Unleashing the Denoising Capability of Diffusion Prior
for Solving Inverse Problems

Jiawei Zhang
Tsinghua University
jiawei-z23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Cheng Jin
Tsinghua University
jinc21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Jiaxin Zhuang
Tsinghua University
zhuangjx23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Gen Li
CUHK
genli@cuhk.edu.hk

Yuantao Gu
Tsinghua University
gyt@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The recent emergence of diffusion models has significantly advanced the precision
of learnable priors, presenting innovative avenues for addressing inverse problems.
Previous works have endeavored to integrate diffusion priors into the maximum a
posteriori estimation (MAP) framework and design optimization methods to solve
the inverse problem. However, prevailing optimization-based rithms primarily
exploit the prior information within the diffusion models while neglecting their
denoising capability. To bridge this gap, this work leverages the diffusion process
to reframe noisy inverse problems as a two-variable constrained optimization
task by introducing an auxiliary optimization variable that represents a ’noisy’
sample at an equivalent denoising step. The projection gradient descent method is
efficiently utilized to solve the corresponding optimization problem by truncating
the gradient through the µ-predictor. The proposed algorithm, termed ProjDiff,
effectively harnesses the prior information and the denoising capability of a pretrained diffusion model within the optimization framework. Extensive experiments
on the image restoration tasks and source separation and partial generation tasks
demonstrate that ProjDiff exhibits superior performance across various linear and
nonlinear inverse problems, highlighting its potential for practical applications.
Code is available at https://github.com/weigerzan/ProjDiff/.

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models have achieved tremendous success in the field of generative modeling
[1–5]. Their remarkable ability to capture data priors provides promising avenues for solving inverse
problems [6], which are widely exploited in image restoration [7–12], medical image processing
[13, 14], 3D vision [15], audio processing [16, 17] and beyond.
Numerous endeavors have sought to harness diffusion models to address inverse problems [18–
27]. Since the sampling process of diffusion models is a reverse Markov chain, most approaches
attempt to integrate the guidance provided by the observation equation into the sampling chain. For
instance, DDRM [20] achieves favorable results for linear inverse problems with low complexity
by introducing a new variational distribution. DDNM [21] capitalizes on the concept of nullrange decomposition, effectively rectifying the range-space component of the intermediate steps by
Jiawei Zhang, Jiaxin Zhuang, Cheng Jin, and Yuantao Gu are with the Department of Electronic Engineering,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China. Gen Li is with the Department of Statistics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
The corresponding author is Yuantao Gu.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

