Open LLMs are Necessary for Current Private
Adaptations and Outperform their Closed Alternatives

Vincent Hanke, Tom Blanchard, Franziska Boenisch,
Iyiola E. Olatunji, Michael Backes, Adam Dziedzic∗
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract
While open Large Language Models (LLMs) have made significant progress, they
still fall short of matching the performance of their closed, proprietary counterparts,
making the latter attractive even for the use on highly private data. Recently,
various new methods have been proposed to adapt closed LLMs to private data
without leaking private information to third parties and/or the LLM provider. In
this work, we analyze the privacy protection and performance of the four most
recent methods for private adaptation of closed LLMs. By examining their threat
models and thoroughly comparing their performance under different privacy levels
according to differential privacy (DP), various LLM architectures, and multiple
datasets for classification and generation tasks, we find that: (1) all the methods
leak query data, i.e., the (potentially sensitive) user data that is queried at inference
time, to the LLM provider, (2) three out of four methods also leak large fractions of
private training data to the LLM provider while the method that protects private data
requires a local open LLM, (3) all the methods exhibit lower performance compared
to three private gradient-based adaptation methods for local open LLMs, and (4) the
private adaptation methods for closed LLMs incur higher monetary training and
query costs than running the alternative methods on local open LLMs. This yields
the conclusion that, to achieve truly privacy-preserving LLM adaptations that yield
high performance and more privacy at lower costs, taking into account current
methods and models, one should use open LLMs.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been the trend of releasing open Large Language Models (LLMs), such as
LLama [20, 57], Vicuna [10], or Mistral [27] as an alternative to their proprietary closed counterparts,
such as GPT from OpenAI [2], Claude from Anthropic [4], or Gemini from Google [54]. Despite the
significant progress in improving open LLMs, they are still outperformed in multiple tasks by closed
LLMs [11], making the latter attractive even for learning tasks from highly private data.
Since it was shown that private data can leak from the adaptations of LLMs [15, 16], in the last
few months alone, an array of new methods for privacy-preserving adaptation of closed LLMs has
been proposed by the machine learning community at multiple conferences (NeurIPS’23 [15] and
ICLR’24 [25, 53, 60]). Given the lack of access to the closed LLMs parameters—which renders
parameter-tuning based adaptations infeasible—they all rely on the generation of privacy-preserving
discrete prompts. We detail their operational setup in Figure 1 (left).
In this work, we ask the simple yet impactful question of whether these efforts actually lead into the
right direction towards the goal of achieving truly privacy-preserving LLM adaptations. Therefore,
we thoroughly analyze the proposed methods both conceptually and empirically and compare them to
∗

Correspondence to adam.dziedzic@cispa.de

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

