Sharpness-diversity tradeoff:
improving flat ensembles with SharpBalance

Haiquan Lu1∗, Xiaotian Liu2∗, Yefan Zhou2∗, Qunli Li3∗,
Kurt Keutzer , Michael W. Mahoney4,5,6 , Yujun Yan2 , Huanrui Yang4 , Yaoqing Yang2
1
Nankai University
2
Dartmouth College
3
University of California San Diego
4
University of California at Berkeley
5
International Computer Science Institute
6
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
4

Abstract
Recent studies on deep ensembles have identified the sharpness of the local minima
of individual learners and the diversity of the ensemble members as key factors
in improving test-time performance. Building on this, our study investigates
the interplay between sharpness and diversity within deep ensembles, illustrating their crucial role in robust generalization to both in-distribution (ID) and
out-of-distribution (OOD) data. We discover a trade-off between sharpness and
diversity: minimizing the sharpness in the loss landscape tends to diminish the
diversity of individual members within the ensemble, adversely affecting the ensemble’s improvement. The trade-off is justified through our theoretical analysis
and verified empirically through extensive experiments. To address the issue of
reduced diversity, we introduce SharpBalance, a novel training approach that
balances sharpness and diversity within ensembles. Theoretically, we show that our
training strategy achieves a better sharpness-diversity trade-off. Empirically, we
conducted comprehensive evaluations in various data sets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
TinyImageNet) and showed that SharpBalance not only effectively improves the
sharpness-diversity trade-off, but also significantly improves ensemble performance
in ID and OOD scenarios. Our code has been made open-source.†

1

Introduction

There has been interest in understanding the properties of neural networks (NNs) and their implications
for robust generalization to both in-distribution (ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) data [Hendrycks
and Dietterich, 2019a]. Two properties of particular importance, sharpness (or flatness) [Granziol,
2020, Andriushchenko et al., 2023, Yang et al., 2021, Dinh et al., 2017, Yao et al., 2020] and
diversity [Laviolette et al., 2017, Fort et al., 2019, Yao et al., 2020, Dietterich, 2000, Ortega et al.,
2022, Theisen et al., 2023], have been shown to have a significant influence on performance. In the
context of deep ensembles [Ovadia et al., 2019, Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017, Fort et al., 2019,
Mehrtash et al., 2020, Ganaie et al., 2022], diversity (which measures the variance in output between
independently-trained models) is shown to be critical in enhancing ensemble accuracy. Sharpness, on
the other hand, quantifies the curvature of local minima and is believed to be empirically correlated
with an individual model’s generalization ability.
* First four authors contributed equally.
†

https://github.com/haiquanlu/SharpBalance

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

