Look, Listen, and Answer: Overcoming
Biases for Audio-Visual Question Answering

Jie Ma†1* , Min Hu†1,2 , Pinghui Wang1 , Wangchun Sun1 , Lingyun Song4 ,
Hongbin Pei1 , Jun Liu3 , Youtian Du1
1
MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
China Mobile System Integration Co.
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
†
Equal Contribution
*
Corresponding Author

Abstract
Audio-Visual Question Answering (AVQA) is a complex multi-modal reasoning
task, demanding intelligent systems to accurately respond to natural language
queries based on audio-video input pairs. Nevertheless, prevalent AVQA approaches are prone to overlearning dataset biases, resulting in poor robustness. Furthermore, current datasets may not provide a precise diagnostic for these methods.
To tackle these challenges, firstly, we propose a novel dataset, MUSIC-AVQA-R,
crafted in two steps: rephrasing questions within the test split of a public dataset
(MUSIC-AVQA) and subsequently introducing distribution shifts to split questions.
The former leads to a large, diverse test space, while the latter results in a comprehensive robustness evaluation on rare, frequent, and overall questions. Secondly,
we propose a robust architecture that utilizes a multifaceted cycle collaborative
debiasing strategy to overcome bias learning. Experimental results show that this
architecture achieves state-of-the-art performance on MUSIC-AVQA-R, notably
obtaining a significant improvement of 9.32%. Extensive ablation experiments are
conducted on the two datasets mentioned to analyze the component effectiveness
within the debiasing strategy. Additionally, we highlight the limited robustness
of existing multi-modal QA methods through the evaluation on our dataset. We
also conduct experiments combining various baselines with our proposed strategy
on two datasets to verify its plug-and-play capability. Our dataset and code are
available at https://github.com/reml-group/MUSIC-AVQA-R.

1

Introduction

Humans possess the extraordinary capacity to seamlessly integrate auditory and visual cues, effectively establishing a cohesive relationship between visual and auditory stimuli [1]. Audio-Visual
Question Answering (AVQA) [2–5, 3] seeks to enable intelligent systems to acquire this capability
and produce answers based on provided natural language questions. It requires the system to learn
high-order interaction representations of the concepts encompassed with audio, video, and language
modalities. As is known to us [6–8], the high-level reasoning ability of the system mainly relies on
large-scale data that does not contain harmful biases or statistical regularities.
Nevertheless, completely avoiding the negative bias in datasets seems challenging. Previous studies
[9–12] in visual and extractive QA have investigated the bias from the perspective of changing answer
distributions and human-in-the-loop adversarial attacks. Drawing inspiration from these works,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

