No Free Lunch in LLM Watermarking:
Trade-offs in Watermarking Design Choices

Qi Pang

Shengyuan Hu Wenting Zheng Virginia Smith
Carnegie Mellon University
{qipang, shengyuanhu, wenting, smithv}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Advances in generative models have made it possible for AI-generated text, code,
and images to mirror human-generated content in many applications. Watermarking, a technique that aims to embed information in the output of a model to verify
its source, is useful for mitigating the misuse of such AI-generated content. However, we show that common design choices in LLM watermarking schemes make
the resulting systems surprisingly susceptible to attack—leading to fundamental
trade-offs in robustness, utility, and usability. To navigate these trade-offs, we
rigorously study a set of simple yet effective attacks on common watermarking
systems, and propose guidelines and defenses for LLM watermarking in practice.

1

Introduction

Modern generative modeling systems have notably enhanced the quality of AI-produced content [4, 35, 28, 27]. For example, large language models (LLMs) like those powering ChatGPT [27] can generate text closely resembling human-crafted sentences. While this has led to
exciting new applications of machine learning, there is also growing concern around the potential for misuse of these models, leading to a flurry of recent efforts on developing techniques to
detect AI-generated content. A promising approach in this direction is to embed invisible watermarks into model-derived content, which can then be extracted and verified using a secret watermark
key [16, 9, 5, 19, 45, 17, 12, 41, 38].
In this work, we identify that many of the key properties that make existing LLM watermarks successful can also render them susceptible to attack. In particular, we study a number of simple attacks
that take advantage of common design choices of existing watermarking schemes, including:
1. Robustness of the watermarks to potential modifications in the output text, so that the watermarks
cannot be easily removed [19, 16, 45, 19, 5, 12];
2. The use of multiple keys to prevent against watermark stealing attacks [16, 19, 14, 34, 10];
3. Public detection APIs, which allow the general public to easily verify whether or not candidate
text is AI-generated [16, 36, 24].
While these common features and design choices of existing watermarking schemes have clear benefits, we show that they also make the resulting systems vulnerable to a number of simple but effective
attacks. In particular, we study two types of attacks: 1) watermark-removal attacks, which remove
the watermark from the watermarked content, and 2) spoofing attacks, which create (potentially
toxic) content with a target watermark embedded, thus making the content appear to be generated
by a specific LLM when it is in fact not (see motivating examples in Table 1).
Our work rigorously explores a number of simple removal and spoofing attacks for LLM watermarks. In doing so, we identify critical trade-offs that emerge between watermark robustness,
utility, and usability as a result of watermarking design choices. To navigate these trade-offs, we
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

