LLaNA: Large Language and NeRF Assistant

Andrea Amaduzzi
andrea.amaduzzi4@unibo.it

Pierluigi Zama Ramirez
pierluigi.zama@unibo.it

Giuseppe Lisanti
giuseppe.lisanti@unibo.it

Samuele Salti
samuele.salti@unibo.it

Luigi Di Stefano
luigi.distefano@unibo.it
CVLAB, University of Bologna
https://andreamaduzzi.github.io/llana/

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated an excellent
understanding of images and 3D data. However, both modalities have shortcomings
in holistically capturing the appearance and geometry of objects. Meanwhile,
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs), which encode information within the weights
of a simple Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), have emerged as an increasingly
widespread modality that simultaneously encodes the geometry and photorealistic
appearance of objects. This paper investigates the feasibility and effectiveness of
ingesting NeRF into MLLM. We create LLaNA, the first general-purpose NeRFlanguage assistant capable of performing new tasks such as NeRF captioning and
Q&A. Notably, our method directly processes the weights of the NeRF’s MLP
to extract information about the represented objects without the need to render
images or materialize 3D data structures. Moreover, we build a dataset of NeRFs
with text annotations for various NeRF-language tasks with no human intervention.
Based on this dataset, we develop a benchmark to evaluate the NeRF understanding
capability of our method. Results show that processing NeRF weights performs
favourably against extracting 2D or 3D representations from NeRFs.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [70, 1] have revolutionized the field of Natural Language Processing,
demonstrating incredible text comprehension and generation capabilities. These results have fostered
the development of Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) [14, 82, 44, 11, 10], which can ingest various
modalities such as images, videos, and audio, to generate text describing and reasoning about the
content of such modalities. Recently, MLLMs have also been extended to 3D data [58, 78], primarily
represented through colored point clouds, yielding remarkable results even in this scenario.
Beyond images and 3D data, another paradigm is emerging to represent objects and scenes: Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [50]. NeRFs are coordinate-based neural networks, typically Multi-Layer
Perceptrons (MLPs), designed to capture both the geometry and the photorealistic appearance of an
object by learning a continuous radiance field at each 3D spatial location. After training, a NeRF
model can be queried to render realistic images or to reconstruct the 3D surface of the encoded object.
Therefore, capturing an object as a NeRF provides an interesting alternative to create a digital twin
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

