Reranking Laws for Language Generation:
A Communication-Theoretic Perspective

António Farinhas1,2 Haau-Sing Li2,3 André F. T. Martins1,2,4,5
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa 2 Instituto de Telecomunicações
3
Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab, TU Darmstadt 4 ELLIS Unit Lisbon 5 Unbabel
1

{antonio.farinhas,andre.t.martins}@tecnico.ulisboa.pt, hli@ukp.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
To ensure large language models (LLMs) are used safely, one must reduce their
propensity to hallucinate or to generate unacceptable answers. A simple and often used strategy is to first let the LLM generate multiple hypotheses and then
employ a reranker to choose the best one. In this paper, we draw a parallel between this strategy and the use of redundancy to decrease the error rate in noisy
communication channels. We conceptualize the generator as a sender transmitting
multiple descriptions of a message through parallel noisy channels. The receiver
decodes the message by ranking the (potentially corrupted) descriptions and selecting the one found to be most reliable. We provide conditions under which
this protocol is asymptotically error-free (i.e., yields an acceptable answer almost
surely) even in scenarios where the reranker is imperfect (governed by Mallows or
Zipf-Mandelbrot models) and the channel distributions are statistically dependent.
We use our framework to obtain reranking laws which we validate empirically on
two real-world tasks using LLMs: text-to-code generation with DeepSeek-Coder
7B and machine translation of medical data with TowerInstruct 13B.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable performance across many tasks in natural
language processing, computer vision, and speech recognition. Despite their capabilities, instances
of hallucinations and other critical errors occasionally arise, casting doubt on the reliability of their
predictions, without clear indication of when and how badly they might fail (Ji et al., 2023; Guerreiro
et al., 2023). This is particularly concerning as these models are increasingly used in high-stakes
applications such as those within the medical or legal domains (Hung et al., 2023) or as agents that
can perform multiple tasks, including generating and executing code (Wang et al., 2024).
The most common mitigation strategy is to “steer” the LLM with the aid of a reward model or
directly from human preferences, either at training time (Stiennon et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2024;
Rafailov et al., 2024) or during decoding (Liu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024). A simple and effective
decoding-time strategy is first to generate multiple hypotheses and then use a reranker to select the
most appropriate one. Several generation techniques used with modern LLMs, including voting
procedures (Borgeaud and Emerson, 2020; Wang et al., 2023; Liévin et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2022),
minimum Bayes risk decoders (Eikema and Aziz, 2020; Freitag et al., 2022), quality-aware decoders
(Fernandes et al., 2022), or other types of hypothesis ensembling/reranking techniques (Farinhas
et al., 2023; Ni et al., 2023; Bertsch et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024), embody this idea. An essential
aspect of these procedures is that they all add redundancy as an intermediate step (by generating
multiple hypotheses) to increase the chances of returning an acceptable answer as the final output.
The idea of adding redundancy to decrease the error rate in noisy channels is a cornerstone of
communication theory, more specifically in forward error correction methods. In its simplest
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

