Understanding Bias in Large-Scale Visual Datasets

Boya Zeng∗
University of Pennsylvania

Yida Yin∗
UC Berkeley
∗

Zhuang Liu
Meta FAIR

equal contribution

Abstract
A recent study [40] has shown that large-scale visual datasets are very biased:
they can be easily classified by modern neural networks. However, the concrete
forms of bias among these datasets remain unclear. In this study, we propose a
framework to identify the unique visual attributes distinguishing these datasets. Our
approach applies various transformations to extract semantic, structural, boundary,
color, and frequency information from datasets, and assess how much each type
of information reflects their bias. We further decompose their semantic bias with
object-level analysis, and leverage natural language methods to generate detailed,
open-ended descriptions of each dataset’s characteristics. Our work aims to help
researchers understand the bias in existing large-scale pre-training datasets, and
build more diverse and representative ones in the future. Our project page and code
are available at boyazeng.github.io/understand_bias.

1

Introduction

Recently, Liu and He [40] revisited the “Name That Dataset” experiment introduced by Torralba
and Efros [69] in 2011, which highlighted the built-in bias of visual datasets. It is a classification
task where each dataset forms a class, and models are trained to predict the dataset origin of each
image. The datasets back in 2011 were found to be classified quite accurately by SVMs [69]. Since
then, significant efforts have been devoted to creating more diverse, large-scale, and comprehensive
datasets [15, 37, 35, 60]. Surprisingly, a decade later, the largest and supposedly most diverse datasets
(e.g., YFCC [66], CC [11], DataComp [19]) can still be classified with remarkably high accuracy by
modern neural networks [40].
Although we now know these large-scale datasets are very biased, a lingering question remains: what
are the concrete forms of bias among them1 , that cause them to be easily classified? Understanding
the bias among datasets is essential for addressing it, and for improving dataset diversity and
coverage. Creating datasets that more comprehensively represent the real world is challenging yet
crucial [64, 55, 31]—only then can we build truly general-purpose vision systems—systems capable of
handling various scenarios out of the box, and performing reliably in real-world situations [30, 29, 24].
To this end, we develop a framework for understanding the concrete forms of bias among datasets.
We isolate the semantic, structure, boundary, color, and frequency information through various
transformations. For example, transforming an image into a semantic segmentation map preserves
semantics while discarding most texture information. We then perform the dataset classification task
on the transformed datasets, to quantify how each type of information reflects the dataset bias.
To pinpoint the semantic bias in datasets, we further conduct object-level and open-ended language
analysis. Specifically, we leverage pre-trained recognition models to identify objects that characterize
each dataset. In addition, using a Vision-Language Model (VLM), we generate image captions as
1
Note that in this work we study bias among datasets. This concerns the coverage of concepts and content
(i.e., how representative the dataset is for the real world). This is related to, but different from, another notion of
bias that concerns social and stereotypical bias, as well as algorithm fairness [8, 75, 6, 47].

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

