SRFUND: A Multi-Granularity Hierarchical Structure
Reconstruction Benchmark in Form Understanding

Jiefeng Ma1 Yan Wang1 Chenyu Liu2 Jun Du1∗ Yu Hu1
Zhenrong Zhang1 Pengfei Hu1 Qing Wang1 Jianshu Zhang2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
iFLYTEK, Hefei, China
{jfma, yanwangsa, zzr666, hudeyouxiang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{jundu, yuhu2, qingwang2}@ustc.edu.cn, {cyliu7, jszhang6}@iflytek.com

Abstract
Accurate identification and organizing of textual content is crucial for the automation of document processing in the field of form understanding. Existing datasets,
such as FUNSD and XFUND, support entity classification and relationship prediction tasks but are typically limited to local and entity-level annotations. This
limitation overlooks the hierarchically structured representation of documents, constraining a comprehensive understanding of complex forms. To address this issue,
we present the SRFUND, a hierarchically structured multi-task form understanding
benchmark. SRFUND provides refined annotations on top of the original FUNSD
and XFUND datasets, encompassing five tasks: (1) word to text-line merging,
(2) text-line to entity merging, (3) entity category classification, (4) item table
localization, and (5) entity-based full-document hierarchical structure recovery. We meticulously supplemented the original dataset with missing annotations
at various levels of granularity and added detailed annotations for multi-item table
regions within the forms. Additionally, we introduce global hierarchical structure dependencies for entity relation prediction tasks, surpassing traditional local
key-value associations. The SRFUND dataset includes eight languages including
English, Chinese, Japanese, German, French, Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese,
making it a powerful tool for understanding cross-lingual forms. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the SRFUND dataset presents new challenges and
significant opportunities in handling diverse layouts and global hierarchical structures of forms, thus providing deep insights into the field of form understanding.
The original data set and implementations of the baseline methods are available at
https://sprateam-ustc.github.io/SRFUND.

1

Introduction

In the United States, billions of individuals and businesses submit tax returns annually,2 and globally,
hundreds of billions of parcels are distributed each year,3 most of which are accompanied by invoices
and delivery notes. Although these documents vary in format, they are all considered forms, which
serve as crucial information mediums widely used in global information and merchandise exchange.
Compared to storage formats like camera-captured images or scanned documents, digitizing original
forms into structured text aids in reducing storage space and facilitates information dissemination
∗

Corresponding author.
https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p55b.pdf
3
https://www.pitneybowes.com/content/dam/pitneybowes/us/en/shipping-index/
23-mktc-03596-2023_global_parcel_shipping_index_ebook-web.pdf
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

