Oracle-Efficient Reinforcement Learning
for Max Value Ensembles
Marcel Hussing
Dept. of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
mhussing@seas.upenn.edu

Michael Kearns
Dept. of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
mkearns@cis.upenn.edu

Aaron Roth
Dept. of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
aaroth@cis.upenn.edu

Sikata Bela Sengupta
Dept. of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
sikata@seas.upenn.edu

Jessica Sorrell∗
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
jess@jhu.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) in large or infinite state spaces is notoriously challenging, both theoretically (where worst-case sample and computational complexities
must scale with state space cardinality) and experimentally (where function approximation and policy gradient techniques often scale poorly and suffer from
instability and high variance). One line of research attempting to address these
difficulties makes the natural assumption that we are given a collection of base
or constituent policies (possibly heuristic) upon which we would like to improve
in a scalable manner. In this work we aim to compete with the max-following
policy, which at each state follows the action of whichever constituent policy has
the highest value. The max-following policy is always at least as good as the best
constituent policy, and may be considerably better. Our main result is an efficient
algorithm that learns to compete with the max-following policy, given only access
to the constituent policies (but not their value functions). In contrast to prior work
in similar settings, our theoretical results require only the minimal assumption
of an ERM oracle for value function approximation for the constituent policies
(and not the global optimal policy or the max-following policy itself) on samplable
distributions. We illustrate our algorithm’s experimental effectiveness and behavior
on several robotic simulation testbeds.

1

Introduction

Computationally efficient RL algorithms are known for simple environments with small state spaces
such as tabular Markov decision processes (MDPs) [Kearns and Singh, 2002, Brafman and Tennenholtz, 2002], but practical applications often require dealing with large or even infinite state spaces.
∗

This work was completed while this author was at the University of Pennsylvania.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

