APEBench: A Benchmark for Autoregressive Neural
Emulators of PDEs
Felix Koehler
Technical University of Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
f.koehler@tum.de
Rüdiger Westermann
Technical University of Munich
westermann@tum.de

Simon Niedermayr
Technical University of Munich
simon.niedermayr@tum.de

Nils Thuerey
Technical University of Munich
nils.thuerey@tum.de

Abstract
We introduce the Autoregressive PDE Emulator Benchmark (APEBench), a comprehensive benchmark suite to evaluate autoregressive neural emulators for solving
partial differential equations. APEBench is based on JAX and provides a seamlessly
integrated differentiable simulation framework employing efficient pseudo-spectral
methods, enabling 46 distinct PDEs across 1D, 2D, and 3D. Facilitating systematic
analysis and comparison of learned emulators, we propose a novel taxonomy for
unrolled training and introduce a unique identifier for PDE dynamics that directly
relates to the stability criteria of classical numerical methods. APEBench enables
the evaluation of diverse neural architectures, and unlike existing benchmarks, its
tight integration of the solver enables support for differentiable physics training
and neural-hybrid emulators. Moreover, APEBench emphasizes rollout metrics to
understand temporal generalization, providing insights into the long-term behavior
of emulating PDE dynamics. In several experiments, we highlight the similarities between neural emulators and numerical simulators. The code is available at
https://github.com/tum-pbs/apebench and APEBench can be installed via
pip install apebench.

1

Introduction

The language of nature is written in partial differential equations (PDEs). From the behavior of
subatomic particles to the earth’s climate, PDEs are used to model phenomena across all scales.
Typically, approximate PDE solutions are computed with numerical simulations. Almost all relevant
simulation techniques stem from the consistent discretization involving symbolic manipulations of
the differential equations into a discrete computer program. This laborious task yields algorithms that
converge to the continuous dynamics for fine resolutions. For realistic models, established techniques
require immense computational resources to attain high accuracy. Recent advances of machine
learning-based emulators challenge this. Purely data-driven or with little additional constraints and
symmetries, neural networks can surpass traditional methods in the accuracy-speed tradeoff (Kochkov
et al., 2021; List et al., 2022; Lam et al., 2022).
The field of neural PDE solvers advanced rapidly over the past years, applying convolutional architectures (Tompson et al., 2017; Thuerey et al., 2020; Um et al., 2020), graph convolutions (Pfaff
et al., 2021; Brandstetter et al., 2022), spectral convolutions (Li et al., 2021), or mesh-free approaches
(Ummenhofer et al., 2020; Wessels et al., 2020) to replace or enhance classical numerical solvers.
However, the relationship between classical solvers, which supply training data, and neural emulators,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

