Return of Unconditional Generation:
A Self-supervised Representation Generation Method

Tianhong Li

Dina Katabi

Kaiming He

MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Unconditional generation—the problem of modeling data distribution without relying on human-annotated labels—is a long-standing and fundamental challenge
in generative models, creating a potential of learning from large-scale unlabeled
data. In the literature, the generation quality of an unconditional method has
been much worse than that of its conditional counterpart. This gap can be attributed to the lack of semantic information provided by labels. In this work,
we show that one can close this gap by generating semantic representations in
the representation space produced by a self-supervised encoder. These representations can be used to condition the image generator. This framework, called
Representation-Conditioned Generation (RCG), provides an effective solution to
the unconditional generation problem without using labels. Through comprehensive experiments, we observe that RCG significantly improves unconditional generation quality: e.g., it achieves a new state-of-the-art FID of 2.15 on ImageNet
256×256, largely reducing the previous best of 5.91 by a relative 64%. Our unconditional results are situated in the same tier as the leading class-conditional
ones. We hope these encouraging observations will attract the community’s attention to the fundamental problem of unconditional generation. Code is available at
https://github.com/LTH14/rcg.

1

Introduction

Generative models have been long developed as unsupervised learning methods in the history, e.g.,
in the seminal works including GAN [27], VAE [39], and diffusion models [57]. These fundamental
methods focus on learning the probabilistic distributions of data, without relying on the availability of human annotations. This problem, often categorized as unconditional generation in today’s
community, is in pursuit of utilizing the vast abundance of unannotated data to learn complex distributions.
However, unconditional image generation has been largely stagnant in comparison with its conditional counterpart. Recent research [18, 54, 10, 11, 24, 50] has demonstrated compelling image
generation quality when conditioned on class labels or text descriptions provided by humans, but its
quality degrades significantly without these conditions. Closing the gap between unconditional and
conditional generation is a challenging and scientifically valuable problem: it is a necessary step
towards unleashing the power of large-scale unannotated data, which is a common goal in today’s
deep learning community.
We hypothesize that such a performance gap is because human-annotated conditioning introduces
rich semantic information to simplify the generative process. In this work, we largely close this
gap by taking inspiration from a closely related area—unsupervised/self-supervised learning.1 We
1
In this paper, the term of “unsupervised learning” implies “not using human supervision”. Thus, we view
self-supervised learning as a form of unsupervised learning. The distinction between these two terminologies
is beyond the scope of this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

