Is A Picture Worth A Thousand Words? Delving Into
Spatial Reasoning for Vision Language Models

Jiayu Wang1 Yifei Ming2∗ Zhenmei Shi1 Vibhav Vineet3
Xin Wang3 Yixuan Li1 Neel Joshi3
1
2
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Salesforce AI Research
3
Microsoft Research
{milawang,zhmeishi,sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu
yifei.ming@salesforce.com
{vibhav.vineet,wanxin,neel}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across a wide range of tasks and domains. Despite
this promise, spatial understanding and reasoning—a fundamental component
of human cognition—remains under-explored. We propose SpatialEval, a novel
benchmark that covers diverse aspects of spatial reasoning such as relationship
understanding, navigation, and counting. We conduct a comprehensive evaluation
of competitive language and vision-language models. Our findings reveal several
counter-intuitive insights that have been overlooked in the literature: (1) Spatial
reasoning poses significant challenges where competitive models can fall behind
random guessing; (2) Despite additional visual input, VLMs often under-perform
compared to their LLM counterparts; (3) When both textual and visual information
is available, multi-modal language models become less reliant on visual information if sufficient textual clues are provided. Additionally, we demonstrate that
leveraging redundancy between vision and text can significantly enhance model
performance. We hope our study will inform the development of multimodal models to improve spatial intelligence and further close the gap with human intelligence.
Our code is available at https://github.com/jiayuww/SpatialEval.

1

Introduction

The recent breakthroughs in foundation models have had a transformative effect on research and
industry, and we have seen these models rapidly integrated into products and new businesses that are
shaping people’s lives for the better. This sea change was initially driven by large language models
(LLMs), which have shown at times near unbelievable, human-level performance across a wide range
of tasks. Over the past year, many of these models have been extended to handle images in addition
to text, leading to a significant increase in vision-language models (VLMs), especially multimodal
large language models (MLLMs), which demonstrate groundbreaking performance in image-related
tasks as in the text domain.
However, the reality is not quite as rosy as advertised. While these models have been instrumental
in advancing the state-of-the-art in complex reasoning tasks such as common sense reasoning,
mathematical problem solving, and scientific question answering [17, 30, 41, 72, 75], they have not
been as effective for a number of problem domains. In particular, as we will show in this paper, they
have limited performance on tasks that require detailed visual understanding and reasoning of images.
∗

The work was completed in part during Yifei Ming’s internship at Microsoft Research, as well as PhD thesis
research at UW-Madison.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

