Ex Uno Pluria: Insights on Ensembling
in Low Precision Number Systems

Giung Nam
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
giung@kaist.ac.kr

Juho Lee
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
juholee@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
While ensembling deep neural networks has shown promise in improving generalization performance, scaling current ensemble methods for large models remains
challenging. Given that recent progress in deep learning is largely driven by the
scale, exemplified by the widespread adoption of large-scale neural network architectures, scalability emerges an increasingly critical issue for machine learning
algorithms in the era of large-scale models. In this work, we first showcase the potential of low precision ensembling, where ensemble members are derived from a
single model within low precision number systems in a training-free manner. Our
empirical analysis demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed low precision
ensembling method compared to existing ensemble approaches.

1

Introduction

In computer science, it is a de facto standard to represent continuous real numbers using finite precision number systems. While many applications rely on precision formats like FP32 or FP64, the
deep learning community is increasingly turning to 16-bit floating-point formats such as FP16 (Micikevicius et al., 2018) or BF16 (Dean et al., 2012) to reduce memory usage during training. More
recently, researchers are further exploring low precision optimization, aiming to utilize fewer bits (8
bits or less) to represent weights, activations, and gradients throughout the training process (Gupta
et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2020; Wortsman et al., 2023).
While low precision number systems can aid in training deep neural networks, they are also beneficial for reducing inference costs in real-world deployments of such models (Jacob et al., 2018).
In particular, recent advancements in large language models (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al.,
2023) containing billions of parameters have triggered active exploration of post-training quantization techniques, for deploying pre-trained large language models on hardware with limited memory
resources. This exploration encompasses quantizing both weights and activations (Dettmers et al.,
2022; Yao et al., 2022), as well as quantizing weights only (Frantar et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024).
Originally, the goal of post-training quantization is to specify the best solution represented in low
precision number systems, aiming to reduce discrepancies from the original high-precision weights,
like perturbations in weight values or increases in loss functions (Nagel et al., 2020). On the other
hand, the presence of numerous distinct yet high-performing models within a single basin on loss
landscapes (Sadrtdinov et al., 2023; Lion et al., 2024) evokes a Bayesian concept of marginalization
instead of optimization, which involves utilizing multiple solutions rather than relying solely on one
solution (Wilson and Izmailov, 2020).
Hinging on this insight, we suggest building ensembles within low precision number systems, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. It depicts a proof-of-concept method for ensemble construction using stochastic
rounding, a technique commonly used in low precision training to address the issue of rounding
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

