DeltaDock: A Unified Framework for Accurate,
Efficient, and Physically Reliable Molecular Docking

1

Jiaxian Yan1 , Zaixi Zhang1 , Jintao Zhu2 , Kai Zhang1 , Jianfeng Pei2 , Qi Liu1∗
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Center for Quantitative Biology,
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
{jiaxianyan, zaixi, sa517494}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhujt@stu.pku.edu.cn,
jfpei@pku.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Molecular docking, a technique for predicting ligand binding poses, is crucial in
structure-based drug design for understanding protein-ligand interactions. Recent
advancements in docking methods, particularly those leveraging geometric deep
learning (GDL), have demonstrated significant efficiency and accuracy advantages
over traditional sampling methods. Despite these advancements, current methods
are often tailored for specific docking settings, and limitations such as the neglect
of protein side-chain structures, difficulties in handling large binding pockets,
and challenges in predicting physically valid structures exist. To accommodate
various docking settings and achieve accurate, efficient, and physically reliable
docking, we propose a novel two-stage docking framework, DeltaDock, consisting
of pocket prediction and site-specific docking. We innovatively reframe the pocket
prediction task as a pocket-ligand alignment problem rather than direct prediction
in the first stage. Then we follow a bi-level coarse-to-fine iterative refinement
process to perform site-specific docking. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
the superior performance of DeltaDock. Notably, in the blind docking setting,
DeltaDock achieves a 31% relative improvement over the docking success rate
compared with the previous state-of-the-art GDL model DiffDock. With the
consideration of physical validity, this improvement increases to about 300%.†

1

Introduction

Recent advancement in geometric deep learning (GDL) [1, 2, 3] presents an innovative and promising
molecular docking paradigm to predict and understand the interactions between target proteins and
drugs, which is of paramount importance for drug discovery [4, 5]. Unlike traditional docking
methods that employ optimization algorithms to sample and identify best binding poses [6, 7],
GDL methods interpret molecular docking as either a regression or generation task, eliminating
the need for intensive candidate sampling [8, 9, 10]. Studies have demonstrated that GDL methods
outperform their traditional counterparts, delivering enhancements in both the accuracy of binding
pose predictions, as measured by the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) metric, and the inference
efficiency [11, 12].
According to whether a prior pocket is given, molecular docking can be divided into blind and
site-specific docking [13]. Traditional sampling methods adeptly navigate both scenarios, primarily
differing in the scope of the search space they explore. In contrast, GDL methods typically specialize
in either one. For instance, EquiBind [8], and DiffDock [9] are designed for blind docking, neglecting
the incorporation of binding pockets. Uni-Mol [14] and DiffBind-FR [15] concentrate on site-specific
docking and only protein atomic level structure within a defined radius (usually 6-12 Å) of the
∗
†

Qi Liu is the corresponding author.
All codes and data will be released on https://github.com/jiaxianyan/DeltaDock.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

