Real-world Image Dehazing with Coherence-based
Pseudo Labeling and Cooperative Unfolding Network

Chengyu Fang1,∗, Chunming He1,3,∗,† , Fengyang Xiao1,2 , Yulun Zhang4,† ,
Longxiang Tang1 , Yuelin Zhang5 , Kai Li6 , Xiu Li1,†
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, 2 Sun Yat-sen University,
3
Duke University, 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 6 Meta Reality Labs
B chengyufang.thu@gmail.com

Abstract
Real-world Image Dehazing (RID) aims to alleviate haze-induced degradation
in real-world settings. This task remains challenging due to the complexities in
accurately modeling real haze distributions and the scarcity of paired real-world
data. To address these challenges, we first introduce a cooperative unfolding
network that jointly models atmospheric scattering and image scenes, effectively
integrating physical knowledge into deep networks to restore haze-contaminated
details. Additionally, we propose the first RID-oriented iterative mean-teacher
framework, termed the Coherence-based Label Generator, to generate high-quality
pseudo labels for network training. Specifically, we provide an optimal label pool
to store the best pseudo-labels during network training, leveraging both global and
local coherence to select high-quality candidates and assign weights to prioritize
haze-free regions. We verify the effectiveness of our method, with experiments
demonstrating that it achieves state-of-the-art performance on RID tasks. Code
will be available at https://github.com/cnyvfang/CORUN-Colabator.

1

Introduction

Real-world image dehazing (RID) is
a challenging task that aims to restore
images affected by complex haze in
real-world scenarios. The goal is to
generate visual-appealing results while
enhancing the performance of downstream tasks [1, 2]. The atmospheric
scattering model (ASM), providing a
physical framework for real-world dehazing, is formulated as follows:
P (x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x)), (1)
where P (x) and J(x) are the hazy
image and the haze-free counterpart.
A signifies the global atmospheric
light. t(x) characterizes the transmission map reflecting varying degrees of
haze visibility across different regions.
∗

Input

DGUN

CORUN

PDN

DGUN +

CORUN+

Figure 1: Results of cutting-edge methods. Our CORUN better
restores hazy-contaminated details. Furthermore, techniques optimized by our Colabator framework, indicated by a "+" suffix,
exhibit strong generalization in haze removal and color correction.

Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author, B Email Address

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

