Learning from Noisy Labels via Conditional
Distributionally Robust Optimization

Hui Guo
Department of Computer Science
University of Western Ontario
hguo288@uwo.ca

Grace Y. Yi ∗
Department of Statistical and Actuarial Sciences
Department of Computer Science
University of Western Ontario
gyi5@uwo.ca

Boyu Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of Western Ontario
bwang@csd.uwo.ca

Abstract
While crowdsourcing has emerged as a practical solution for labeling large datasets,
it presents a significant challenge in learning accurate models due to noisy labels
from annotators with varying levels of expertise. Existing methods typically estimate the true label posterior, conditioned on the instance and noisy annotations, to
infer true labels or adjust loss functions. These estimates, however, often overlook
potential misspecification in the true label posterior, which can degrade model performances, especially in high-noise scenarios. To address this issue, we investigate
learning from noisy annotations with an estimated true label posterior through the
framework of conditional distributionally robust optimization (CDRO). We propose
formulating the problem as minimizing the worst-case risk within a distance-based
ambiguity set centered around a reference distribution. By examining the strong
duality of the formulation, we derive upper bounds for the worst-case risk and
develop an analytical solution for the dual robust risk for each data point. This
leads to a novel robust pseudo-labeling algorithm that leverages the likelihood
ratio test to construct a pseudo-empirical distribution, providing a robust reference
probability distribution in CDRO. Moreover, to devise an efficient algorithm for
CDRO, we derive a closed-form expression for the empirical robust risk and the
optimal Lagrange multiplier of the dual problem, facilitating a principled balance
between robustness and model fitting. Our experimental results on both synthetic
and real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in supervised learning have spurred a growing demand for large labeled datasets
[1, 2]. However, acquiring accurately annotated datasets is typically costly and time-consuming,
often requiring a pool of annotators with adequate domain expertise to manually label the data.
Crowdsourcing has emerged as an efficient and cost-effective solution for annotating large datasets.
On crowdsourcing platforms, multiple annotators with varying levels of labeling skills are employed
to gather extensive labeled data. However, this approach introduces a significant challenge: the
labels collected through crowdsourcing are often subject to unavoidable noise, especially in fields
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

