Relating Hopfield Networks to Episodic Control

Hugo Chateau-Laurent ∗
Inria centre of the University of Bordeaux, France
IMN, CNRS UMR 5293, France
LaBRI, CNRS UMR 5800, France
hugo.chateaulaurent@gmail.com
Frédéric Alexandre
Inria centre of the University of Bordeaux, France
IMN, CNRS UMR 5293, France
LaBRI, CNRS UMR 5800, France
frederic.alexandre@inria.fr

Abstract
Neural Episodic Control is a powerful reinforcement learning framework that employs a differentiable dictionary to store non-parametric memories. It was inspired
by episodic memory on the functional level, but lacks a direct theoretical connection to the associative memory models generally used to implement such a memory.
We first show that the dictionary is an instance of the recently proposed Universal
Hopfield Network framework. We then introduce a continuous approximation
of the dictionary readout operation in order to derive two energy functions that
are Lyapunov functions of the dynamics. Finally, we empirically show that the
dictionary outperforms the Max separation function, which had previously been
argued to be optimal, and that performance can further be improved by replacing
the Euclidean distance kernel by a Manhattan distance kernel. These results are
enabled by the generalization capabilities of the dictionary, so a novel criterion
is introduced to disentangle memorization from generalization when evaluating
associative memory models.

1

Introduction

Episodic memory is the ability to remember information about a specific situation. An influential
model of episodic memory is the Hopfield Network (1), a recurrent associative memory that can
learn a pattern in one shot and recall it, given some partial or noisy cue. Some important limitations
have been addressed with the development of differentiable continuous Hopfield Networks (2) and
their connection to deep learning (3; 4), thus providing a renewed interest to the field of associative
memory. Episodic memory has also been studied as an efficient way to control reinforcement learning
in so-called episodic control, particularly in the initial steps of learning (5), but no explicit link
has been made between Hopfield Networks and control algorithms. Such a link could lead to the
development of more efficient controllers and memory models. It could also shed light on how the
hippocampus, the seat of episodic memory in the brain, contributes to behavior.
In this paper, a novel connection is established between the fields of associative memory and
reinforcement learning. It is shown in Section 2 that the differentiable neural dictionary (DND)
introduced in the context of episodic control (6) as a rapid way to store and retrieve experiences, is
mathematically close to the Hopfield Network. Retrieval from a DND can indeed be decomposed into
∗

Currently a postdoc at CerCo, CNRS UMR 5549, Université de Toulouse, France.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

