Rethinking the Membrane Dynamics and
Optimization Objectives of Spiking Neural Networks

Hangchi Shen1,2 , Qian Zheng3,4 , Huamin Wang1,2,∗, Gang Pan3,4
1
College of Artificial Intelligence, Southwest University
2
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Brain Inspired Computing and Intelligent Chips
3
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
stephen1998@email.swu.edu.cn, hmwang@swu.edu.cn,
{qianzheng, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite spiking neural networks (SNNs) have demonstrated notable energy efficiency across various fields, the limited firing patterns of spiking neurons within
fixed time steps restrict the expression of information, which impedes further improvement of SNN performance. In addition, current implementations of SNNs
typically consider the firing rate or average membrane potential of the last layer as
the output, lacking exploration of other possibilities. In this paper, we identify that
the limited spike patterns of spiking neurons stem from the initial membrane potential (IMP), which is set to 0. By adjusting the IMP, the spiking neurons can generate
additional firing patterns and pattern mappings. Furthermore, we find that in static
tasks, the accuracy of SNNs at each time step increases as the membrane potential
evolves from zero. This observation inspires us to propose a learnable IMP, which
can accelerate the evolution of membrane potential and enables higher performance
within a limited number of time steps. Additionally, we introduce the last time step
(LTS) approach to accelerate convergence in static tasks, and we propose a label
smooth temporal efficient training (TET) loss to mitigate the conflicts between optimization objective and regularization term in the vanilla TET. Our methods improve
the accuracy by 4.05% on ImageNet compared to baseline and achieve state-of-theart performance of 87.80% on CIFAR10-DVS and 87.86% on N-Caltech101. The
code is available at https://github.com/StephenTaylor1998/IMP-SNN.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning technology based on artificial neural networks (ANNs) has made
significant breakthroughs in many fields [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, as we all known, its high training
and inference costs have become a major obstacle to restrict its further widespread applications. To
overcome these challenges, a new generation of neural network architectures named spiking neural
networks (SNNs) [6] have been developed, which may be a feasible path to refer to the efficient
dynamics mechanism of biological nervous systems [7]. SNNs leverage the dynamic mechanisms
of membrane potential integration and fire from biological neural networks, which can process
time-varying input data by using a single model [8] as biological neurons, maintaining linearly
increasing computational complexity. Therefore, the advantages of energy efficiency and biologically
plausible dynamical mechanisms [7, 9, 10] make them a bridge between the fields of brain science
and artificial intelligence, which is widely regarded as the next generation of ANNs [6]. In addition,
it is worth mentioning that SNNs can cleverly avoid multiplication operations on neuromorphic chips
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

