BIGOS V2 Benchmark for Polish ASR: Curated
Datasets and Tools for Reproducible Evaluation
Michał Junczyk1, 2
1

Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland, michal.junczyk@amu.edu.pl
2
Allegro, Poznań, Poland, michal.junczyk@allegro.com

Abstract
Speech datasets available in the public domain are often underutilized because of
challenges in accessibility and interoperability. To address this, a system to survey,
catalog, and curate existing speech datasets was developed, enabling reproducible
evaluation of automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems. The system was
applied to curate over 24 datasets and evaluate 25 ASR models, with a specific
focus on Polish. This research represents the most extensive comparison to date of
commercial and free ASR systems for the Polish language, drawing insights from
600 system-model-test set evaluations across 8 analysis scenarios. Curated datasets
and benchmark results are available publicly. 1 The evaluation tools are opensourced to support reproducibility of the benchmark, encourage community-driven
improvements, and facilitate adaptation for other languages.2

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

The Polish language is spoken by more than 50 million people worldwide. The number of available
ASR systems and services, as well as speech data resources that support Polish, is systematically
growing. However, the community has insufficient resources to methodically evaluate and track
progress of ASR (Automatic Speech Recognition) technology for Polish. First, the available data assets are underutilized due to challenges such as accessibility, licensing, and interoperability. Secondly,
there is no standardized ASR benchmark dataset. Finally, the tooling to reproduce or systematically
extend evaluation scope is missing. As a result Polish ASR systems benchmarks performed so
far cover limited number systems and datasets (see Appendix B.1). [15, 27, 28, 41, 17, 10] These
limitations may slow the development of new systems and applications, as reliable evaluations and
publicly available leaderboards drive research progress and inform the public about the capabilities
of AI technology. [22] The international ASR community has recognized the importance of evaluation methodologies for consistent and comparative performance assessments in ASR specifically.
[2, 38, 7] and ML field in general [19, 24, 23] This calls for innovations in the management of ASR
datasets and evaluation methods. [13, 40]
1.2

Research gap

Current data curation and ASR benchmarking methods for low-resource languages such as Polish
exhibit several shortcomings:
1
2

BIGOS collection on Hugging Face
BIGOS ASR eval tools on GitHub

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

