UMFC: Unsupervised Multi-Domain Feature
Calibration for Vision-Language Models
Jiachen Liang1,2 , Ruibing Hou1∗, Minyang Hu1,2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jiachen.liang, minyang.hu}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {houruibing, changhong, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models (e.g., CLIP) have shown powerful zero-shot
transfer capabilities. But they still struggle with domain shifts and typically require
labeled data to adapt to downstream tasks, which could be costly. In this work, we
aim to leverage unlabeled data that naturally spans multiple domains to enhance the
transferability of vision-language models. Under this unsupervised multi-domain
setting, we have identified inherent model bias within CLIP, notably in its visual
and text encoders. Specifically, we observe that CLIP’s visual encoder tends to
prioritize encoding domain over discriminative category information, meanwhile
its text encoder exhibits a preference for domain-relevant classes. To mitigate this
model bias, we propose a training-free and label-free feature calibration method,
Unsupervised Multi-domain Feature Calibration (UMFC). UMFC estimates imagelevel biases from domain-specific features and text-level biases from the direction
of domain transition. These biases are subsequently subtracted from original
image and text features separately, to render them domain-invariant. We evaluate
our method on multiple settings including transductive learning and test-time
adaptation. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms CLIP and
performs on par with the state-of-the-arts that need additional annotations or
optimization. Our code is available at https://github.com/GIT-LJc/UMFC.

1

Introduction

Recently, Vision-Language Foundation Models (VLFMs) such as CLIP [30], BLIP [24], Flamingo
[1] and ALIGN [20] have demonstrated remarkable performance across various downstream tasks.
These VLFMs formulate the training objective as contrastive learning, leveraging millions of imagetext pairs to establish a shared embedding space. Equipped with a wide range of visual and text
representations, VLFMs exhibit the capability to tackle downstream tasks in a zero-shot manner.
Despite VLFMs being exposed to abundant examples, they may still encounter examples with new
variations in downstream tasks. To address the problem of distribution shift between the pre-training
and downstream domains, a natural approach involves fine-tuning VLFMs on various target tasks,
such as prompt engineering [39, 38] and adapter learning [11, 37]. However, these methods generally
require labeled samples for fine-tuning, which is prohibitively expensive to be satisfied in reality.
Conversely, abundant unlabeled data are often available for downstream tasks. Notably, in practical
scenarios, the unlabeled data typically contains multiple domains, which exacerbates the adaptation
difficulty of VLFMs. Therefore, in this paper, we aim to improve the adaptation performance of
VLFMs directly on unlabeled data that naturally spans multiple domains.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

