Adaptive Exploration for Data-Efficient General Value
Function Evaluations
Arushi Jain
arushi.jain@mail.mcgill.ca
McGill University
Mila

Josiah P. Hanna
jphanna@cs.wisc.edu
The University of Wisconsin – Madison

Doina Precup
dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca
McGill University
Mila

Abstract
General Value Functions (GVFs) (Sutton et al., 2011) represent predictive knowledge in reinforcement learning. Each GVF computes the expected return for a
given policy, based on a unique reward. Existing methods relying on fixed behavior policies or pre-collected data often face data efficiency issues when learning
multiple GVFs in parallel using off-policy methods. To address this, we introduce
GVFExplorer, which adaptively learns a single behavior policy that efficiently
collects data for evaluating multiple GVFs in parallel. Our method optimizes the
behavior policy by minimizing the total variance in return across GVFs, thereby
reducing the required environmental interactions. We use an existing temporaldifference-style variance estimator to approximate the return variance. We prove
that each behavior policy update decreases the overall mean squared error in
GVF predictions. We empirically show our method’s performance in tabular and
nonlinear function approximation settings, including Mujoco environments, with
stationary and non-stationary reward signals, optimizing data usage and reducing
prediction errors across multiple GVFs.

1

Introduction

The ability to make multiple predictions is a key attribute of human, animal, and artificial intelligence.
Sutton et al. (2011) introduced General Value Functions (GVFs) which consists of several independent sub-agents, each responsible for answering specific predictive knowledge about the environment.
Each GVF consists of a unique - policy, custom reward function called cumulant and state-dependent
discount factor - to calculate the cumulative discounted cumulant. For example, a GVF can predict
the expected number of times an agent will bump into the wall under a given policy (White et al.,
2015; Schlegel et al., 2021; Sherstan, 2020). In essence, GVFs generalizes the standard value function
to address a wider range of predictive questions, making them a powerful tool for intelligent systems.
Prior works have used either a fixed random behavior policy (Sutton et al., 2011) or pre-collected
datasets (Xu et al., 2022) to update all GVFs in parallel using off-policy learning. However, these
methods can result in large value estimation errors if the behavior policy significantly diverges
from the GVF policies. Our work addresses this gap by focusing on the question of exploration
for evaluating GVFs: how can we adapt an agent’s behavior policy for data-efficient estimation of
multiple GVFs in parallel? While exploration has been extensively studied in the context of optimal
control in Markov Decision Processes (MDP), the question of constructing a policy that can learn
multiple value functions in parallel has remained largely unexplored.
To accurately evaluate multiple GVFs in parallel, we aim to design a behavior policy that minimizes
the overall mean squared error (MSE) of their predictions. A natural approach might involve
following each GVF’s target policy for some period of time (e.g. one episode) in a round-robin
manner while concurrently updating all GVFs off-policy. However, this approach can be highly
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

