Solving Zero-Sum Markov Games with Continuous
State via Spectral Dynamic Embedding

Chenhao Zhou1 Zebang Shen2 Chao Zhang1∗ Hanbin Zhao1 Hui Qian1,3
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
{zhouchenhao,zczju,zhaohanbin,qianhui}@zju.edu.cn
zebang.shen@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a provably efﬁcient natural policy gradient algorithm
called Spectral Dynamic Embedding Policy Optimization (SDEPO) for two-player
zero-sum stochastic Markov games with continuous state space and ﬁnite action
space. In the policy evaluation procedure of our algorithm, a novel kernel embedding method is employed to construct a ﬁnite-dimensional linear approximations
to the state-action value function. We explicitly analyze the approximation error in
1
policy evaluation, and show that SDEPO achieves an Õ( (1−γ)
3 ϵ ) last-iterate convergence to the ϵ−optimal Nash equilibrium, which is independent of the cardinality
of the state space. The complexity result matches the best-known results for global
convergence of policy gradient algorithms for single agent setting. Moreover, we
also propose a practical variant of SDEPO to deal with continuous action space and
empirical results demonstrate the practical superiority of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Two-player zero-sum stochastic Markov games (2p0s-MGs) has been the focus of research across a
range of research communities. In this problem, two players select their actions based on the current
state simultaneously and independently. Player one aims to maximize the return based on the reward
provided by the environment, while player two aims to minimize it. For 2p0s-MGs with ﬁnite state
space, tabular methods [Alacaoglu et al., 2022, Bai and Jin, 2020, Daskalakis et al., 2020, Wei et al.,
2021, Zhao et al., 2022] represent the state-action value function with tables, which results in a
sample complexity depending on the cardinality of the state spaces.
To deal with 2p0s-MGs with complex state space, researchers recently employ function approximations of the state-action value function to deal with large-scale discrete/continuous state space,
including linear function approximations [Xie et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2022], kernel function approximations [Junchi Li et al., 2022, Qiu et al., 2021] and general function classes such as neural
networks [Jin et al., 2022, Huang et al., 2021]. Basically, these methods use samples to construct
the function approximations and update the policies with value iteration. Theoretical analyses show
that these methods possess sample complexities independent of the state space’s cardinality. Note
that these methods fail to explicitly utilize the dynamics information of the underlying environments
and only achieve a sub-optimal sample complexity Õ(ϵ−2 ) to ﬁnd an ϵ−optimal Nash equilibrium
for 2p0s-MGs with known system dynamics.
In this paper, we introduce a spectral dynamic embedding method, which explicitly uses the dynamics information to approximate the state-action value functions, and propose an efﬁcient naturalpolicy-gradient-type algorithm, called Spectral Dynamic Embedding Policy optimization (SDEPO),
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

