GFT: Graph Foundation Model with
Transferable Tree Vocabulary

Zehong Wang
University of Notre Dame
Indiana, USA
zwang43@nd.edu
Nitesh V Chawla
University of Notre Dame
Indiana, USA
nchawla@nd.edu

Zheyuan Zhang
University of Notre Dame
Indiana, USA
zzhang42@nd.edu

Chuxu Zhang∗
University of Connecticut
Connecticut, USA
chuxu.zhang@uconn.edu

Yanfang Ye∗
University of Notre Dame
Indiana, USA
yye7@nd.edu

Abstract
Inspired by the success of foundation models in applications such as ChatGPT,
as graph data has been ubiquitous, one can envision the far-reaching impacts that
can be brought by Graph Foundation Models (GFMs) with broader applications
in the areas such as scientific research, social network analysis, drug discovery,
and e-commerce. Despite the significant progress of pre-trained graph neural
networks, there haven’t been GFMs that can achieve desired performance on
various graph-learning-related tasks. Building GFMs may rely on a vocabulary that
encodes transferable patterns shared among different tasks and domains. Unlike
image and text, defining such transferable patterns for graphs remains an open
question. In this paper, we aim to bridge this gap by rethinking the transferable
patterns on graphs as computation trees – i.e., tree structures derived from the
message-passing process. Based on this insight, we propose a cross-task, crossdomain graph foundation model named GFT, short for Graph Foundation model
with transferable Tree vocabulary. By treating computation trees as tokens within
the transferable vocabulary, GFT improves model generalization and reduces the
risk of negative transfer. The theoretical analyses and extensive experimental
studies have demonstrated the transferability of computation trees and shown the
effectiveness of GFT across diverse tasks and domains in graph learning. The open
source code and data are available at https://github.com/Zehong-Wang/GFT.

1

Introduction

Foundation models such as Large Language Models (LLMs) and Large Vision Models (LVMs) keep
reshaping our view of the world [7, 100, 51, 112, 50]. These models are designed to be generalpurpose, adaptable across various tasks and domains through fine-tuning or prompting, such as
GPT-4 [1] in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Sora [46] in Computer Vision (CV). Research
attributes the success of foundation models to the uniformity of tasks and a general vocabulary that
defines basic transferable patterns across tasks [98, 76, 112, 3, 50]. For example, LLMs [1, 112] treat
language tasks as question-answering or next-word prediction and deconstruct sentences using a
word vocabulary. Similarly, LVMs [100, 98, 3] reformulate image tasks as image question-answering,
converting images into discrete tokens using a vision vocabulary. Inspired by the success of LLMs
∗

Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

