EMGBench: Benchmarking Out-of-Distribution
Generalization and Adaptation for Electromyography

Jehan Yang∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
jehan@cmu.edu

Maxwell Soh∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
msoh@andrew.cmu.edu

Douglas J Weber
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
dweber2@andrew.cmu.edu

Vivianna Lieu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
vlieu@andrew.cmu.edu

Zackory Erickson
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zerickso@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces the first generalization and adaptation benchmark using machine learning for evaluating out-of-distribution performance of electromyography
(EMG) classification algorithms. The ability of an EMG classifier to handle inputs
drawn from a different distribution than the training distribution is critical for
real-world deployment as a control interface. By predicting the user’s intended
gesture using EMG signals, we can create a wearable solution to control assistive
technologies, such as computers, prosthetics, and mobile manipulator robots. This
new out-of-distribution benchmark consists of two major tasks that have utility
for building robust and adaptable control interfaces: 1) intersubject classification,
and 2) adaptation using train-test splits for time-series. This benchmark spans
nine datasets, the largest collection of EMG datasets in a benchmark. Among
these, a new dataset is introduced, featuring a novel, easy-to-wear high-density
EMG wearable for data collection. The lack of open-source benchmarks has made
comparing accuracy results between papers challenging for the EMG research
community. This new benchmark provides researchers with a valuable resource for
analyzing practical measures of out-of-distribution performance for EMG datasets.
Our code and data from our new dataset can be found at emgbench.github.io.

1

Introduction

Electromyography (EMG) sensors detect muscle and motor neuron activity from the body, allowing
for wearable gesture-based control of robots or devices. Particularly, EMG sensors can be used to
sense intended hand or other body movements from people who are unable to move parts of their body
due to injury or neurodegenerative disease [1–5]. For people with upper or lower limb amputations,
EMG-based prosthetic arms or legs can be controlled using the residual muscles from the remaining
limb after amputation [2]. Additionally, for people with paralysis from stroke or spinal cord injury
(SCI), EMG sensors can detect motor intent based on residual muscle fiber activity [4, 3, 5].
Several EMG datasets have been made publicly available, although many of them differ in regards to
the hardware used and the placements of the sensors [2, 6–10]. Due to these common differences
between EMG control interfaces, it is important to evaluate multiple EMG datasets to assess the
classification accuracy and hardware-agnostic nature of machine learning-based techniques [11, 12].
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

