Neuro-Symbolic Data Generation for Math Reasoning

Zenan Li1∗ Zhi Zhou1∗ Yuan Yao1 Yu-Feng Li1
Chun Cao1 Fan Yang2 Xian Zhang2 Xiaoxing Ma1
1
State Key Lab of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
lizn@smail.nju.edu.cn, zhouz@lamda.nju.edu.cn,
zhxian@microsoft.com, xxm@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
A critical question about Large Language Models (LLMs) is whether their apparent
deficiency in mathematical reasoning is inherent, or merely a result of insufficient
exposure to high-quality mathematical data. To explore this, we developed an
automated method for generating high-quality, supervised mathematical datasets.
The method carefully mutates existing math problems, ensuring both diversity and
validity of the newly generated problems. This is achieved by a neuro-symbolic data
generation framework combining the intuitive informalization strengths of LLMs,
and the precise symbolic reasoning of math solvers along with projected Markov
chain Monte Carlo sampling in the highly-irregular symbolic space. Empirical
experiments demonstrate the high quality of data generated by the proposed method,
and that the LLMs, specifically LLaMA-2 and Mistral, when realigned with the
generated data, surpass their state-of-the-art counterparts.

1

Introduction

Despite recent progress [1–6], both proprietary and open-source LLMs are still far from satisfactory
in mathematical reasoning [7–9]. It is an open question whether LLM’s subpar reasoning capability
is inherent or due to the the extreme scarcity of high-quality mathematical datasets [10–13]. As an
initial step towards answer this question, a data generation framework that could create high-quality
math datasets is required. To this end, current two lines of research struggle in the diversity-validity
dilemma: (1) to produce diverse math data, the prompt-based method effectively rephrases math
problems using LLMs, but may induce errors thus ruining the validity, especially considering the
rigor of maths; (2) to ensure the validity, template-based methods are often used by rewriting math
problems with certain rules, sacrificing the diversity and thus confining data scale.
To address this dilemma, we propose a novel neuro-symbolic framework that automatically generates
high-quality, supervised mathematical data. The merit of this paradigm lies in leveraging both neural
and symbolic strengths: (1) the math problem is generated in the symbolic space, achieving diversity
through systematic sampling, while maintaining validity through symbolic solvers; (2) the translation
from the symbolic space back to the natural language space can be effectively supported by LLMs,
ensuring the consistency between newly generated formal problems and their corresponding natural
language versions.
Our framework, as illustrated in Figure 1, initiates with the formalization of the original problem
expressed via the math symbolic tools. Next, it mutates the formal problem into an evolved version,
and then derives a new natural language problem by informalization. Specifically, we design a
mutation mechanism, including various simplification and complication strategies, such that the
new problems can be generated with a controllable complexity. As shown in Figure 2, our mutation
∗

Equal contribution. This work was partially done during Zenan’s internship at MSRA.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

