DiffPhyCon: A Generative Approach to Control
Complex Physical Systems

Long Wei1∗ Peiyan Hu2∗§ Ruiqi Feng1∗ Haodong Feng1 Yixuan Du3§ Tao Zhang1
Rui Wang4§ Yue Wang5 Zhi-Ming Ma2 Tailin Wu1†
1
School of Engineering, Westlake University,
2
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
Jilin University, 4 Fudan University, 5 Microsoft AI4Science
{weilong,hupeiyan,fengruiqi,wutailin}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Controlling the evolution of complex physical systems is a fundamental task across
science and engineering. Classical techniques suffer from limited applicability
or huge computational costs. On the other hand, recent deep learning and reinforcement learning-based approaches often struggle to optimize long-term control
sequences under the constraints of system dynamics. In this work, we introduce
Diffusion Physical systems Control (DiffPhyCon), a new class of method to address the physical systems control problem. DiffPhyCon excels by simultaneously
minimizing both the learned generative energy function and the predefined control objectives across the entire trajectory and control sequence. Thus, it can
explore globally and plan near-optimal control sequences. Moreover, we enhance
DiffPhyCon with prior reweighting, enabling the discovery of control sequences
that significantly deviate from the training distribution. We test our method on
three tasks: 1D Burgers’ equation, 2D jellyfish movement control, and 2D highdimensional smoke control, where our generated jellyfish dataset is released as
a benchmark for complex physical system control research. Our method outperforms widely applied classical approaches and state-of-the-art deep learning and
reinforcement learning methods. Notably, DiffPhyCon unveils an intriguing fastclose-slow-open pattern observed in the jellyfish, aligning with established findings
in the field of fluid dynamics. The project website, jellyfish dataset, and code can
be found at https://github.com/AI4Science-WestlakeU/diffphycon.

1

Introduction

Modeling the dynamics of complex physical systems is an important class of problems in science and
engineering. Usually, we are not only interested in predicting a physical system’s behavior but also
injecting time-variant signals to steer its evolution and optimize specific objectives. This gives rise to
the complex physical control problem, a fundamental task with wide applications, such as controlled
nuclear fusion [10], fluid control [22], underwater devices [70] and aviation [47], among others.
Despite its importance, controlling complex physical systems efficiently presents significant challenges. It inherits the fundamental challenge of simulating complex physical systems, which are
typically high-dimensional and highly nonlinear, as specified in Appendix A.1. Furthermore, observed control signals and corresponding system trajectories for optimizing a control model are
typically far from the optimal solutions of the specific control objective. This fact poses a significant
challenge of dilemma: How to explore long-term control sequences beyond its training distribution
∗

Equal contribution. § Work done as an intern at Westlake University. † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

