Improving Robustness of 3D Point Cloud Recognition
from a Fourier Perspective

Yibo Miao1,2 , Yinpeng Dong3,6† , Jinlai Zhang4 , Lijia Yu5 , Xiao Yang3 , Xiao-Shan Gao1,2†
1
KLMM, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
4
Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha 410114, China
5
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 6 RealAI
miaoyibo@amss.ac.cn, dongyinpeng@tsinghua.edu.cn, xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn

Abstract
Although 3D point cloud recognition has achieved substantial progress on standard
benchmarks, the typical models are vulnerable to point cloud corruptions, leading
to security threats in real-world applications. To improve the corruption robustness,
various data augmentation methods have been studied, but they are mainly limited
to the spatial domain. As the point cloud has low information density and significant spatial redundancy, it is challenging to analyze the effects of corruptions. In
this paper, we focus on the frequency domain to observe the underlying structure
of point clouds and their corruptions. Through graph Fourier transform (GFT), we
observe a correlation between the corruption robustness of point cloud recognition
models and their sensitivity to different frequency bands, which is measured by
the GFT spectrum of the model’s Jacobian matrix. To reduce the sensitivity and
improve the corruption robustness, we propose Frequency Adversarial Training
(FAT) that adopts frequency-domain adversarial examples as data augmentation to
train robust point cloud recognition models against corruptions. Theoretically, we
provide a guarantee of FAT on its out-of-distribution generalization performance.
Empirically, we conducted extensive experiments with various network architectures to validate the effectiveness of FAT, which achieves the new state-of-the-art
results.

1

Introduction

3D point cloud recognition based on deep neural networks (DNNs) [35, 36, 65] has achieved unprecedented performance on typical benchmarks [5, 67], which assume that the data are independently and
identically distributed. However, in practical scenarios, point clouds suffer from severe corruptions
(e.g., noise, density change, transformation) due to sensor imprecision and scene complexity [66, 76].
When the testing distribution is different from the training distribution caused by corruption, point
cloud recognition models have significant performance degradation [41, 51], indicating that they lack
the robustness of human visual system [40], while also raising concerns about safety and reliability
of these models. As deep 3D point cloud recognition has been increasingly deployed in safety-critical
applications, such as autonomous driving [6, 84], robotics [60, 92], and medical image processing
[54], it is of crucial importance to improve the robustness of 3D point cloud recognition models to
out-of-distribution (OOD) point cloud data induced by corruptions [10].
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

