UniAudio 1.5: Large Language Model-Driven Audio
Codec is A Few-Shot Audio Task Learner
Dongchao Yang1 , Haohan Guo1 , Yuanyuan Wang2 , Rongjie Huang1 , Xiang Li2
Xu Tan3 , Xixin Wu1 , Helen Meng1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Microsoft Research Asia
{dcyang,hmmeng}@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Large Language models (LLMs) have demonstrated supreme capabilities in textual understanding and generation, but cannot be directly applied to cross-modal
tasks without fine-tuning. This paper proposes a cross-modal in-context learning approach, empowering the frozen LLMs to achieve multiple audio tasks in
a few-shot style without any parameter update. Specifically, we propose a novel
LLM-driven audio codec model, LLM-Codec, which transfers the audio modality
into textual space by representing audio tokens with words or sub-words from the
LLM vocabulary, while maintaining high audio reconstruction quality. The key
idea is to reduce the modality heterogeneity between text and audio by compressing
the audio modality into the well-trained textual space of LLMs. Thus, the audio
representation can be viewed as a new foreign language, and LLMs can learn the
new foreign language with several demonstrations. In experiments, we investigate
the performance of the proposed approach across multiple audio understanding and
generation tasks, e.g. speech emotion classification, audio classification, text-tospeech generation, speech enhancement, etc. Experimental results show that LLMs
equipped with the LLM-Codec, named as UniAudio 1.5, prompted by only a few
examples, can perform effectively in simple scenarios, validating our cross-modal
in-context learning approach. To facilitate research on few-shot audio task learning
and multi-modal LLMs, we have open-sourced the LLM-Codec model. 1

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) (e.g., GPT-4 [2], LLAMA [36]) have become increasingly versatile
and effective in handling diverse and complex Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks as they
scale in model size and training data. It is worth noting that the in-context learning ability of LLMs
can be used to solve unseen tasks, e.g., we can provide instructions along with a few demonstrations,
enabling LLMs to learn and solve new tasks. The success of LLMs inspires the development of
multi-modal LLMs, naturally leading to the idea of empowering their auditory capabilities to tackle
audio-related tasks. There have been notable advancements in extending the capabilities of LLMs to
tackle audio understanding tasks by combining the pre-trained audio encoder (e.g. Whisper encoder
[31]) and LLMs. For instance, models like WavLLM [15], SALMONN [35], and Qwen-audio [8]
propose training multi-modal LLMs by integrating a pre-trained audio encoder, a trainable adaptor,
and pre-trained LLMs. They try to align the audio and text modalities by updating the adaptor or
fine-tuning the LLMs with LORA [14]. However, previous works have limitations: (1) they primarily
focus on expanding LLMs to solve specific audio tasks without leveraging in-context learning for
unseen audio tasks; (2) they do not support audio generation tasks, which limits their applicability;
(3) they require large-scale audio data for aligning audio and text modalities, increasing the burden of
model training and data collection.
1

https://github.com/yangdongchao/LLM-Codec

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

