Global Convergence in Training Large-Scale
Transformers
Cheng Gao1∗ Yuan Cao2∗ Zihao Li1 Yihan He1 Mengdi Wang1
Han Liu3 Jason M. Klusowski1† Jianqing Fan1†
1
Princeton University 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Northwestern University
{chenggao,zihaoli,yihan.he,mengdiw,jason.klusowski,jqfan}@princeton.edu
yuancao@hku.hk
hanliu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Despite the widespread success of Transformers across various domains, their
optimization guarantees in large-scale model settings are not well-understood.
This paper rigorously analyzes the convergence properties of gradient flow in
training Transformers with weight decay regularization. First, we construct the
mean-field limit of large-scale Transformers, showing that as the model width
and depth go to infinity, gradient flow converges to the Wasserstein gradient flow,
which is represented by a partial differential equation. Then, we demonstrate that
the gradient flow reaches a global minimum consistent with the PDE solution
when the weight decay regularization parameter is sufficiently small. Our analysis
is based on a series of novel mean-field techniques that adapt to Transformers.
Compared with existing tools for deep networks [47] that demand homogeneity
and global Lipschitz smoothness, we utilize a refined analysis assuming only
partial homogeneity and local Lipschitz smoothness. These new techniques are of
independent interest.

1

Introduction

Transformers have revolutionized the field of deep learning since their introduction in [66]. These
models are distinguished by their immense scales, often comprising billions of parameters to achieve
state-of-the-art performance. Notably, this massive parameterization enables them to excel in a variety
of domains, notably in natural language processing [21, 55, 65] and vision tasks [20, 36], where they
have significantly advanced the frontiers of machine learning.
Despite the widespread adoption of Transformer models, our understanding of their optimization
guarantees is still in its early stages. One particularly intriguing phenomenon is that as the size
of model increases, training algorithms typically converges globally despite the highly nonconvex
landscape of the training objective function. Remarkably, it remains somewhat enigmatic how
gradient-based approaches can consistently succeed when training large-scale Transformers.
Notably, there have been several recent works showing the global convergence of training overparameterized neural networks [51, 16, 28, 14, 47, 22, 23, 35, 3, 25, 76]. In particular, several works
[47, 22, 23] studied the setting with deep neural networks with skip connections. By studying the
connections between the network with discretization in the parameter space and a corresponding
ordinary differential equation system [71, 12, 43], these works demonstrated global convergence
guarantees of wide and deep neural networks based on a mean-field analysis. However, these results
are established based on certain homogeneity and/or global Lipschitz smoothness properties of the
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

