Fight Back Against Jailbreaking via
Prompt Adversarial Tuning

Yichuan Mo1∗

Yuji Wang2∗ Zeming Wei3

Yisen Wang1,4†

1

State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
While Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved tremendous success in various applications, they are also susceptible to jailbreaking attacks. Several primary
defense strategies have been proposed to protect LLMs from producing harmful
information, mostly focusing on model fine-tuning or heuristical defense designs.
However, how to achieve intrinsic robustness through prompt optimization remains
an open problem. In this paper, motivated by adversarial training paradigms for
achieving reliable robustness, we propose an approach named Prompt Adversarial
Tuning (PAT) that trains a prompt control attached to the user prompt as a guard
prefix. To achieve our defense goal whilst maintaining natural performance, we
optimize the control prompt with both adversarial and benign prompts. Comprehensive experiments show that our method is effective against both grey-box and
black-box attacks, reducing the success rate of advanced attacks to nearly 0%, while
maintaining the model’s utility on the benign task and incurring only negligible
computational overhead, charting a new perspective for future explorations in LLM
security. Our code is available at https://github.com/PKU-ML/PAT.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [35, 1, 67, 44] have shown remarkable performance in multiple
regions, such as coding [62, 29], math [30, 21] and role-playing [40, 51]. Meanwhile, serious
concerns have been raised about their security issues [41, 60] and one of the most prominent
problems is the jailbreak attack [70]. Although at the training stage, substantial efforts [38, 4] have
been invested to align the outputs of LLMs with human values, recent studies reveal that LLMs may
still output inappropriate content when facing well-designed adversarial prompts [43, 27]. Similar to
the adversarial attacks [32, 49, 11, 3, 55, 31] in the image domain, it will not only significantly affect
the normal functionality of LLMs but also potentially result in serious ethical issues.
To mitigate this threat, several studies have proposed targeted defenses to enhance protection. For
instance, fine-tuning-based defenses [22, 14, 64] aim to improve intrinsic robustness by incorporating
safety datasets into the training data. However, given the vast parameters in LLMs, this approach
significantly increases computational costs. Alternatively, prompt-based defenses [71, 58, 54] involve
manually designing secure prompting contexts, which are computationally efficient but rely heavily
on human heuristics. In addition, those approaches also risk high false-positive rates due to their
lack of alignment with the model’s training distribution. By combining the distinct advantages of
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

