Improving Gloss-free Sign Language Translation by
Reducing Representation Density

Jinhui Ye1 Xing Wang4 Wenxiang Jiao4,† Junwei Liang1,2,† Hui Xiong1,2,3,†
1
Artificial Intelligence Thrust, HKUST (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Guangzhou HKUST Fok Ying Tung Research Institute 4 Tencent AI Lab
jye624@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn; junweiliang@hkust-gz.edu.cn;
xionghui@ust.hk; {brightxwang,joelwxjiao}@tencent.com

Abstract
Gloss-free sign language translation (SLT) aims to develop well-performing SLT
systems with no requirement for the costly gloss annotations, but currently still lags
behind gloss-based approaches significantly. In this paper, we identify a representation density problem that could be a bottleneck in restricting the performance
of gloss-free SLT. Specifically, the representation density problem describes that
the visual representations of semantically distinct sign gestures tend to be closely
packed together in feature space, which makes gloss-free methods struggle with
distinguishing different sign gestures and suffer from a sharp performance drop.
To address the representation density problem, we introduce a simple but effective
contrastive learning strategy, namely SignCL, which encourages gloss-free models
to learn more discriminative feature representation in a self-supervised manner.
Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed SignCL can significantly reduce
the representation density and improve performance across various translation
frameworks. Specifically, SignCL achieves a significant improvement in BLEU
score for the Sign Language Transformer and GFSLT-VLP on the CSL-Daily
dataset by 39% and 46%, respectively, without any increase of model parameters. Compared to Sign2GPT, a state-of-the-art method based on large-scale
pre-trained vision and language models, SignCL achieves better performance with
only 35% of its parameters. Implementation and Checkpoints are available at
https://github.com/JinhuiYE/SignCL.

1

Introduction

Sign languages are the primary form of communication for millions of deaf individuals. Sign language
translation (SLT) aims to convert sign language into fluent spoken language sentences, which is
a challenging task as it needs to extract information from continuous video and translate it into
discrete text tokens. Most prior studies promoted the SLT by utilizing intermediate representations,
namely gloss annotations, either directly or indirectly [3, 48, 53, 8, 49, 46, 41]. Gloss annotations
are beneficial as they provide a simplified representation and sequential ordering of each gesture
within continuous sign videos, which aids in representation learning for visual encoders. However,
the creation of sign language translation datasets with gloss annotations is both resource-intensive
and time-consuming.
Recently, there has been a shift towards gloss-free sign language translation methods, which do not
rely on gloss annotations to train SLT models. These methods usually rely on general datasets [47],
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

