Pretrained Transformer Efficiently Learns
Low-Dimensional Target Functions In-Context
Kazusato Oko1,3 , Yujin Song2,3 , Taiji Suzuki2,3 , Denny Wu4,5
1

University of California, Berkeley, 2 University of Tokyo,
4
New York University, 5 Flatiron Institute

3

RIKEN AIP

oko@berkeley.edu, song-yujin139@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp,
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, dennywu@nyu.edu

Abstract
Transformers can efficiently learn in-context from example demonstrations. Most
existing theoretical analyses studied the in-context learning (ICL) ability of transformers for linear function classes, where it is typically shown that the minimizer
of the pretraining loss implements one gradient descent step on the least squares
objective. However, this simplified linear setting arguably does not demonstrate the
statistical efficiency of ICL, since the pretrained transformer does not outperform
directly solving linear regression on the test prompt. In this paper, we study ICL
of a nonlinear function class via transformer with nonlinear MLP layer: given a
class of single-index target functions f∗ (x) = σ∗ (⟨x, β⟩), where the index features
β ∈ Rd are drawn from a r-dimensional subspace, we show that a nonlinear transformer optimized by gradient descent (with a pretraining sample complexity that
depends on the information exponent of the link functions σ∗ ) learns f∗ in-context
with a prompt length that only depends on the dimension of the distribution of
target functions r; in contrast, any algorithm that directly learns f∗ on test prompt
yields a statistical complexity that scales with the ambient dimension d. Our result
highlights the adaptivity of the pretrained transformer to low-dimensional structures of the function class, which enables sample-efficient ICL that outperforms
estimators that only have access to the in-context data.

1

Introduction

Pretrained transformers [VSP+ 17] possess the remarkable ability of in-context learning (ICL)
[BMR+ 20], whereby the model constructs a predictor from a prompt sequence consisting of pairs of
labeled examples without updating any parameters. A common explanation is that the trained transformer can implement a learning algorithm, such as gradient descent on the in-context examples, in
its forward pass [HvMM+ 19, DSD+ 22, VONR+ 23]. Such explanation has been empirically studied
in synthetic tasks such as linear regression [GTLV22, ASA+ 22], which has motivated theoretical
analyses of the statistical and computational complexity of ICL in learning simple function classes.
Many recent theoretical works on ICL focus on learning the function class of linear models using
linear transformers trained via empirical risk minimization. In this setting, it can be shown that
minima of the pretraining loss implements one (preconditioned) gradient descent step on the least
squares objective computed on the test prompt [ZFB23, ACDS23, MHM23]. This implies that the
forward pass of the pretrained transformer can learn linear targets with n ≳ d in-context examples,
hence matching the sample complexity of linear regression on the test prompt. Subsequent works
also studied how the distribution and “diversity” of pretrained tasks affect the ICL solution in similar
problem settings [WZC+ 23, RPCG23, ZWB24, LLZV+ 24].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

