Learnability Matters: Active Learning for Video
Captioning

Yiqian Zhang1 , Buyu Liu2 , Jun Bao2 , Qiang Huang3 , Min Zhang2 , Jun Yu2∗
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
3
National University of Singapore
yiqian.zyq@gmail.com, {buyu.liu, baojun}@hit.edu.cn,
huangq@comp.nus.edu.sg, zhangmin2021@hit.edu.cn, zju.yujun@gmail.com

Abstract
This work focuses on the active learning in video captioning. In particular, we
propose to address the learnability problem in active learning, which has been
brought up by collective outliers in video captioning and neglected in the literature.
To start with, we conduct a comprehensive study of collective outliers, exploring
their hard-to-learn property and concluding that ground truth inconsistency is one
of the main causes. Motivated by this, we design a novel active learning algorithm
that takes three complementary aspects, namely learnability, diversity, and uncertainty, into account. Ideally, learnability is reflected by ground truth consistency.
Under the active learning scenario where ground truths are not available until
human involvement, we measure the consistency on estimated ground truths, where
predictions from off-the-shelf models are utilized as approximations to ground
truths. These predictions are further used to estimate sample frequency and reliability, evincing the diversity and uncertainty respectively. With the help of our
novel caption-wise active learning protocol, our algorithm is capable of leveraging
knowledge from humans in a more effective yet intellectual manner. Results on
publicly available video captioning datasets with diverse video captioning models
demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms SOTA active learning methods by a
large margin,e.g.we achieve about 103% of full performance on CIDEr with 25%
of human annotations on MSR-VTT.

1

Introduction

Video captioning, which aims to understand videos in the form of describing them in natural language Abdar et al. (2023), becomes a heated task Lin et al. (2022) with the emergence of a large
amount of data Li et al. (2023a) as well as transformer-based models Liu et al. (2022). Despite
the superior performance, existing methods suffer heavily from the need for time-consuming and
labor-intensive human annotations Chan et al. (2020) because of their learning-based nature.
Approaches such as active learning Tharwat and Schenck (2023), semi-supervised learning Yang
et al. (2023), and domain adaptation Yu et al. (2023) are proposed to address the above-mentioned
data issue. This paper takes the active learning approach where we assume there exists a small
amount of labelled data together with a large number of unlabelled ones. Our goal is to select the
most informative samples from the unlabelled set and have them annotated by humans such that the
video captioning model can achieve the best performance with the minimum human effort. Though
uncertainty and diversity have been exploited to investigate the properties of unlabelled data, the
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

