Similarity-Navigated Conformal Prediction for Graph
Neural Networks
Jianqing Song1 , Jianguo Huang2,3 , Wenyu Jiang2,1 , Baoming Zhang1 ,
Shuangjie Li1 , Chongjun Wang1∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and Technology
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks have achieved remarkable accuracy in semi-supervised
node classification tasks. However, these results lack reliable uncertainty estimates.
Conformal prediction methods provide a theoretical guarantee for node classification tasks, ensuring that the conformal prediction set contains the ground-truth
label with a desired probability (e.g., 95%). In this paper, we empirically show that
for each node, aggregating the non-conformity scores of nodes with the same label
can improve the efficiency of conformal prediction sets while maintaining valid
marginal coverage. This observation motivates us to propose a novel algorithm
named Similarity-Navigated Adaptive Prediction Sets (SNAPS), which aggregates
the non-conformity scores based on feature similarity and structural neighborhood.
The key idea behind SNAPS is that nodes with high feature similarity or direct
connections tend to have the same label. By incorporating adaptive similar nodes information, SNAPS can generate compact prediction sets and increase the singleton
hit ratio (correct prediction sets of size one). Moreover, we theoretically provide a
finite-sample coverage guarantee of SNAPS. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superiority of SNAPS, improving the efficiency of prediction sets and singleton
hit ratio while maintaining valid coverage.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which process graph-structured data by the message-passing
manner (Kipf and Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019),
have achieved remarkable accuracy in various high-stakes applications, e.g., drug discovery (Li et al.,
2022), fraud detection (Liu et al., 2023) and traffic forecasting (Jiang and Luo, 2022), where any
erroneous prediction can be costly and dangerous (Amodei et al., 2016; Gao et al., 2019). To improve
the reliability of prediction results, many methods have been investigated to quantify the model
uncertainty (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016; Guo et al., 2017; Kendall and Gal, 2017; Wang et al., 2021;
Hsu et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2024), while these methods lack theoretical guarantees of quantification.
Conformal prediction (CP), on the other hand, offers a systematic approach to construct prediction
sets that contain ground-truth labels with a desired coverage guarantee (Vovk et al., 2005; Romano
et al., 2020; Angelopoulos et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2023a; Xi et al., 2024).
CP algorithms utilize non-conformity scores to measure dissimilarity between a new instance and
the training instances. The lower the score of a new instance, the more likely it belongs to the same
distribution space as the training instances, thereby included in the prediction set. To improve the
efficiency of prediction sets for GNNs, DAPS (Zargarbashi et al., 2023) smooths node-wise nonconformity scores by incorporating neighborhood information based on the assumption of network
∗

Corresponding author (chjwang@nju.edu.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

