Federated Learning under Periodic Client
Participation and Heterogeneous Data: A New
Communication-Efficient Algorithm and Analysis

Michael Crawshaw
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
mcrawsha@gmu.edu

Mingrui Liu
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
mingruil@gmu.edu

Abstract
In federated learning, it is common to assume that clients are always available to
participate in training, which may not be feasible with user devices in practice.
Recent works analyze federated learning under more realistic participation patterns,
such as cyclic client availability or arbitrary participation. However, all such works
either require strong assumptions (e.g., all clients participate almost surely within
a bounded window), do not achieve linear speedup and reduced communication
rounds, or are not applicable in the general non-convex setting. In this work, we
focus on nonconvex optimization and consider participation patterns in which
the chance of participation over a fixed window of rounds is equal among all
clients, which includes cyclic client availability as a special case. Under this
setting, we propose a new algorithm, named Amplified SCAFFOLD, and prove
that it achieves linear speedup, reduced communication, and resilience to data
heterogeneity simultaneously. In particular, for cyclic participation, our algorithm
is proved to enjoy O(ϵ−2 ) communication rounds to find an ϵ-stationary point in
the non-convex stochastic setting. In contrast, the prior work under the same setting
requires O(κ2 ϵ−4 ) communication rounds, where κ denotes the data heterogeneity.
Therefore, our algorithm significantly reduces communication rounds due to better
dependency in terms of ϵ and κ. Our analysis relies on a fine-grained treatment
of the nested dependence between client participation and errors in the control
variates, which results in tighter guarantees than previous work. We also provide
experimental results with (1) synthetic data and (2) real-world data with a large
number of clients (N = 250), demonstrating the effectiveness of our algorithm
under periodic client participation.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [27, 21, 16, 53] is a distributed learning paradigm that emphasizes client
privacy [28, 41, 29], limited communication [19, 25], and data heterogeneity across clients [17, 55].
FL has attracted attention in recent years due to the ability to leverage data and compute from user
devices while respecting privacy [49, 9]. For large-scale FL, it is common to limit the number of
simultaneously participating devices, and many works do so by assuming that a random subset of
clients can be sampled independently at each round [27, 3, 50, 22, 38]. However, this pattern of client
participation is not always practical. If clients are user devices like mobile phones, they may not
have 24/7 availability due to low battery or bad internet connection [15, 31]. In particular, if client
availability is correlated with geographical location (e.g. mobile phones charging at night), then
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

