PointAD: Comprehending 3D Anomalies from Points
and Pixels for Zero-shot 3D Anomaly Detection

Qihang Zhou1 , Jiangtao Yan1 , Shibo He1∗, Wenchao Meng1 , Jiming Chen1
1
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
1
{zqhang, jtaoy, s18he, wmengzju, cjm}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Zero-shot (ZS) 3D anomaly detection is a crucial yet unexplored field that addresses scenarios where target 3D training samples are unavailable due to practical
concerns like privacy protection. This paper introduces PointAD, a novel approach
that transfers the strong generalization capabilities of CLIP for recognizing 3D
anomalies on unseen objects. PointAD provides a unified framework to comprehend 3D anomalies from both points and pixels. In this framework, PointAD
renders 3D anomalies into multiple 2D renderings and projects them back into
3D space. To capture the generic anomaly semantics into PointAD, we propose
hybrid representation learning that optimizes the learnable text prompts from 3D
and 2D through auxiliary point clouds. The collaboration optimization between
point and pixel representations jointly facilitates our model to grasp underlying 3D
anomaly patterns, contributing to detecting and segmenting anomalies of unseen
diverse 3D objects. Through the alignment of 3D and 2D space, our model can
directly integrate RGB information, further enhancing the understanding of 3D
anomalies in a plug-and-play manner. Extensive experiments show the superiority
of PointAD in ZS 3D anomaly detection across diverse unseen objects. Code is
available at https://github.com/zqhang/PointAD

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection, a significant field within deep learning, has been widely applied to diverse
domains, including industrial inspection [2, 3, 32, 36, 37, 44, 15, 24, 55, 6, 19, 63]. While 2D
anomaly detection has been extensively studied by exploring RGB information [23, 56, 50, 51, 8, 29],
real-world anomalies typically present themselves with abnormal spatial characteristics. Relying
solely on RGB information poses challenges in detecting some anomalies in many cases, e.g., when
the defect mimics the appearance of the object’s background or foreground, as shown in Figure 1(a).
The emerging field of 3D anomaly detection aims to unveil these spatial relations indicative of
abnormal patterns [22, 4, 45, 9, 54, 13].
However, current 3D anomaly detection methods typically store normal point features during training
and identify anomalies by measuring the distance between the test feature and these stored features [22,
54, 13]. They all depend on the assumption that target point clouds are available and entirely normal.
This assumption does not hold in various situations when the training samples in the target dataset
are inaccessible due to privacy protection (e.g., involvement of trade secrets) or the absence of target
training data (e.g., a new product never seen before) [63]. Figure 1(b) depicts the setting discrepancy
between ZS 3D and unsupervised anomaly detection. These methods mentioned above, which detect
anomalies by memorizing or reconstructing normal point features, have limitations in generalizing
to unseen objects in Figure 1(c). While zero-shot (ZS) anomaly detection has been explored in 2D
images [35, 63], ZS 3D anomaly detection remains a research blank. It is a challenging task as ZS
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

