Shuffling Gradient-Based Methods for
Nonconvex-Concave Minimax Optimization
Quoc Tran-Dinh

Trang H. Tran

Department of Statistics and Operations Research

School of OR and Information Engineering

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Cornell University, Ithaca, NY

quoctd@email.unc.edu

htt27@cornell.edu
Lam M. Nguyen

IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY
LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com

Abstract
This paper aims at developing novel shuffling gradient-based methods for tackling
two classes of minimax problems: nonconvex-linear and nonconvex-strongly concave settings. The first algorithm addresses the nonconvex-linear minimax model
and achieves the state-of-the-art oracle complexity typically observed in nonconvex
optimization. It also employs a new shuffling estimator for the “hyper-gradient”,
departing from standard shuffling techniques in optimization. The second method
consists of two variants: semi-shuffling and full-shuffling schemes. These variants
tackle the nonconvex-strongly concave minimax setting. We establish their oracle
complexity bounds under standard assumptions, which, to our best knowledge, are
the best-known for this specific setting. Numerical examples demonstrate the performance of our algorithms and compare them with two other methods. Our results
show that the new methods achieve comparable performance with SGD, supporting
the potential of incorporating shuffling strategies into minimax algorithms.

1

Introduction

Minimax problems arise in various applications across generative machine learning, game theory,
robust optimization, online learning, and reinforcement learning (e.g., [1, 2, 3, 5, 12, 13, 17, 19, 21,
25, 35, 40]). These models often involve stochastic settings or large finite-sum objective functions.
To tackle these problems, existing methods frequently adapt stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
principles to develop algorithms for solving the underlying minimax problems [4, 13]. For instance,
in generative adversarial networks (GANs), early algorithms employed stochastic gradient descentascent methods where two routines, each using an SGD loop, ran iteratively [13]. However, practical
implementations of SGD often incorporate shuffling strategies, as seen in popular deep learning
libraries like TensorFlow and PyTorch. This has motivated recent research on developing shuffling
techniques specifically for optimization algorithms [4, 5, 8, 16, 26, 32, 38]. Our work builds upon
this trend by developing shuffling methods for two specific classes of minimax problems.
Problem statement. In this paper, we study the following minimax optimization problem:
n
n
o
X
minp maxq L(w, u) := f (w) + H(w, u) h(u) ⌘ f (w) + n1
Hi (w, u) h(u) ,
w2R u2R

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

i=1

(1)

