UniMTS: Unified Pre-training for Motion Time Series

Xiyuan Zhang
UC San Diego
xiyuanzh@ucsd.edu
Ranak Roy Chowdhury
UC San Diego
rrchowdh@ucsd.edu

Diyan Teng
Qualcomm
diyateng@qti.qualcomm.com
Shuheng Li
UC San Diego
shl060@ucsd.edu

Rajesh K. Gupta
UC San Diego
rgupta@ucsd.edu

Dezhi Hong∗
Amazon
hondezhi@amazon.com
Jingbo Shang
UC San Diego
jshang@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Motion time series collected from low-power, always-on mobile and wearable
devices such as smartphones and smartwatches offer significant insights into human
behavioral patterns, with wide applications in healthcare, automation, IoT, and
AR/XR. However, given security and privacy concerns, building large-scale motion
time series datasets remains difficult, hindering the development of pre-trained
models for human activity analysis. Typically, existing models are trained and
tested on the same dataset, leading to poor generalizability across variations in
device location, device mounting orientation, and human activity type. In this
paper, we introduce UniMTS1 , the first unified pre-training procedure for motion
time series that generalizes across diverse device latent factors and activities.
Specifically, we employ a contrastive learning framework that aligns motion time
series with text descriptions enriched by large language models. This helps the
model learn the semantics of time series to generalize across activities. Given the
absence of large-scale motion time series data, we derive and synthesize time series
from existing motion skeleton data with all-joint coverage. We use spatio-temporal
graph networks to capture the relationships across joints for generalization across
different device locations. We further design rotation-invariant augmentation to
make the model agnostic to changes in device mounting orientations. Our model
shows exceptional generalizability across 18 motion time series classification
benchmark datasets, outperforming the best baselines by 340% in the zero-shot
setting, 16.3% in the few-shot setting, and 9.2% in the full-shot setting.

1

Introduction

Recognition of human motion using time series from mobile and wearable devices, such as accelerations and angular velocities, is widely adopted as key context information for various applications
from health condition monitoring [4], sports activity analysis [1] to user habit studies [50]. Compared
with vision-based approaches, methods based on motion sensor time series offer more energy-efficient
and cost-effective solutions with enhanced privacy protection [54], making them preferable.
∗

Work unrelated to Amazon.
Code is available on Github: https://github.com/xiyuanzh/UniMTS. Model is available on Hugging
Face: https://huggingface.co/xiyuanz/UniMTS.
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

