Point-PRC: A Prompt Learning Based Regulation
Framework for Generalizable Point Cloud Analysis

Hongyu Sun1,2 Qiuhong Ke2 Yongcai Wang1∗
Wang Chen1 Kang Yang1 Deying Li1 Jianfei Cai2
1

Department of Computer Science, Renmin University of China, China
2
Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University, Australia

Abstract
This paper investigates the 3D domain generalization (3DDG) ability of large 3D
models based on prevalent prompt learning. Recent works demonstrate the performances of 3D point cloud recognition can be boosted remarkably by parameterefficient prompt tuning. However, we observe that the improvement on downstream
tasks comes at the expense of a severe drop in 3D domain generalization. To resolve
this challenge, we present a comprehensive regulation framework that allows the
learnable prompts to actively interact with the well-learned general knowledge
in large 3D models to maintain good generalization. Specifically, the proposed
framework imposes multiple explicit constraints on the prompt learning trajectory by maximizing the mutual agreement between task-specific predictions and
task-agnostic knowledge. We design the regulation framework as a plug-and-play
module to embed into existing representative large 3D models. Surprisingly, our
method not only realizes consistently increasing generalization ability but also
enhances task-specific 3D recognition performances across various 3DDG benchmarks by a clear margin. Considering the lack of study and evaluation on 3DDG, we
also create three new benchmarks, namely base-to-new, cross-dataset and few-shot
generalization benchmarks, to enrich the field and inspire future research. Code and
benchmarks are available at https://github.com/auniquesun/Point-PRC.

1

Introduction

3D point cloud data is widely adopted in many industrial and civil areas, such as autonomous
driving [47], robotics [27, 3], geospatial mapping [39] and entertainment games [46]. Recognizing
3D objects from point cloud data is a basic need of these applications. Relevant research topics
have been explored for a long time and their development can be summarized in three stages. In
the early phase, PointNet series [48, 49] sparked a wave of directly operating raw point cloud data
using deep learning techniques. Later methods improved upon PointNet and PointNet++ in terms
of local information aggregation [33, 67, 60, 63, 69, 37], optimization techniques [50], geometry
prior [55], model architecture [18, 82, 68, 44, 14], etc. Although remarkable progress has been made,
these works tend to design specific architectures targeting downstream benchmarks while paying
little attention to the model generalization, resulting in disappointed performances when deploying in
the wild, especially in the case of unseen domains and corrupted data. On the other hand, training
point cloud recognition models on each benchmark is not always feasible due to the narrow set of 3D
visual concepts and expensive labeled data.
∗

Corresponding author. {sunhongyu, ycw}@ruc.edu.cn, {qiuhong.ke, jianfei.cai}@monash.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

