Boosting Weakly-Supervised Referring Image
Segmentation via Progressive Comprehension

Yuhao Liu† , Jiaying Lin, Gerhard Hancke† , Rynson W.H. Lau†
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
{zaiquyang2-c, yuhliu9-c,jiayinlin5-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk
{gp.hancke, Rynson.Lau}@cityu.edu.hk

Zaiquan Yang,

Abstract
This paper explores the weakly-supervised referring image segmentation (WRIS)
problem, and focuses on a challenging setup where target localization is learned
directly from image-text pairs. We note that the input text description typically
already contains detailed information on how to localize the target object, and we
also observe that humans often follow a step-by-step comprehension process (i.e.,
progressively utilizing target-related attributes and relations as cues) to identify
the target object. Hence, we propose a novel Progressive Comprehension Network
(PCNet) to leverage target-related textual cues from the input description for progressively localizing the target object. Specifically, we first use a Large Language
Model (LLM) to decompose the input text description into short phrases. These
short phrases are taken as target-related cues and fed into a Conditional Referring
Module (CRM) in multiple stages, to allow updating the referring text embedding
and enhance the response map for target localization in a multi-stage manner. Based
on the CRM, we then propose a Region-aware Shrinking (RaS) loss to constrain the
visual localization to be conducted progressively in a coarse-to-fine manner across
different stages. Finally, we introduce an Instance-aware Disambiguation (IaD)
loss to suppress instance localization ambiguity by differentiating overlapping
response maps generated by different referring texts on the same image. Extensive
experiments show that our method outperforms SOTA methods on three common
benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) aims to segment a target object in an image via a user-specified
input text description. RIS has various applications, such as text-based image editing [17, 13, 2]
and human-computer interaction [62, 51]. Despite remarkable progress, most existing RIS works [7,
58, 27, 26, 21, 5] rely heavily on pixel-level ground-truth masks to learn visual-linguistic alignment.
Recently, there has been a surge in interest in developing weakly-supervised RIS (WRIS) methods via
weak supervisions, e.g., bounding-boxes [9], and text descriptions [54, 18, 30, 4], to alleviate burden
of data annotations. In this work, we focus on obtaining supervision from text descriptions only.
The relatively weak constraint of utilizing text alone as supervision makes visual-linguistic alignment
particularly challenging. There are some attempts [30, 18, 22, 46] to explore various alignment
workflows. For example, TRIS [30] classifies referring texts that describe the target object as positive
texts while other texts as negative ones, to model a text-to-image response map for locating potential
target objects. SAG [18] introduces a bottom-up and top-down attention framework to discover
†

Joint corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

