Infinite-Dimensional Feature Interaction
Chenhui Xu1,2
Fuxun Yu1,3
Maoliang Li4
Zihao Zheng4
1
2,∗
Zirui Xu
Jinjun Xiong
Xiang Chen1,4,∗
1
2
George Mason University
University at Buffalo
3
4
Microsoft
Peking University
{cxu26,jinjun}@buffalo.edu, xiang.chen@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The past neural network design has largely focused on feature representation space
dimension and its capacity scaling (e.g., width, depth), but overlooked the feature
interaction space scaling. Recent advancements have shown shifted focus towards
element-wise multiplication to facilitate higher-dimensional feature interaction
space for better information transformation. Despite this progress, multiplications
predominantly capture low-order interactions, thus remaining confined to a finitedimensional interaction space. To transcend this limitation, classic kernel methods
emerge as a promising solution to engage features in an infinite-dimensional space.
We introduce InfiNet, a model architecture that enables feature interaction within
an infinite-dimensional space created by RBF kernel. Our experiments reveal that
InfiNet achieves new state-of-the-art, owing to its capability to leverage infinitedimensional interactions, significantly enhancing model performance.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, deep neural network architecture design has experienced several major paradigm
shifts regarding the feature representation learning. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the early stage of neural
network design is dominant by flat stream architectures in the form of weight-feature interaction (e.g.,
W x), like multi-layer perceptron (MLP), convolution neural networks (CNN), ResNet, etc. These
models usually adopt linear superposition (e.g., Wi x ⊕ Wj x)1 in the feature representation space.
Therefore, the feature representation space scaling is limited to increase model channel width and
depth [14, 19]. Nevertheless, this scaling approach has witnessed model development from the very
small-scale MLPs or LeNet[20] to the recent huge ConvNext V2 [41]. With the ultra-scaled parameter
amounts, computing complexity, and model size, the return of investment on model performance by
further scaling feature dimensions has largely plateaued [10].
Despite the plateau in feature representation space, recent sporadic architecture design works [29]
shed light on another potential dimension of scaling: feature interaction space. Specifically, as shown
in Fig. 1(b), these neural network designs generally demonstrate feature-feature interaction (e.g.,
Wi x ⊗ Wj x). As a mathematical example, the self-attention mechanism in Transformers [38] can
be formulated as xL+1 = fk (xL ) ⊗ fq (xL ) ⊗ fv (xL ), which is also element-wise multiplication
between processed input feature themselves. Characterized by element-wise interaction, these designs
offer complementary feature correlation capabilities in addition to simple linear superposition. Such
feature interactions have become the essential mechanisms of mainstream state-of-the-art neural
architectures. For example, it’s implemented in SENet with squeeze and excitation [17], non-local
network with transposed multiplication [39], vision transformers with self-attention [4, 11, 38], gated
aggregation [22, 35, 46], and quadratic neurons [12, 44, 45].
∗

Corresponding Author.
The symbol ⊕ denotes the Direct Sum of vector spaces. This corresponds to structures such as channel
expansion/bottleneck in commonly used neural networks. While the ⊗ is elementwise multiplication.
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

