Bridging the Divide: Reconsidering Softmax and
Linear Attention
Dongchen Han∗ Yifan Pu∗ Zhuofan Xia∗ Yizeng Han Xuran Pan
Xiu Li Jiwen Lu Shiji Song Gao Huang†
Tsinghua University

Abstract
Widely adopted in modern Vision Transformer designs, Softmax attention can
effectively capture long-range visual information; however, it incurs excessive
computational cost when dealing with high-resolution inputs. In contrast, linear
attention naturally enjoys linear complexity and has great potential to scale up to
higher-resolution images. Nonetheless, the unsatisfactory performance of linear
attention greatly limits its practical application in various scenarios. In this paper,
we take a step forward to close the gap between the linear and Softmax attention
with novel theoretical analyses, which demystify the core factors behind the performance deviations. Specifically, we present two key perspectives to understand
and alleviate the limitations of linear attention: the injective property and the local
modeling ability. Firstly, we prove that linear attention is not injective, which is
prone to assign identical attention weights to different query vectors, thus adding to
severe semantic confusion since different queries correspond to the same outputs.
Secondly, we confirm that effective local modeling is essential for the success
of Softmax attention, in which linear attention falls short. The aforementioned
two fundamental differences significantly contribute to the disparities between
these two attention paradigms, which is demonstrated by our substantial empirical
validation in the paper. In addition, more experiment results indicate that linear
attention, as long as endowed with these two properties, can outperform Softmax
attention across various tasks while maintaining lower computation complexity.
Code is available at https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/InLine.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the unprecedented success of Transformer and attention [32] in the field
of computer vision [7]. Softmax attention, also known as dot-product attention, has demonstrated
remarkable expressive power, leading to state-of-the-art performance across various vision tasks [30,
2, 23, 35]. However, applying Softmax attention in vision also faces challenges. The quadratic
complexity of Softmax attention results in prohibitively high computational cost when applied with
a global receptive field. Previous works [33, 19, 36, 6, 45] have strived to reduce the computation
complexity by restricting receptive fields or introducing sparsity. Although effective, these approaches
inevitably compromise Softmax attention’s ability for long-range modeling and scalability.
The nature of Softmax attention forces to compute the dot-products between queries and keys QK√⊤ ∈
RN ×N at first, and then aggregates values V ∈ RN ×C by the normalized score Softmax(QK ⊤ / d),
which accounts for the quadratic O(N 2 ) complexity w.r.t. the sequence length N . On the contrary,
linear attention relaxes the similarity score between Q and K from Softmax to other functions
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

