SPEAR: Exact Gradient Inversion of Batches in
Federated Learning

Dimitar I. Dimitrov1 , Maximilian Baader2 , Mark Niklas Müller2,3 ,
1
2
INSAIT, Sofia University "St. Kliment Ohridski"
ETH Zurich

Martin Vechev2
3
LogicStar.ai

{dimitar.iliev.dimitrov}@insait.ai 1
{mbaader, mark.mueller, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch 2

Abstract
Federated learning is a framework for collaborative machine learning where clients
only share gradient updates and not their private data with a server. However,
it was recently shown that gradient inversion attacks can reconstruct this data
from the shared gradients. In the important honest-but-curious setting, existing
attacks enable exact reconstruction only for batch size of b = 1, with larger batches
permitting only approximate reconstruction. In this work, we propose SPEAR, the
first algorithm reconstructing whole batches with b > 1 exactly. SPEAR combines
insights into the explicit low-rank structure of gradients with a sampling-based
algorithm. Crucially, we leverage ReLU-induced gradient sparsity to precisely filter
out large numbers of incorrect samples, making a final reconstruction step tractable.
We provide an efficient GPU implementation for fully connected networks and
show that it recovers high-dimensional ImageNet inputs in batches of up to b ≲ 25
exactly while scaling to large networks. Finally, we show theoretically that much
larger batches can be reconstructed with high probability given exponential time.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning has emerged as the dominant paradigm for training machine learning
models collaboratively without sharing sensitive
data [2]. Instead, a central server sends the current model to all clients which then send back
gradients computed on their private data. The
server aggregates the gradients and uses them to
update the model. Using this approach sensitive
data never leaves the clients’ machines, aligning
it better with data privacy regulations such as
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
and California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA).

Exact Recon.
(SPEAR – ours)

Approximate
Recon. [1]

Original
Image

Figure 1: A sample of four images from a batch of
b = 20, reconstructed using our SPEAR (top) or
the prior state-of-the-art Geiping et al. [1] (mid),
compared to the ground truth (bottom).

Gradient Inversion Attacks Recent work has shown that an honest-but-curious server can use the
shared gradient updates to recover the sensitive client data [3, 4]. However, while exact reconstruction
was shown to be possible for batch sizes of b = 1 [5, 6], it was assumed to be infeasible for larger
batches. This led to a line of research on approximate methods that sacrificed reconstruction quality
in order to recover batches of b > 1 inputs [7, 8, 9]. In this paper we challenge this fundamental
assumption and, for the first time, show that exact reconstruction is possible for batch sizes b > 1.
This Work: Exact Reconstruction of Batches We propose the first gradient inversion attack
reconstructing inputs exactly for batch sizes b > 1 in the honest-but-curious setting. In Fig. 1, we
show the resulting reconstructions versus approximate methods [1] for a batch of b = 20 images.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

