Real-Time Selection Under General Constraints via
Predictive Inference
Yuyang Huo1∗ Lin Lu1∗ Haojie Ren2† Changliang Zou1†
School of Statistics and Data Sciences, LPMC, KLMDASR and LEBPS,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
huoyynk@gmail.com, linlu102099@gmail.com
haojieren@sjtu.edu.cn, zoucl@nankai.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Real-time decision-making gets more attention in the big data era. Here, we consider the problem of sample selection in the online setting, where one encounters a
possibly infinite sequence of individuals collected over time with covariate information available. The goal is to select samples of interest that are characterized by
their unobserved responses until the user-specified stopping time. We derive a new
decision rule that enables us to find more preferable samples that meet practical
requirements by simultaneously controlling two types of general constraints: individual and interactive constraints, which include the widely utilized False Selection
Rate (FSR), cost limitations, diversity of selected samples, etc. The key elements
of our approach involve quantifying the uncertainty of response predictions via
predictive inference and addressing individual and interactive constraints in a sequential manner. Theoretical and numerical results demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method in controlling both individual and interactive constraints.

1

Introduction

In recent times, the field of real-time decision has flourished significantly, primarily driven by the
exponential growth of available data in both the tech industry and computer science. We consider
here a typical application of real-time decision, the problem of online sample selection [2, 5]. For
instance, online recruitment systems utilize machine learning algorithms to sequentially choose
qualified candidates rather than waiting for all (future) candidates’ information to be collected
[14]. Additionally, recommendation systems have now become commonplace in providing real-time
suggestions for content (e.g., news articles, short videos) with potential high click-through rates to
users [24]. Common situations also can be found in real-time precision marketing [43].
We describe the online sample selection problem as follows: samples (individuals) characterized by
covariates Xt ∈ Rd arrive sequentially while their responses Yt ∈ R remain unobserved throughout
the process. The data pairs (X, Y ) of each time are i.i.d. random vectors. At each time point, the
analyst is faced with the task of deciding whether to select the current observation based on certain
predetermined criteria related to Yt , and this selection process continues until a specific stopping rule
is triggered. For example, Yt is the score that measures how one candidate fits a given job position in
the recruitment system and the human resource agencies aim to prioritize candidates with higher Yt ,
such as Yt ≥ b. Or Yt is a binary variable where Yt = 1/0 means accepting or rejecting the offer,
and the companies wish to find those individuals with Yt = 1 based on the Xt .
*
†

Equal contribution, and the first two authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Correspondence to: Haojie Ren <haojieren@sjtu.edu.cn>, Changliang Zou <zoucl@nankai.edu.cn.>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

