Large Stepsize Gradient Descent for
Non-Homogeneous Two-Layer Networks:
Margin Improvement and Fast Optimization

Yuhang Cai1 Jingfeng Wu1 Song Mei1 Michael Lindsey1,2 Peter L. Bartlett1,3
1
UC Berkeley 2 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 3 Google DeepMind
{willcai,uuujf,songmei,lindsey,peter}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
The typical training of neural networks using large stepsize gradient descent (GD)
under the logistic loss often involves two distinct phases, where the empirical risk
oscillates in the first phase but decreases monotonically in the second phase. We
investigate this phenomenon in two-layer networks that satisfy a near-homogeneity
condition. We show that the second phase begins once the empirical risk falls
below a certain threshold, dependent on the stepsize. Additionally, we show that the
normalized margin grows nearly monotonically in the second phase, demonstrating
an implicit bias of GD in training non-homogeneous predictors. If the dataset is
linearly separable and the derivative of the activation function is bounded away
from zero, we show that the average empirical risk decreases, implying that the
first phase must stop in finite steps. Finally, we demonstrate that by choosing a
suitably large stepsize, GD that undergoes this phase transition is more efficient
than GD that monotonically decreases the risk. Our analysis applies to networks of
any width, beyond the well-known neural tangent kernel and mean-field regimes.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are mostly optimized by gradient descent (GD) or its variants. Understanding the
behavior of GD is one of the key challenges in deep learning theory. However, there is a nonnegligible
discrepancy between the GD setups in theory and in practice. In theory, GD is mostly analyzed with
relatively small stepsizes such that its dynamics are close to the continuous gradient flow dynamics,
although a few exceptions will be discussed later. However, in practice, GD is often used with
a relatively large stepsize, with behaviors significantly deviating from that of small stepsize GD
or gradient flow. Specifically, notice that small stepsize GD (hence also gradient flow) induces
monotonically decreasing empirical risk, but in practice, good optimization and generalization
performance is usually achieved when the stepsize is large and the empirical risk oscillates [see Wu
and Ma, 2018, Cohen et al., 2020, for example]. Therefore, it is unclear which of the theoretical
insights drawn from analyzing small stepsize GD apply to large stepsize GD used practically.
The behavior of small stepsize GD is relatively well understood. For instance, classical optimization
theory suggests that GD minimizes convex and L-smooth functions if the stepsize η̃ is well below
2/L, with a convergence rate of O(1/(η̃t)), where t is the number of steps [Nesterov, 2018]. More
recently, Soudry et al. [2018], Ji and Telgarsky [2018] show an implicit bias of small stepsize GD
in logistic regression with separable data, where the direction of the GD iterates converges to the
max-margin direction. Subsequent works extend their implicit bias theory from linear model to
homogenous networks [Lyu and Li, 2020, Chizat and Bach, 2020, Ji and Telgarsky, 2020]. These
theoretical results all assume the stepsize of GD is small (and even infinitesimal) such that the
empirical risk decreases monotonically and, therefore cannot be directly applied to large stepsize GD
used in practice.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

