The Challenges of the Nonlinear Regime for
Physics-Informed Neural Networks

Andrea Bonfanti
BMW AG, Digital Campus Munich
Basque Center for Applied Mathematics
University of the Basque Country
abonfanti001@ikasle.ehu.eus

Giuseppe Bruno
BMW AG, Digital Campus Munich
Giuseppe.GB.Bruno@bmw.de

Cristina Cipriani
Technical University of Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
Munich Data Science Institute
cristina.cipriani@ma.tum.de

Abstract
The Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) viewpoint is widely employed to analyze
the training dynamics of overparameterized Physics-Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs). However, unlike the case of linear Partial Differential Equations (PDEs),
we show how the NTK perspective falls short in the nonlinear scenario. Specifically,
we establish that the NTK yields a random matrix at initialization that is not
constant during training, contrary to conventional belief. Another significant
difference from the linear regime is that, even in the idealistic infinite-width limit,
the Hessian does not vanish and hence it cannot be disregarded during training.
This motivates the adoption of second-order optimization methods. We explore
the convergence guarantees of such methods in both linear and nonlinear cases,
addressing challenges such as spectral bias and slow convergence. Every theoretical
result is supported by numerical examples with both linear and nonlinear PDEs,
and we highlight the benefits of second-order methods in benchmark test cases.

1

Introduction

PINNs have became ubiquitous in the scientific research community as a meshless and practical
alternative tool for solving PDEs. The first attempts to exploit machine learning models for PDE
solutions can be traced back to two articles from the 90s [3, 20], while the model acquired its name
and popularity through a later publication [31]. Due to the flexible structure of the architecture,
PINNs can be used for forward and inverse problems [42] and efficiently exploited for more complex
engineering practice such as constrained shape and topology optimization, and surrogate modeling
[35, 16]. However, the usability of PINNs for such applications is often hindered by their slow training
and occasional failure to converge to acceptable solutions. Due to the black-box nature of PINNs, it
is challenging to analyze their training dynamics and convergence properties mathematically [19].
Nonetheless, rapid training and reliable convergence are crucial aspects of any PDE solver intended
for engineering applications.
Related works. In this context, the NTK [15] viewpoint has yielded intriguing insights, particularly
in the realm of linear PDEs [40]. Although based on the assumption of overparameterized networks,
this perspective has proven valuable in highlighting various intrinsic pathologies in PINN training,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

