Leveraging Drift to Improve Sample Complexity of
Variance Exploding Diffusion Models

Ruofeng Yang
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wanshuiyin@sjtu.edu.cn

Zhijie Wang
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
violetevergarden@sjtu.edu.cn

Bo Jiang
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
bjiang@sjtu.edu.cn

Shuai Li∗
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Variance exploding (VE) based diffusion models, an important class of diffusion
models, have shown state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance. However, only a few
theoretical works analyze VE-based models, and those works suffer from a worse
forward convergence rate 1/poly(T ) than the exp (−T ) of variance preserving
(VP) based models, where T is the forward diffusion time and the rate measures
the distance between forward marginal distribution qT and pure Gaussian noise.
The slow rate is due to the Brownian Motion without a drift term. In this work, we
design a new drifted VESDE forward process, which allows a faster exp (−T ) forward convergence rate. With this process, we achieve the first efficient polynomial
sample complexity for a series of VE-based models with reverse SDE under the
manifold hypothesis. Furthermore, unlike previous works, we allow the diffusion
coefficient to be unbounded instead of a constant, which is closer to the SOTA models. Besides the reverse SDE, the other common reverse process is the probability
flow ODE (PFODE) process, which is deterministic and enjoys faster sample speed.
To deepen the understanding of VE-based models, we consider a more general
setting considering reverse SDE and PFODE simultaneously, propose a unified
tangent-based analysis framework, and prove the first quantitative convergence
guarantee for SOTA VE-based models with reverse PFODE. We also show that the
drifted VESDE can balance different error terms and improve generated samples
without training through synthetic and real-world experiments.

1

Introduction

Recently, diffusion modeling has shown impressive performance in different areas [Ho et al., 2022,
Rombach et al., 2022, Esser et al., 2024, Li et al., 2024]. Diffusion models consist of two processes:
the forward and reverse process. The forward process gradually converts data q0 to Gaussian noise,
which can be described by an intermediate marginal distribution sequence {qt }t∈[0,T ] . The reverse
process sequentially predicts noise and removes it from data to generate samples.
There are two common forward processes: (1) Variance preserving (VP) SDE and (2) variance
exploding (VE) SDE. The VPSDE corresponds to an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, and the stationary
distribution is N (0, I). The VESDE has an exploding variance in the forward process. In earlier
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

