Counterfactual Fairness by Combining Factual and
Counterfactual Predictions
Zeyu Zhou, Tianci Liu, Ruqi Bai, Jing Gao, Murat Kocaoglu, David I. Inouye
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
{zhou1059, liu3351, bai116, jinggao, mkocaoglu, dinouye}@purdue.edu

Abstract
In high-stakes domains such as healthcare and hiring, the role of machine learning
(ML) in decision-making raises significant fairness concerns. This work focuses on
Counterfactual Fairness (CF), which posits that an ML model’s outcome on any individual should remain unchanged if they had belonged to a different demographic
group. Previous works have proposed methods that guarantee CF. Notwithstanding,
their effects on the model’s predictive performance remain largely unclear. To fill
this gap, we provide a theoretical study on the inherent trade-off between CF and
predictive performance in a model-agnostic manner. We first propose a simple but
effective method to cast an optimal but potentially unfair predictor into a fair one
with minimal performance degradation. By analyzing the excess risk incurred by
perfect CF, we quantify this inherent trade-off. Further analysis on our method’s
performance with access to only incomplete causal knowledge is also conducted.
Built upon this, we propose a practical algorithm that can be applied in such scenarios. Experiments on both synthetic and semi-synthetic datasets demonstrate the
validity of our analysis and methods.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) has been widely used in high-stakes domains such as healthcare [Daneshjou
et al., 2021], hiring [Hoffman et al., 2018], criminal justice [Brennan et al., 2009], and loan assessment
[Khandani et al., 2010], bringing with it critical ethical and social considerations. A prominent
example is the bias observed in the COMPAS tool against African Americans in recidivism predictions
[Brackey, 2019]. This issue is particularly alarming in an era where large-scale deep learning models,
commonly trained on noisy data from the internet, are increasingly prevalent. Such models, due to
their extensive reach and impact, amplify the potential for widespread and systemic biases. This
increasing awareness underscores the need for ML practitioners to integrate fairness considerations
into their work, extending their focus beyond merely maximizing prediction accuracy [Bolukbasi
et al., 2016, Calders and Verwer, 2010, Dwork et al., 2012, Grgic-Hlaca et al., 2016, Hardt et al.,
2016]. Various fairness notions have been developed, ranging from group-level measures such as
group parity [Hardt et al., 2016] to individual-level metrics [Dwork et al., 2012]. Recently, there
has been a growing interest in approaches based on causal inference, particularly in understanding
the causal effects of sensitive attributes such as gender and age on decision-making [Chiappa, 2019,
Galhotra et al., 2022, Khademi et al., 2019]. This has led to the proposal of Counterfactual Fairness
(CF), which states that prediction for an individual in hypothetical scenarios where their sensitive
attributes differ should remain unchanged [Kusner et al., 2017]. As an individual-level notion agnostic
to the choice of similarity measure [Kusner et al., 2017, Rosenblatt and Witter, 2023], CF has recently
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

