ConceptFactory: Facilitate 3D Object Knowledge
Annotation with Object Conceptualization

Jianhua Sun †, Yuxuan Li †, Longfei Xu ‡, Nange Wang ‡, Jiude Wei ‡, Yining Zhang, Cewu Lu§
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
We present ConceptFactory, a novel scope to facilitate more efficient annotation of
3D object knowledge by recognizing 3D objects through generalized concepts (i.e.
object conceptualization), aiming at promoting machine intelligence to learn comprehensive object knowledge from both vision and robotics aspects. This idea originates from the findings in human cognition research that the perceptual recognition
of objects can be explained as a process of arranging generalized geometric components (e.g. cuboids and cylinders). ConceptFactory consists of two critical parts: i)
ConceptFactory Suite, a unified toolbox that adopts Standard Concept Template
Library (STL-C) to drive a web-based platform for object conceptualization, and ii)
ConceptFactory Asset, a large collection of conceptualized objects acquired using
ConceptFactory suite. Our approach enables researchers to effortlessly acquire or
customize extensive varieties of object knowledge to comprehensively study different object understanding tasks. We validate our idea on a wide range of benchmark
tasks from both vision and robotics aspects with state-of-the-art algorithms, demonstrating the high quality and versatility of annotations provided by our approach.
Our website is available at https://apeirony.github.io/ConceptFactory.

1

Introduction

In the current data-driven era, the availability of a large amount of training data with dense annotations
has become an indispensable factor for the successful implementation of deep neural networks in
a wide range of 3D object understanding tasks. Particularly, for tasks like segmentation, pose
estimation and more sophisticated robot manipulation, current approaches [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]
require a substantial volume of annotations of semantic, pose and affordance knowledge to fully
demonstrate their power.
However, there are two primary issues demanding attention in 3D object knowledge annotation. On
one hand, some types of knowledge such as affordance for manipulation are highly complicated to
manually annotate [7], resulting in few existing datasets being available for such labels. On the other
hand, common practices of acquiring these knowledge annotations [6, 9, 10] follow the conventional
paradigm that only a single type of knowledge is labeled on one object at a time, for which researchers
develop different annotation platforms to adapt to various knowledge types and let annotators engage
in multiple rounds of annotations, taking significant time and human effort.
In this paper, We present ConceptFactory as a novel annotation paradigm that addresses these
existing issues and facilitates more efficient annotation of 3D object knowledge. The idea behind
ConceptFactory originates from the well-known ’Recognition-by-Components’ theory [11] in human
cognition research, which finds that the perceptual recognition of objects can be explained as a
process of arranging generalized geometric components. Inspired by this theory, we devise an
efficient knowledge annotation paradigm performing in two steps. i) Describe the shape of an object
†

and ‡ denote equal contribution, § denotes corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

