Factorized Diffusion Architectures for
Unsupervised Image Generation and Segmentation

Xin Yuan†‡∗
†
Google
yuanxzzz@google.com

Michael Maire‡
University of Chicago
mmaire@uchicago.edu
‡

Abstract
We develop a neural network architecture which, trained in an unsupervised manner
as a denoising diffusion model, simultaneously learns to both generate and segment
images. Learning is driven entirely by the denoising diffusion objective, without
any annotation or prior knowledge about regions during training. A computational
bottleneck, built into the neural architecture, encourages the denoising network to
partition an input into regions, denoise them in parallel, and combine the results.
Our trained model generates both synthetic images and, by simple examination of
its internal predicted partitions, semantic segmentations of those images. Without
fine-tuning, we directly apply our unsupervised model to the downstream task of
segmenting real images via noising and subsequently denoising them. Experiments
demonstrate that our model achieves accurate unsupervised image segmentation
and high-quality synthetic image generation across multiple datasets.

1

Introduction

Supervised deep learning yields powerful discriminative representations, and has fundamentally
advanced many computer vision tasks, including image classification [13, 58, 21, 28], object detection [18, 49, 41], and semantic and instance segmentation [42, 22, 33]. Yet, annotation efforts [13],
especially those involving fine-grained labeling for tasks such as segmentation [39], can become
prohibitively expensive to scale with increasing dataset size. This motivates an ongoing revolution in
self-supervised methods for visual representation learning, which do not require any annotated data
during a large-scale pre-training phase [7, 15, 67, 35, 23, 10, 12]. However, many of these approaches,
including those in the particularly successful contrastive learning paradigm [23, 10, 12], still require
supervised fine-tuning (e.g., linear probing) on labeled data to adapt networks to downstream tasks
such as classification [23, 10] or segmentation [8, 69].
In parallel with the development of self-supervised deep learning, rapid progress on a variety of
frameworks for deep generative models [32, 19, 65, 66, 60, 37, 27, 59, 50] has lead to new systems for
high-quality image synthesis. This progress inspires efforts to explore representation learning within
generative models, with recent results suggesting that image generation can serve as a good proxy
task for capturing high-level semantic information, while also enabling realistic image synthesis.
Building upon generative adversarial networks (GANs) [19] or variational autoencoders (VAEs) [32],
InfoGAN [11] and Deep InfoMax [26] demonstrate that generative models can perform image
classification without any supervision. PerturbGAN [4] focuses on a more complex task, unsupervised
image segmentation, by forcing an encoder to map an image to the input of a pre-trained generator so
that it synthesizes a composite image that matches the original input image. However, here training is
conducted in two stages and mask generation relies on knowledge of predefined object classes.
∗

This work was completed while Xin Yuan was a PhD student at the University of Chicago.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

