Soft Prompt Threats: Attacking Safety Alignment and
Unlearning in Open-Source LLMs through the
Embedding Space

Leo Schwinn
Technical University of Munich,
Munich Data Science Institute
l.schwinn@tum.de

David Dobre
Mila, Université de Montréal
david.dobre@mila.quebec

Sophie Xhonneux
Mila, Université de Montréal
lpxhonneux@gmail.com

Gauthier Gidel
Mila, Université de Montréal
Canada AI CIFAR Chair
gidelgau@mila.quebec

Stephan Günnemann
Technical University of Munich,
Munich Data Science Institute
s.guennemann@tum.de
https://github.com/SchwinnL/LLM_Embedding_Attack

Abstract
Current research in adversarial robustness of LLMs focuses on discrete input
manipulations in the natural language space, which can be directly transferred to
closed-source models. However, this approach neglects the steady progression
of open-source models. As open-source models advance in capability, ensuring
their safety becomes increasingly imperative. Yet, attacks tailored to open-source
LLMs that exploit full model access remain largely unexplored. We address this
research gap and propose the embedding space attack, which directly attacks the
continuous embedding representation of input tokens. We find that embedding
space attacks circumvent model alignments and trigger harmful behaviors more
efficiently than discrete attacks or model fine-tuning. Additionally, we demonstrate
that models compromised by embedding attacks can be used to create discrete
jailbreaks in natural language. Lastly, we present a novel threat model in the
context of unlearning and data extraction and show that embedding space attacks
can extract supposedly deleted information from unlearned models, and to a certain
extent, even recover pretraining data in LLMs. Our findings highlight embedding
space attacks as an important threat model in open-source LLMs.

1

Introduction

With LLM-integrated applications getting increasingly prevalent, various methods have been proposed
to enhance the safety of LLMs after deployment [1, 2]. Despite these efforts, LLMs have remained
vulnerable to exploitation by malicious actors [3, 4]. The majority of investigated threat models in the
literature, such as prompt injection [4] or jailbreaking [5], operate on the discrete token level [5, 6].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

