Neural Gaffer: Relighting Any Object via Diffusion

Haian Jin1
Yuan Li2
Fujun Luan3
Yuanbo Xiangli1
Sai Bi3
3
3
4
Kai Zhang
Zexiang Xu
Jin Sun
Noah Snavely1
1

Cornell Tech, Cornell University 2 Zhejiang University
3
Adobe Research 4 University of Georgia

Project Website: https://neural-gaffer.github.io/

Abstract
Single-image relighting is a challenging task that involves reasoning about the
complex interplay between geometry, materials, and lighting. Many prior methods
either support only specific categories of images, such as portraits, or require special
capture conditions, like using a flashlight. Alternatively, some methods explicitly
decompose a scene into intrinsic components, such as normals and BRDFs, which
can be inaccurate or under-expressive. In this work, we propose a novel end-to-end
2D relighting diffusion model, called Neural Gaffer1 , that takes a single image of
any object and can synthesize an accurate, high-quality relit image under any novel
environmental lighting condition, simply by conditioning an image generator on
a target environment map, without an explicit scene decomposition. Our method
builds on a pre-trained diffusion model, and fine-tunes it on a synthetic relighting
dataset, revealing and harnessing the inherent understanding of lighting present
in the diffusion model. We evaluate our model on both synthetic and in-the-wild
Internet imagery and demonstrate its advantages in terms of generalization and
accuracy. Moreover, by combining with other generative methods, our model
enables many downstream 2D tasks, such as text-based relighting and object
insertion. Our model can also operate as a strong relighting prior for 3D tasks, such
as relighting a radiance field.

1

Introduction

Lighting plays a key role in our visual world, serving as one of the fundamental elements that
shape our interpretation and interaction with 3D space. The interplay of light and shadows can
highlight textures, reveal contours, and enhance the perception of shape and form. In many cases,
there is a desire to relight an image—that is, to modify it as if it were captured under different
lighting conditions. Such a relighting capability enables photo enhancement (e.g., relighting portraits
[18; 67]), facilitates consistent lighting across various scenes for filmmaking [59; 22], and supports
the seamless integration of virtual objects into real-world environments [38; 19].
However, relighting single images is a challenging task because it involves the complex interplay
between geometry, materials, and illumination. Hence, many classical model-based inverse rendering
approaches aim to explicitly recover shape, material properties, and lighting from input images [2;
75; 47; 83; 87], so that they can then modify these components and rerender the image. These
methods often require multi-view inputs and can suffer from: 1) model limitations that prevent
faithful estimation of complex light, materials, and shape in real-world scenes, and 2) ambiguities in
determining these factors without strong data-driven priors.
To circumvent these issues, image-based relighting techniques [18; 72; 76] avoid explicit scene
reconstruction and focus on high-quality image synthesis. However, some image-based methods
1

In film and television crews, the gaffer is responsible for managing lighting, including associated resources
such as labor, lighting instruments, and electrical equipment
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

