QueST: Self-Supervised Skill Abstractions for
Learning Continuous Control
Atharva Mete1 , Haotian Xue1 , Albert Wilcox1 , Yongxin Chen1,2 , Animesh Garg1,2
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 NVIDIA

Abstract
Generalization capabilities, or rather a lack thereof, is one of the most important
unsolved problems in the field of robot learning, and while several large scale
efforts have set out to tackle this problem, unsolved it remains. In this paper, we
hypothesize that learning temporal action abstractions using latent variable models
(LVMs), which learn to map data to a compressed latent space and back, is a
promising direction towards low-level skills that can readily be used for new tasks.
Although several works have attempted to show this, they have generally been
limited by architectures that do not faithfully capture sharable representations. To
address this we present Quantized Skill Transformer (QueST), which learns a larger
and more flexible latent encoding that is more capable of modeling the breadth of
low-level skills necessary for a variety of tasks. To make use of this extra flexibility,
QueST imparts causal inductive bias from the action sequence data into the latent
space, leading to more semantically useful and transferable representations. We
compare to state-of-the-art imitation learning and LVM baselines and see that
QueST’s architecture leads to strong performance on several multitask and fewshot learning benchmarks. Further results and videos are available at https:
//quest-model.github.io.

1

Introduction

One of the grand goals of robotic learning is a general-purpose model that can learn from complex
multitask demonstration data and generalize to new tasks in a zero-shot or few-shot manner. While
such general-purpose models have become ubiquitous in natural language (NLP) [66, 72, 52, 53, 63]
and computer vision (CV) [77, 33, 7], they have eluded robotics researchers. Whereas CV and NLP
can achieve positive transfer by scaling up models trained on internet scale datasets [33, 72, 56, 62, 39],
even large scale robot data collection efforts [10, 11, 47, 20, 31] have been insufficient for this
approach. To that end, we posit that in order to achieve positive transfer in robotics, it is important to
design architectures that specifically lend themselves to efficient cross-task transfer.
There has recently been a surge of work towards the goal of learning generalist policies from large,
diverse datasets. Several papers have used techniques such as action discretization [57, 16, 35, 10,
11, 47, 55] and implicit models [23, 15, 25] to model multimodal action distributions. In particular,
the behavior transformer line of work shows that a carefully discretized action space combined with a
GPT-style transformer leads to impressive capabilities modeling multimodal behavior distributions
[57, 16, 35]. In another vein, several works have attempted to scale demonstration data and achieve
positive transfer of low-level skills between high-level tasks [10, 11, 47, 46, 18, 12, 55, 3]. While
these works have shown some transfer, for example applying policies for known tasks to unfamiliar
objects, they have generally failed to achieve transfer of low-level skills to novel tasks [4]. We
1

Correspondence to: amete7@gatech.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

