Incorporating Surrogate Gradient Norm to Improve
Offline Optimization Techniques

Manh Cuong Dao, Phi Le Nguyen
Hanoi University of Science and Technology
Cuong.DM242249M@sis.hust.edu.vn,lenp@soict.hust.edu.vn
Thao Nguyen Truong
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
nguyen.truong@aist.go.jp
Trong Nghia Hoang∗
Washington State University
trongnghia.hoang@wsu.edu

Abstract
Offline optimization has recently emerged as an increasingly popular approach
to mitigate the prohibitively expensive cost of online experimentation. The key
idea is to learn a surrogate of the black-box function that underlines the target
experiment using a static (offline) dataset of its previous input-output queries. Such
an approach is, however, fraught with an out-of-distribution issue where the learned
surrogate becomes inaccurate outside the offline data regimes. To mitigate this,
existing offline optimizers have proposed numerous conditioning techniques to
prevent the learned surrogate from being too erratic. Nonetheless, such conditioning
strategies are often specific to particular surrogate or search models, which might
not generalize to a different model choice. This motivates us to develop a modelagnostic approach instead, which incorporates a notion of model sharpness into
the training loss of the surrogate as a regularizer. Our approach is supported by a
new theoretical analysis demonstrating that reducing surrogate sharpness on the
offline dataset provably reduces its generalized sharpness on unseen data. Our
analysis extends existing theories from bounding generalized prediction loss (on
unseen data) with loss sharpness to bounding the worst-case generalized surrogate
sharpness with its empirical estimate on training data, providing a new perspective
on sharpness regularization. Our extensive experimentation on a diverse range
of optimization tasks also shows that reducing surrogate sharpness often leads to
significant improvement, marking (up to) a noticeable 9.6% performance boost.
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/cuong-dm/IGNITE.

1

Introduction

A central task in numerous scientific disciplines is to optimize for some material configuration
that maximizes a certain utility metric. Previously, this would incur an expensive and repetitive
experiment process that requires a huge amount of human-labor. To bypass such inefficiencies, a
data-driven approach [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] has recently been adopted. Instead of laboring on a
new set of expensive on-demand experimentation for each new optimization task, we can leverage
past experimentation data to build a parametric model that predicts the outcome of the experiments
themselves. Its parameters are tuned to fit past experimental data and then fixed while optimizing for
the best input.
∗

Corresponding authors: Manh Cuong Dao, Trong Nghia Hoang.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

