Enhancing Graph Transformers with Hierarchical
Distance Structural Encoding

Yuankai Luo1,3
Hongkang Li2
Lei Shi1∗
Xiao-Ming Wu3∗
1
2
Beihang University
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
luoyk@buaa.edu.cn
xiao-ming.wu@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Graph transformers need strong inductive biases to derive meaningful attention
scores. Yet, current methods often fall short in capturing longer ranges, hierarchical
structures, or community structures, which are common in various graphs such
as molecules, social networks, and citation networks. This paper presents a Hierarchical Distance Structural Encoding (HDSE) method to model node distances
in a graph, focusing on its multi-level, hierarchical nature. We introduce a novel
framework to seamlessly integrate HDSE into the attention mechanism of existing
graph transformers, allowing for simultaneous application with other positional
encodings. To apply graph transformers with HDSE to large-scale graphs, we
further propose a high-level HDSE that effectively biases the linear transformers
towards graph hierarchies. We theoretically prove the superiority of HDSE in
terms of expressivity and generalization. Empirically, we demonstrate that graph
transformers with HDSE excel in graph classification, regression on 7 graph-level
datasets, and node classification on 11 large-scale graphs.

1

Introduction

The success of Transformers [74] in various domains, including natural language processing (NLP)
and computer vision [18], has sparked significant interest in developing transformers for graph
data [19, 86, 46, 11, 68, 61, 89, 60, 82]. Scholars have turned their attention to this area, aiming to
address the limitations of Message-Passing Graph Neural Networks (MPNNs) [30] such as oversmoothing [54] and over-squashing [1, 73].
However, Transformers [74] are known for their lack of strong inductive biases [18]. In contrast to
MPNNs, graph transformers do not rely on fixed graph structure information. Instead, they compute
pairwise interactions for all nodes within a graph and represent positional and structural data using
more flexible, soft inductive biases. Despite its potential, this mechanism does not have the capability
to learn hierarchical structures within graphs. Developing effective positional encodings is also
challenging, as it requires identifying important hierarchical structures among nodes, which differ
significantly from other Euclidean domains [10]. Consequently, graph transformers are prone to
overfitting and often underperform MPNNs when data is limited [61], especially in tasks involving
large graphs with relatively few labeled nodes [82]. These challenges become even more significant
when dealing with various molecular graphs, such as those found in polymers or proteins. These
graphs are characterized by a multitude of substructures and exhibit long-range and hierarchical
structures. The inability of graph transformers to learn these hierarchical structures can significantly
impede their performance in tasks involving such complex molecular graphs.
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

