NVRC: Neural Video Representation Compression

Ho Man Kwan†, Ge Gao†, Fan Zhang†, Andrew Gower‡, David Bull†
† Visual Information Lab, University of Bristol, UK
‡ Immersive Content & Comms Research, BT, UK
{hm.kwan, ge1.gao, fan.zhang, dave.bull}@bristol.ac.uk,
andrew.p.gower@bt.com

Abstract
Recent advances in implicit neural representation (INR)-based video coding have
demonstrated its potential to compete with both conventional and other learningbased approaches. With INR methods, a neural network is trained to overfit a
video sequence, with its parameters compressed to obtain a compact representation
of the video content. However, although promising results have been achieved,
the best INR-based methods are still out-performed by the latest standard codecs,
such as VVC VTM, partially due to the simple model compression techniques
employed. In this paper, rather than focusing on representation architectures, which
is a common focus in many existing works, we propose a novel INR-based video
compression framework, Neural Video Representation Compression (NVRC)1 ,
targeting compression of the representation. Based on its novel quantization and
entropy coding approaches, NVRC is the first framework capable of optimizing an
INR-based video representation in a fully end-to-end manner for the rate-distortion
trade-off. To further minimize the additional bitrate overhead introduced by the
entropy models, NVRC also compresses all the network, quantization and entropy
model parameters hierarchically. Our experiments show that NVRC outperforms
many conventional and learning-based benchmark codecs, with a 23% average
coding gain over VVC VTM (Random Access) on the UVG dataset, measured
in PSNR. As far as we are aware, this is the first time an INR-based video codec
achieving such performance.

1

Introduction

In recent years, learning-based video compression [40, 34, 36, 13, 30] has demonstrated its significant
potential to compete with conventional video coding standards, with some recent contributions (e.g.,
DCVC-DC [36]) reported to outperform the latest MPEG standard codec, VVC VTM [10]. However,
learning-based codecs are typically associated with high computational complexity, in particular at
the decoder, which therefore limits their practical deployment. To address this, a new type of learned
video codec has been proposed, based on implicit neural representation (INR) models [13, 30], where
each INR instance is overfitted and compressed to represent a video sequence (or a video dataset).
INR-based codecs enable much faster decoding speed compared to most non-INR learning based
coding methods, and do not require offline optimization due to its overfitting nature. Although they
have shown promise, INR-based codecs are yet to compete with state-of-the-art conventional and
learned video coding methods in terms of rate-distortion performance.
To enhance coding performance, it is noted that most recent INR-based video coding methods [13, 30]
focus on improving network architectures but still perform simply model pruning, quantization and
entropy coding to obtain compact representations. Moreover, these methods are not fully end-toend optimized; for example, NeRV [13] and HiNeRV [30] are not trained with a rate-distortion
1

Project page: https://hmkx.github.io/nvrc/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

