Aligning LLM Agents by Learning Latent Preference
from User Edits
Ge Gao♣∗ Alexey Taymanov♢∗ Eduardo Salinas♢ Paul Mineiro♢ Dipendra Misra♢
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University♣ Microsoft Research New York♢
ggao@cs.cornell.edu {ataymano, edus, pmineiro, dimisra}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study interactive learning of LLM-based language agents based on user edits
made to the agent’s output. In a typical setting such as writing assistants, the user
interacts with a language agent to generate a response given a context, and may
optionally edit the agent response to personalize it based on their latent preference,
in addition to improving the correctness. The edit feedback is naturally generated,
making it a suitable candidate for improving the agent’s alignment with the user’s
preference, and for reducing the cost of user edits over time. We propose a learning
framework, PRELUDE that infers a description of the user’s latent preference
based on historic edit data. The inferred user preference descriptions are used
to define prompts for generating responses in the future. This avoids fine-tuning
the agent, which is costly, challenging to scale with the number of users, and may
even degrade its performance on other tasks. Furthermore, learning descriptive
preference improves interpretability, allowing the user to view and modify the
learned preference. However, user preference can be complex, subtle, and vary
based on context, making it challenging to learn. To address this, we propose a
simple yet effective algorithm named CIPHER that leverages the LLM to infer the
user preference for a given context based on user edits. In the future, CIPHER retrieves inferred preferences from the k-closest contexts in the history, and forms
an aggregate preference for response generation. We introduce two interactive
environments – summarization and email writing, and use a GPT-4 simulated
user for evaluation. On both tasks, CIPHER outperforms several baselines by
achieving the lowest edit distance cost while only having a small overhead in LLM
query cost over the base agent. Our analysis reports that user preferences learned
by CIPHER show significant similarity to the ground truth latent preferences.1

1

Introduction

Language agents based on large language models (LLMs) have been developed for a variety of
applications (Dohmke, 2022; Brynjolfsson et al., 2023), following recent breakthroughs in improving
LLMs (Achiam et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022b; Team et al., 2023). However, despite their
impressive zero-shot performance, LLMs still need to align to a given user and task (Mysore et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023). In many applications, a natural feedback for LLM-based agents is user edits,
where a user queries the agent and edits the agent’s response before their own final use. In contrast,
typical feedback used for fine-tuning, such as the comparison-based preference feedback in RLHF,
is explicitly collected by providing annotators with model responses and asking them to rank (Ziegler
et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Nakano et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022a, inter alia), making
such feedback an expensive choice for improving alignment. Motivated by this observation, we focus
on interactive learning of LLM-based language agents using user edits as feedback.
∗
1

Equal contribution.
Our code and data are publicly available at https://github.com/gao-g/prelude.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

