Unveiling Induction Heads: Provable Training
Dynamics and Feature Learning in Transformers

Siyu Chen∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Yale University

Heejune Sheen∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Yale University

siyu.chen.sc3226@yale.edu

heejune.sheen@yale.edu

Tianhao Wang
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

Zhuoran Yang
Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Yale University

tianhao.wang@ttic.edu

zhuoran.yang@yale.edu
∗

Abstract
In-context learning (ICL) is a cornerstone of large language model (LLM) functionality, yet its theoretical foundations remain elusive due to the complexity of
transformer architectures. In particular, most existing work only theoretically explains how the attention mechanism facilitates ICL under certain data models. It
remains unclear how the other building blocks of the transformer contribute to ICL.
To address this question, we study how a two-attention-layer transformer is trained
to perform ICL on n-gram Markov chain data, where each token in the Markov
chain statistically depends on the previous n tokens. We analyze a sophisticated
transformer model featuring relative positional embedding, multi-head softmax
attention, and a feed-forward layer with normalization. We prove that the gradient
flow with respect to a cross-entropy ICL loss converges to a limiting model that
performs a generalized version of the “induction head” mechanism with a learned
feature, resulting from the congruous contribution of all the building blocks. In the
limiting model, the first attention layer acts as a copier, copying past tokens within
a given window to each position, and the feed-forward network with normalization
acts as a selector that generates a feature vector by only looking at informationally
relevant parents from the window. Finally, the second attention layer is a classifier
that compares these features with the feature at the output position, and uses the
resulting similarity scores to generate the desired output. Our theory is further
validated by simulation experiments.

1

Introduction

In-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020) has emerged as a crucial aspect of large language
model (LLM) (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2023; Team
et al., 2023) functionality, enabling pre-trained LLMs to solve user-specified tasks during inference
without updating model parameters. In ICL, a pre-trained LLM, typically a transformer, receives
prompts containing a few demonstration examples sampled from a task-specific distribution and
produces the desired output for that task. This capability is noteworthy because the tasks addressed
during the ICL might not be part of the original training data set. The success of ICL requires the
LLM to perform certain learning processes during inference.
∗

equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

