Task-Agnostic Machine-Learning-Assisted Inference

Jiacheng Miao
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jiacheng.miao@wisc.edu

Qiongshi Lu
University of Wisconsin-Madison
qlu@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) is playing an increasingly important role in scientific research. In conjunction with classical statistical approaches, ML-assisted analytical
strategies have shown great promise in accelerating research findings. This has also
opened a whole field of methodological research focusing on integrative approaches
that leverage both ML and statistics to tackle data science challenges. One type
of study that has quickly gained popularity employs ML to predict unobserved
outcomes in massive samples, and then uses predicted outcomes in downstream
statistical inference. However, existing methods designed to ensure the validity
of this type of post-prediction inference are limited to very basic tasks such as
linear regression analysis. This is because any extension of these approaches to
new, more sophisticated statistical tasks requires task-specific algebraic derivations
and software implementations, which ignores the massive library of existing software tools already developed for the same scientific problem given observed data.
This severely constrains the scope of application for post-prediction inference. To
address this challenge, we introduce a novel statistical framework named PSPS for
task-agnostic ML-assisted inference. It provides a post-prediction inference solution that can be easily plugged into almost any established data analysis routines.
It delivers valid and efficient inference that is robust to arbitrary choice of ML
model, allowing nearly all existing statistical frameworks to be incorporated into
the analysis of ML-predicted data. Through extensive experiments, we showcase
our method’s validity, versatility, and superiority compared to existing approaches.
Our software is available at https://github.com/qlu-lab/psps.

1

Introduction

Leveraging machine learning (ML) techniques to enhance and accelerate research has become
increasingly popular in many scientific disciplines [44]. For example, sophisticated deep learning
models have achieved remarkable success in predicting protein structure and interactions, which has
the potential to significantly speed up the research process, save costs, and revolutionize the field of
structural biology [1, 2, 25]. However, recent studies have pointed out that statistical inference using
ML-predicted outcomes may lead to invalid scientific discoveries due to the lack of consideration
of ML prediction uncertainty in traditional statistical approaches. To address this, researchers have
introduced methods that couple extensive ML predictions with limited gold-standard data to ensure
the validity of ML-assisted statistical inference [3, 35, 46].
Despite these advances, current ML-assisted inference methods can only address very basic statistical
tasks, including mean estimation, quantile estimation, and linear and logistic regression [3, 35]. While
the same mathematical principle behind existing ML-assisted inference methods can be generalized
to a broader class of M-estimation problems, specific algebraic derivations and computational
implementations are required for each new statistical task. Moreover, many tasks, such as the
Wilcoxon rank-sum test, do not fit into the M-estimation framework. These issues pose significant
challenges to the broad application of ML-assisted inference across various scientific domains.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

1

