Causal Imitation for Markov Decision Processes:
a Partial Identification Approach

Kangrui Ruan∗
Columbia University
kr2910@columbia.edu

Junzhe Zhang∗
Syracuse University
jzhan403@syr.edu

Xuan Di
Columbia University
sharon.di@columbia.edu

Elias Bareinboim
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Imitation learning enables an agent to learn from expert demonstrations when the
performance measure is unknown and the reward signal is not specified. Standard
imitation methods do not generally apply when the learner and the expert’s sensory capabilities mismatch and demonstrations are contaminated with unobserved
confounding bias. To address these challenges, recent advancements in causal
imitation learning have been pursued. However, these methods often require access
to underlying causal structures that might not always be available, posing practical
challenges. In this paper, we investigate robust imitation learning within the framework of canonical Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) using partial identification,
allowing the agent to achieve expert performance even when the system dynamics
are not uniquely determined from the confounded expert demonstrations. Specifically, first, we theoretically demonstrate that when unobserved confounders (UCs)
exist in an MDP, the learner is generally unable to imitate expert performance. We
then explore imitation learning in partially identifiable settings — either transition distribution or reward function is non-identifiable from the available data and
knowledge. Augmenting the celebrated GAIL method (Ho & Ermon, 2016), our
analysis leads to two novel causal imitation algorithms that can obtain effective
policies guaranteed to achieve expert performance.

1

Introduction

Children often learn how to behave in an unfamiliar environment by imitating adults. Imitation
learning (IL) enables a learning agent to behave in an unknown environment by observing expert
demonstrations. It provides a viable approach for policy learning from demonstrations when the
reward function is not fully known and reward signals are not specified [2, 30, 8, 20, 31]. Imitation
learning has been widely applied across disciplines, such as autonomous driving [13, 39], robotics
[18], natural language processing [10, 11, 40, 41], and chronic disease management [52, 44].
U
U
It has been acknowledged in the literature that imitation
learning could face significant challenges when unobserved confounding bias in expert demonstrations cannot
X
Y
X
Y
be ruled out a priori [17, 57, 27, 42]. For illustration with
(a) P (X, Y )
(b) Pπ (X, Y )
simplicity, consider a Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) model
[28] described in Fig. 1; X ∈ {0, 1} is a binary action, and Figure 1: A multi-armed bandit model.
∗

Equal contribution; Kangrui: work performed while at Columbia University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

