Action Gaps and Advantages in Continuous-Time
Distributional Reinforcement Learning

Harley Wiltzer∗
Mila–Québec AI Institute
McGill University

Marc G. Bellemare†
Mila–Québec AI Institute
McGill University

David Meger
McGill University

Yash Jhaveri∗
Rutgers University–Newark

Patrick Shafto
Rutgers University–Newark

Abstract
When decisions are made at high frequency, traditional reinforcement learning (RL)
methods struggle to accurately estimate action values. In turn, their performance is
inconsistent and often poor. Whether the performance of distributional RL (DRL)
agents suffers similarly, however, is unknown. In this work, we establish that DRL
agents are sensitive to the decision frequency. We prove that action-conditioned
return distributions collapse to their underlying policy’s return distribution as the
decision frequency increases. We quantify the rate of collapse of these return
distributions and exhibit that their statistics collapse at different rates. Moreover,
we define distributional perspectives on action gaps and advantages. In particular,
we introduce the superiority as a probabilistic generalization of the advantage—
the core object of approaches to mitigating performance issues in high-frequency
value-based RL. In addition, we build a superiority-based DRL algorithm. Through
simulations in an option-trading domain, we validate that proper modeling of the
superiority distribution produces improved controllers at high decision frequencies.

1

Introduction

In many real-time deployments of reinforcement learning (RL)—quantitative finance, robotics, and
autonomous driving, for instance—the state of the environment evolves continuously in time, but
policies make decisions at discrete timesteps (h units of time apart) [28]. In such systems, the
performance of value-based agents is sensitive to the frequency ω := 1/h with which actions are
taken. In particular, action values become indistinguishable as the time between actions decreases. In
turn, in high-frequency settings, Baird demonstrated that action value estimates are susceptible to
noise and approximation error [20]. Moreover, Tallec et al. exhibited that the performance of popular
deep Q-learning agents is inconsistent and often poor [34].
In order to remedy this sensitivity, Baird proposed the advantage function and advantage-based
variants of Q-learning, Advantage Updating (AU) [20] and Advantage Learning (AL) [2]. Unlike
action values, advantages (appropriately rescaled) do not become indistinguishable as decision
frequency increases. As a result, Baird, in [20, 2], demonstrated that advantage-based agents can learn
faster and be more resilient to noise than their action value-based counterparts. Furthermore, Tallec et
al., in [34], exhibited that their extension of AU, Deep Advantage Updating (DAU), works efficiently
over a wide range of timesteps and environments, unlike standard deep Q-learning approaches.
While advantage-based approaches to RL have demonstrated robustness to decision frequency, in
this work, we establish that they are nevertheless sensitive to the frequency with which actions
∗
†

Equal contribution. Correspondence to harley.wiltzer@mail.mcgill.ca.
CIFAR AI Chair.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

