The Limits of Differential Privacy in Online Learning

Bo Li Wei Wang Peng Ye
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong SAR, China
bli@ust.hk, weiwa@cse.ust.hk, pyeac@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
Differential privacy (DP) is a formal notion that restricts the privacy leakage of an
algorithm when running on sensitive data, in which privacy-utility trade-off is one
of the central problems in private data analysis. In this work, we investigate the
fundamental limits of differential privacy in online learning algorithms and present
evidence that separates three types of constraints: no DP, pure DP, and approximate
DP. We first describe a hypothesis class that is online learnable under approximate
DP but not online learnable under pure DP under the adaptive adversarial setting.
This indicates that approximate DP must be adopted when dealing with adaptive
adversaries. We then prove that any private online learner must make an infinite
number of mistakes for almost all hypothesis classes. This essentially generalizes
previous results and shows a strong separation between private and non-private
settings since a finite mistake bound is always attainable (as long as the class is
online learnable) when there is no privacy requirement.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has demonstrated extraordinary capabilities in various industries, from healthcare
to finance. Yet, it could raise serious privacy concerns as it may require access to a vast amount of
personal data. The data used to train machine learning models may also contain sensitive information
such as medical records or financial transactions. Therefore, it is crucial to ensure that the private
data is well-protected during the training process.
Differential privacy (DP) [24, 23] is a rigorous mathematical definition that quantifies the level of
personal data leakage. In a nutshell, an algorithm is said to be differentially private if the change
of any individual’s data won’t make the output significantly different. DP has become the standard
notion of privacy and has been broadly employed [1, 6, 2].
However, privacy is not a free lunch and usually comes at a cost. Simple tasks may become much
harder or even intractable when privacy constraints are imposed. It is crucial to understand the cost
to pay for privacy. For probably approximately correct (PAC) learning [44, 11, 43], which is the
standard theoretical model of machine learning, there have been many works investigating the cost
associated with privacy, which demonstrate a huge discrepancy in terms of the cost under non-private,
pure private, and approximate private constraints.
One central requirement in PAC learning is that the data need to be i.i.d. generated and given in
advance. Such assumptions fail to capture many scenarios in practice. For example, fraud detection
in financial transactions often needs to be handled in real time, which prohibits access to the entire
dataset. Moreover, fraudulent patterns can change over time, and new types of fraud can emerge.
In such a scenario, the data are clearly not i.i.d. and can even be adaptive to the algorithm’s prior
predictions, in which the online learning model should be adopted.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

