Towards Unsupervised Model Selection for
Domain Adaptive Object Detection

Hengfu Yu∗
Jinhong Deng∗
Wen Li†
Lixin Duan
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
hfyu@std.uestc.edu.cn, {jhdengvision, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com

Abstract
Evaluating the performance of deep models in new scenarios has drawn increasing
attention in recent years due to the wide application of deep learning techniques in
various fields. However, while it is possible to collect data from new scenarios, the
annotations are not always available. Existing Domain Adaptive Object Detection
(DAOD) works usually report their performance by selecting the best model on the
validation set or even the test set of the target domain, which is highly impractical
in real-world applications. In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised model
selection approach for domain adaptive object detection, which is able to select
almost the optimal model for the target domain without using any target labels. Our
approach is based on the flat minima principle, i.e., models located in the flat minima region in the parameter space usually exhibit excellent generalization ability.
However, traditional methods require labeled data to evaluate how well a model is
located in the flat minima region, which is unrealistic for the DAOD task. Therefore, we design a Detection Adaptation Score (DAS) approach to approximately
measure the flat minima without using target labels. We show via a generalization
bound that the flatness can be deemed as model variance, while the minima depend
on the domain distribution distance for the DAOD task. Accordingly, we propose a
Flatness Index Score (FIS) to assess the flatness by measuring the classification
and localization fluctuation before and after perturbations of model parameters
and a Prototypical Distance Ratio (PDR) score to seek the minima by measuring
the transferability and discriminability of the models. In this way, the proposed
DAS approach can effectively represent the degree of flat minima and evaluate the
model generalization ability on the target domain. We have conducted extensive
experiments on various DAOD benchmarks and approaches, and the experimental
results show that the proposed DAS correlates well with the performance of DAOD
models and can be used as an effective tool for model selection after training. The
code will be released at https://github.com/HenryYu23/DAS.

1

Introduction

With the explosion of deep neural networks [27, 56, 18], object detection [24, 47, 3, 54, 5] has
achieved promising results and shown great potential in many downstream tasks such as autonomous
driving [2, 53], video understanding [55, 6], robot navigation [42, 41], etc. However, the well-trained
object detection models frequently face previously unseen domains in real-world scenarios and often
suffer from dramatic performance degradation when being deployed in a novel domain [11]. This is
because the training set (i.e., source domain) and the test set (i.e., target domain) have distinct domain
distributions. To address this problem, Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) [11, 50, 14, 38, 4]
∗
†

Equal contribution.
The corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

