Space-Time Continuous PDE Forecasting using
Equivariant Neural Fields
David M. Knigge∗,1 , David R. Wessels∗,1 , Riccardo Valperga1 , Samuele Papa1 , Jan-Jakob Sonke2 ,
Efstratios Gavves †,1 , Erik J. Bekkers †,1
1
University of Amsterdam 2 Netherlands Cancer Institute
d.m.knigge@uva.nl, d.r.wessels@uva.nl

Abstract
Recently, Conditional Neural Fields (NeFs) have emerged as a powerful modelling
paradigm for PDEs, by learning solutions as flows in the latent space of the
Conditional NeF. Although benefiting from favourable properties of NeFs such
as grid-agnosticity and space-time-continuous dynamics modelling, this approach
limits the ability to impose known constraints of the PDE on the solutions – e.g.
symmetries or boundary conditions – in favour of modelling flexibility. Instead, we
propose a space-time continuous NeF-based solving framework that - by preserving
geometric information in the latent space - respects known symmetries of the PDE.
We show that modelling solutions as flows of pointclouds over the group of interest
G improves generalization and data-efficiency. We validated that our framework
readily generalizes to unseen spatial and temporal locations, as well as geometric
transformations of the initial conditions - where other NeF-based PDE forecasting
methods fail - and improve over baselines in a number of challenging geometries.

1

Introduction

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are a foundational tool in modelling and understanding spatiotemporal dynamics across diverse scientific domains. Classically, PDEs are solved using numerical
methods such as finite elements, finite volumes, or spectral methods. In recent years, Deep Learning
(DL) methods have emerged as promising alternatives due to abundance of observed and simulated
data as well as the accessibility to computational resources, with applications ranging from fluid
simulations and weather modelling [51, 7] to biology [33].
* shared first author, † shared lead advising

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

Figure 1: We propose to solve an equivariant PDE in function space by solving an equivariant ODE in
latent space. Through our proposed framework, which leverages Equivariant Neural Fields fθ , a field
νt is represented by a set of latents ztν = {(pνi , cνi )}N
i=1 consisting of a pose pi and context vector ci .
Using meta-learning, the initial latent z0ν is fit in only 3 SGD steps, after which an equivariant neural
ODE Fψ models the solution as a latent flow.

