Instruction Embedding: Latent Representations of
Instructions Towards Task Identification
Yiwei Li1†,

Jiayi Shi1†,
Shaoxiong Feng2 ,
Peiwen Yuan1 ,
Xinglin Wang1 ,
2
2
2
Boyuan Pan , Heda Wang , Yao Hu ,
Kan Li1‡
1
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Xiaohongshu Inc

Abstract
Instruction data is crucial for improving the capability of Large Language Models
(LLMs) to align with human-level performance. Recent research LIMA demonstrates that alignment is essentially a process where the model adapts instructions’
interaction style or format to solve various tasks, leveraging pre-trained knowledge
and skills. Therefore, for instructional data, the most important aspect is the task
it represents, rather than the specific semantics and knowledge information. The
latent representations of instructions play roles for some instruction-related tasks
like data selection and demonstrations retrieval. However, they are always derived
from text embeddings, encompass overall semantic information that influences
the representation of task categories. In this work, we introduce a new concept,
instruction embedding, and construct Instruction Embedding Benchmark (IEB) for
its training and evaluation. Then, we propose a baseline Prompt-based Instruction
Embedding (PIE) method to make the representations more attention on tasks. The
evaluation of PIE, alongside other embedding methods on IEB with two designed
tasks, demonstrates its superior performance in accurately identifying task categories. Moreover, the application of instruction embeddings in four downstream
tasks showcases its effectiveness and suitability for instruction-related tasks1 .

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable proficiency in generating responses
capable of addressing specific tasks according to provided instructions. Initially pre-trained for
wide-ranging capabilities, they are subsequently fine-tuned using instruction-following datasets to
enhance their ability to align with human preferences. LIMA has proved that alignment can be viewed
as a straightforward process in which the model just learns the style or format for interacting with
users to solve particular problems, where the knowledge and capabilities have already been acquired
during pre-training (Zhou et al., 2023).
Text embeddings play a crucial role in a variety of NLP tasks such as semantic textual similarity
(Agirre et al., 2012; Cer et al., 2017; Marelli et al., 2014) and information retrieval (Mitra et al., 2017;
Karpukhin et al., 2020). Similarly, as a type of text, the latent represent of instructions is also essential
for many tasks like data selection for instruction tuning (Wu et al., 2023a) and prompt retrieval for
in-context learning (Su et al., 2023). Previous studies (Gao et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024) obtain
text embeddings by directly taking the token vector from language models. However, when it comes
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.
1
Our
code
and
data
have
instruction-embedding-benchmark.
‡

been

released

on

https://github.com/Yiwei98/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

