CALANet: Cheap All-Layer Aggregation for Human
Activity Recognition

1

Jaegyun Park1 , Dae-Won Kim1,∗ , Jaesung Lee2,∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chung-Ang University, Republic of Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Chung-Ang University, Republic of Korea
jgp0566.cau@gmail.com, {dwkim, curseor}@cau.ac.kr

Abstract
With the steady growth of sensing technology and wearable devices, sensor-based
human activity recognition has become essential in widespread applications, such
as healthcare monitoring and fitness tracking, where accurate and real-time systems are required. To achieve real-time response, recent studies have focused
on lightweight neural network models. Specifically, they designed the network
architectures by restricting the number of layers shallowly or connections of each
layer. However, these approaches suffer from limited accuracy because the classifier only uses the features at the last layer. In this study, we propose a cheap
all-layer aggregation network, CALANet, for accuracy improvement while maintaining the efficiency of existing real-time HAR models. Specifically, CALANet
allows the classifier to aggregate the features for all layers, resulting in a performance gain. In addition, this work proves that the theoretical computation cost
of CALANet is equivalent to that of conventional networks. Evaluated on seven
publicly available datasets, CALANet outperformed existing methods, achieving
state-of-the-art performance. The source codes of the CALANet are publicly
available at https://github.com/jgpark92/CALANet.

1

Introduction

Human activity recognition (HAR) is a fundamental technique in healthcare [28, 53], fitness tracking
[5, 23], and surveillance [21, 41]. Wearable sensor-based HAR has drawn attention in pervasive
computing applications due to the popularity of smart wearable devices in recent years [7, 53].
Specifically, it aims to identify motion details of users or activity tracks from sensor signal patterns
[10]. To this end, neural networks (NNs) have been widely used to achieve a superior learning performance without handcrafted feature engineering [7, 52]. Besides, with advances in microelectronics
and inertial sensor-based wearable devices, recent researchers have focused on achieving real-time
systems [4, 43]. Especially, a recent trend across most studies has become increasingly to train NNs
on a resource-rich computing device and then deploy them to resource-limited wearable devices,
where inference is executed [44, 60, 61].
Recent real-time HAR studies have focused on one-dimensional (1D) convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) compatible with various hardware accelerators and deployment frameworks [14, 20, 23, 36,
37, 48, 51, 60]. CNNs include convolution and pooling operations, which allow them to extract
more abstracted high-level features as input signals pass from early to later layers. Specifically, the
pooling operation abstracts signals by reducing the feature size (temporal resolution), which can be
regarded as a sampling of signal. As a result, the final classifier predicts an activity class based on the
abstracted or sampled features at the last layer. The sampled features are more semantic and global
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

