A New Neural Kernel Regime:
The Inductive Bias of Multi-Task Learning

Julia Nakhleh
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI
jnakhleh@wisc.edu

Joseph Shenouda
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI
jshenouda@wisc.edu

Robert D. Nowak
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the properties of solutions to multi-task shallow ReLU neural
network learning problems, wherein the network is trained to fit a dataset with
minimal sum of squared weights. Remarkably, the solutions learned for each
individual task resemble those obtained by solving a kernel regression problem,
revealing a novel connection between neural networks and kernel methods. It
is known that single-task neural network learning problems are equivalent to a
minimum norm interpolation problem in a non-Hilbertian Banach space, and that
the solutions of such problems are generally non-unique. In contrast, we prove that
the solutions to univariate-input, multi-task neural network interpolation problems
are almost always unique, and coincide with the solution to a minimum-norm
interpolation problem in a Sobolev (Reproducing Kernel) Hilbert Space. We also
demonstrate a similar phenomenon in the multivariate-input case; specifically,
we show that neural network learning problems with large numbers of tasks are
approximately equivalent to an ℓ2 (Hilbert space) minimization problem over a
fixed kernel determined by the optimal neurons.

1

Introduction

This paper characterizes the functions learned by multi-output shallow ReLU neural networks trained
with weight decay regularization, wherein each network output fits a different “task” (i.e., a different
set of labels on the same data points). We show that the solutions to such multi-task training
problems can differ dramatically from those obtained by fitting separate neural networks to each task
individually. Unlike standard intuitions Caruana (1997) and existing theory Ben-David and Schuller
(2003); Maurer et al. (2016) regarding the effects and benefits of multi-task learning, our results do
not rely on similarity between tasks.
We focus on shallow, vector-valued (multi-output) neural networks with Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
activation functions, which are functions fθ : Rd → RT of the form
fθ (x) =

K
X


vk wk⊤ x + bk + + Ax + c

k=1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

(1)

