On the Comparison between Multi-modal and
Single-modal Contrastive Learning

Wei Huang∗ †
RIKEN AIP
wei.huang.vr@riken.jp

Andi Han∗
RIKEN AIP
andi.han@riken.jp

Yongqiang Chen
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
yqchen@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Zhiqiang Xu†
MBZUAI
zhiqiang.xu@mbzuai.ac.ae

Yuan Cao
The University of Hong Kong
yuancao@hku.hk

Taiji Suzuki
University of Tokyo & RIKEN AIP
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Multi-modal contrastive learning with language supervision has presented a
paradigm shift in modern machine learning. By pre-training on a web-scale dataset,
multi-modal contrastive learning can learn high-quality representations that exhibit
impressive robustness and transferability. Despite its empirical success, the theoretical understanding is still in its infancy, especially regarding its comparison with
single-modal contrastive learning. In this work, we introduce a feature learning
theory framework that provides a theoretical foundation for understanding the
differences between multi-modal and single-modal contrastive learning. Based
on a data generation model consisting of signal and noise, our analysis is performed on a ReLU network trained with the InfoMax objective function. Through
a trajectory-based optimization analysis and generalization characterization on
downstream tasks, we identify the critical factor, which is the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR), that impacts the generalizability in downstream tasks of both multi-modal
and single-modal contrastive learning. Through the cooperation between the two
modalities, multi-modal learning can achieve better feature learning, leading to
improvements in performance in downstream tasks compared to single-modal
learning. Our analysis provides a unified framework that can characterize the
optimization and generalization of both single-modal and multi-modal contrastive
learning. Empirical experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets further
consolidate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained models have achieved unprecedented success, including GPT series [6, 41],
LLaMa [53], among many others. CLIP [42] as a typical example, uses a multi-modal contrastive
learning framework to learn from a massive scale of image-caption data. The multi-modal contrastive
learning in CLIP has shown significant capabilities to learn high-quality representations, which are
ready to be adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks, forming the backbone of generative models
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

