FreqMark: Invisible Image Watermarking via
Frequency Based Optimization in Latent Space

Yiyang Guo∗1,5† , Ruizhe Li∗2 , Mude Hui3 , Hanzhong Guo4 , Chen Zhang1
Chuangjian Cai5 , Le Wan5 , Shangfei Wang‡1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Fudan University
3
University of California, Santa Cruz 4 The University of Hong Kong 5 IEG, Tencent
{guoyiyang, zhangchenzc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn; lirz22@m.fudan.edu.cn;
muhui@ucsc.edu; hanzhong@connect.hku.hk;
{herbertcai, vinowan}@tencent.com;
sfwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Invisible watermarking is essential for safeguarding digital content, enabling copyright protection and content authentication. However, existing watermarking methods fall short in robustness against regeneration attacks. In this paper, we propose
a novel method called FreqMark that involves unconstrained optimization of the
image latent frequency space obtained after VAE encoding. Specifically, FreqMark
embeds the watermark by optimizing the latent frequency space of the images and
then extracts the watermark through a pre-trained image encoder. This optimization allows a flexible trade-off between image quality with watermark robustness
and effectively resists regeneration attacks. Experimental results demonstrate that
FreqMark offers significant advantages in image quality and robustness, permits
flexible selection of the encoding bit number, and achieves a bit accuracy exceeding
90% when encoding a 48-bit hidden message under various attack scenarios.

1

Introduction

As the development of generative models [42, 32], distinguishing between AI-generated and real
images becomes increasingly challenging, which brings new risks such as deepfakes and copyright
infringement [5, 31]. By adding invisible watermarks within images, the concealed message can be
tracked and used for purposes such as copyright verification, identity authentication, copy control,
etc., thereby safeguarding against the misuse of image content.
Traditional methods [12, 15, 14, 36, 15] conceal hidden messages in the frequency space of images,
providing resistance to Gaussian noise attacks but susceptibility to brightness, contrast, and regeneration attacks. The rapid development of deep learning has also promoted the iteration of watermarking
techniques with enhanced robustness to numerous attacks. A common approach is to train a watermark embedding network through supervised learning to introduce imperceptible perturbations to
images, and then to retrieve the hidden messages through a decoding network [46, 10, 55, 3]. An
alternative method sets the optimization objective as the image itself, utilizing pre-trained neural
networks to calculate the perturbations to be added, thereby bypassing the higher cost of training
networks and providing a more flexible approach [29, 20]. However, with the continued advancement
of generative models, leveraging their generalization capabilities to denoise watermarked images
through regeneration attacks has proven to be an effective method for watermark removal [58, 43].
A logical step is to encode the watermark in the image latent space, allowing the watermark to
∗

Equal Contribution. † Work is done during an internship at IEG, Tencent. ‡ Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

