How to Boost Any Loss Function

Richard Nock
Google Research
richardnock@google.com

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University
Google Research
mansour@google.com

Abstract
Boosting is a highly successful ML-born optimization setting in which one is
required to computationally efficiently learn arbitrarily good models based on the
access to a weak learner oracle, providing classifiers performing at least slightly differently from random guessing. A key difference with gradient-based optimization
is that boosting’s original model does not requires access to first order information
about a loss, yet the decades long history of boosting has quickly evolved it into a
first order optimization setting – sometimes even wrongfully defining it as such.
Owing to recent progress extending gradient-based optimization to use only a
loss’ zeroth (0th ) order information to learn, this begs the question: what loss
functions can be efficiently optimized with boosting and what is the information
really needed for boosting to meet the original boosting blueprint’s requirements?
We provide a constructive formal answer essentially showing that any loss function
can be optimized with boosting and thus boosting can achieve a feat not yet
known to be possible in the classical 0th order setting, since loss functions are not
required to be be convex, nor differentiable or Lipschitz – and in fact not required
to be continuous either. Some tools we use are rooted in quantum calculus, the
mathematical field – not to be confounded with quantum computation – that studies
calculus without passing to the limit, and thus without using first order information.

1

Introduction

In ML, zeroth order optimization has been devised as an alternative to techniques that would
otherwise require access to ě 1-order information about the loss to minimize, such as gradient
descent (stochastic or not, constrained or not, etc., see Section 2). Such approaches replace the access
to a so-called oracle providing derivatives for the loss at hand, operations that can be consuming
or not available in exact form in the ML world, by the access to a cheaper function value oracle,
providing loss values at queried points.
Zeroth order optimization has seen a considerable boost in ML over the past years, over many
settings and algorithms, yet, there is one foundational ML setting and related algorithms that, to our
knowledge, have not yet been the subject of investigations: boosting [32, 31]. Such a question is
very relevant: boosting has quickly evolved as a technique requiring first-order information about
the loss optimized [6, Section 10.3], [41, Section 7.2.2] [53]. It is also not uncommon to find
boosting reduced to this first-order setting [9]. However, originally, the boosting model did not
mandate the access to any first-order information about the loss, rather requiring access to a weak
learner providing classifiers at least slightly different from random guessing [31]. In the context of
zeroth-order optimization gaining traction in ML, it becomes crucial to understand not just whether
differentiability is necessary for boosting, but more generally what are loss functions that can be
boosted with a weak learner and in fine where boosting stands with respect to recent formal progress
on lifting gradient descent to zeroth-order optimisation.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

