Optimizing the coalition gain in Online Auctions with
Greedy Structured Bandits

Dorian Baudry1,2,∗

Hugo Richard2,∗

Maria Cherifa2,∗

Clément Calauzènes2

Vianney Perchet2
1

2

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford. 2
Inria Fairplay Joint team, CREST, ENSAE Paris, Criteo AI Lab

Abstract
Motivated by online display advertising, this work considers repeated second-price
auctions, where agents sample their value from an unknown distribution with
cumulative distribution function F . In each auction t, a decision-maker bound
by limited observations selects nt agents from a coalition of N to compete for
a prize with p other agents, aiming to maximize the cumulative reward of the
coalition across all auctions. The problem is framed as an N -armed structured
bandit, each number of player sent being an arm n, with expected reward r(n)
fully characterized by F and p + n. We present two algorithms, Local-Greedy (LG)
and Greedy-Grid (GG), both achieving constant problem-dependent regret. This
relies on three key ingredients: 1. an estimator of r(n) from feedback collected
from any arm k, 2. concentration bounds of these estimates for k within an
estimation neighborhood of n and 3. the unimodality property of r under standard
assumptions on F . Additionally, GG exhibits problem-independent guarantees
on top of best problem-dependent guarantees. However, by avoiding to rely on
confidence intervals, LG practically outperforms GG, as well as standard unimodal
bandit algorithms such as OSUB or multi-armed bandit algorithms.

1

Introduction

The online display advertising has seen remarkable evolution in recent decades [14, 30, 33, 25].
Publishers, who are the suppliers of digital ad space on the internet, sell display spots for ads to
advertisers through real-time bidding in spot auctions, with many of these auctions being conducted
using first or second-price mechanisms [20]. Due to the technological complexity of online advertising, advertisers usually delegate the task of buying ad placements to demand-side platforms (DSP)
that operate many advertising campaigns. This interaction between DSP and the publisher, can be
simplified as the publisher acting as multiple ad auctions selling ad impressions (online displays),
while the DSP acts as a centralized coalition: at each time step, it determines which campaign(s)
from the coalition participate to the auction to maximize their total gain. The chosen campaign(s)
then compete with others to secure impressions. The primary goal of advertising companies is then
to maximize the cumulative utility: the total value of impressions won minus their costs. This raises
a fundamental question: how many ad campaigns should participate in the auction to optimize the
overall utility? In the interim setting, where the DSP observes current bidder values before deciding,
it’s known that only the highest value bidder should be sent. However, online privacy enhancements
in browsers necessitate ex-ante decisions from DSPs [8], without exact value knowledge. Here, the
problem becomes challenging: choosing a small number of campaigns can make it difficult to secure
impressions, while securing the spot with a large number of bidders inevitably raises the price due
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: dorian.baudry@ox.ac.uk

2

