SeafloorAI: A Large-scale Vision-Language Dataset
for Seafloor Geological Survey

1

Kien X. Nguyen1 , Fengchun Qiao1 , Arthur Trembanis2 , Xi Peng1
Deep-REAL Lab, Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Delaware
2
School of Marine Science and Policy, University of Delaware
{kxnguyen,fengchun,art,xipeng}@udel.edu

Abstract
A major obstacle to the advancements of machine learning models in marine science, particularly in sonar imagery analysis, is the scarcity of AI-ready datasets.
While there have been efforts to make AI-ready sonar image dataset publicly available, they suffer from limitations in terms of environment setting and scale. To
bridge this gap, we introduce SeafloorAI, the first extensive AI-ready datasets
for seafloor mapping across 5 geological layers that is curated in collaboration with
marine scientists. We further extend the dataset to SeafloorGenAI by incorporating the language component in order to facilitate the development of both visionand language-capable machine learning models for sonar imagery. The dataset
consists of 62 geo-distributed data surveys spanning 17,300 square kilometers, with
696K sonar images, 827K annotated segmentation masks, 696K detailed language
descriptions and approximately 7M question-answer pairs. By making our data
processing source code publicly available, we aim to engage the marine science
community to enrich the data pool and inspire the machine learning community
to develop more robust models. This collaborative approach will enhance the
capabilities and applications of our datasets within both fields. Our code repository
are available 1 under the CC-BY-4.0 license.

1

Introduction

Seafloor mapping stands at the forefront of marine science, utilizing cutting-edge technologies like
multibeam echosounders and side-scan sonar to unveil the hidden complexities of the ocean floor [67,
68]. Beyond scientific research, seafloor mapping is instrumental in identifying potential resources,
assessing environmental impacts, and supporting sustainable ocean management practices in the
context of the blue economy [42]. However, the current analysis techniques in seafloor mapping are
predominantly labor-intensive and reliant on manual interpretation by marine scientists, necessitating
hundreds of hours spent meticulously examining data surveys to analyze seabed imagery [66]. This
hands-on approach is not only time-consuming but also susceptible to user subjectivity and the
limitations of individual expertise, thus introducing potential inconsistencies in analysis [56].
The integration of machine learning (ML) holds the promise of enhancing efficiency and reliability
in seafloor mapping by automating the segmentation and classification tasks [3, 54, 38]. However,
the lack of public AI-ready datasets poses a significant challenge in leveraging the full potential
of AI technologies for this purpose. While there have been efforts to make AI-ready sonar image
datasets publicly available, they suffer from limitations in terms of environment setting and scale.
For example, the dataset in [63] was captured in a water tank, which does not accurately represent
the ocean’s complex conditions. Additionally, other work have only produced small-scale datasets
1

https://github.com/deep-real/SeafloorAI

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

