LT-Defense: Searching-free Backdoor Defense via
Exploiting the Long-tailed Effect

1

Yixiao Xu1,2,3 , Binxing Fang2,3 , Mohan Li2,3∗, Keke Tang2,3 , Zhihong Tian2,3
School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University, China
3
Huangpu Research School of Guangzhou University, China
yixiaoxu@bupt.edu.cn, fangbx@cae.cn, tangbohutbh@gmail.com
{limohan, tianzhihong}@gzhu.edu.cn

Abstract
Language models have shown vulnerability against backdoor attacks, threatening
the security of services based on them. To mitigate the threat, existing solutions
attempted to search for backdoor triggers, which can be time-consuming when
handling a large search space. Looking into the attack process, we observe that
poisoned data will create a long-tailed effect in the victim model, causing the
decision boundary to shift towards the attack targets. Inspired by this observation,
we introduce LT-Defense, the first searching-free backdoor defense via exploiting
the long-tailed effect. Specifically, LT-Defense employs a small set of clean examples and two metrics to distinguish backdoor-related features in the target model.
Upon detecting a backdoor model, LT-Defense additionally provides test-time
backdoor freezing and attack target prediction. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of LT-Defense in both detection accuracy and efficiency, e.g., in
task-agnostic scenarios, LT-Defense achieves 98% accuracy across 1440 models
with less than 1% of the time cost of state-of-the-art solutions.

1

Introduction

Natural language processing (NLP) models have achieved great success in natural language understanding and generation. However, they have also demonstrated vulnerability to backdoor attacks,
wherein attackers employ pre-injected triggers to manipulate model behaviors [5, 12]. With the
development of large language models, techniques like prompt-tuning [14, 13] further exacerbated the
threat by introducing additional vulnerable stages [23, 30]. Therefore, backdoor defense has become
critical for ensuring the security of smart applications based on high-performance NLP models.
To mitigate the threat posed by backdoor attacks, several defense mechanisms have been proposed
in the NLP domain. Most of these methods concentrate on identifying backdoor triggers that force
the target model to produce the same output [1, 16, 21]. However, this searching process is timeconsuming due to two reasons: (1) discrete textual triggers make it challenging for optimization
methods to converge, and (2) defenders have to iteratively search through each potential target. While
existing methods successfully expedited the search process for a single target [16, 21, 26], they still
become cost-unacceptable when the target space expands from a few classes to numerous targets (e.g.,
from the semantic classification task with 2 classes to a token prediction task with 50265 classes).
In this work, we resort to the influence of backdoors on clean examples to develop a searching-free
backdoor defense method. Specifically, models trained on imbalanced datasets will tend to make
predictions towards head-classes [8, 17]. This long-tailed effect arises because the learned feature
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

