Edit Distance Robust Watermarks for Language
Models
Noah Golowich
nzg@mit.edu
MIT

Ankur Moitra
moitra@mit.edu
MIT

Abstract
Motivated by the problem of detecting AI-generated text, we consider the problem
of watermarking the output of language models with provable guarantees. We aim
for watermarks which satisfy: (a) undetectability, a cryptographic notion introduced in [CGZ24] which stipulates that it is computationally hard to distinguish
watermarked language model outputs from the model’s actual output distribution;
and (b) robustness to channels which introduce a constant fraction of adversarial
insertions, substitutions, and deletions to the watermarked text. Earlier schemes
could only handle stochastic substitutions and deletions, and thus we are aiming
for a more natural and appealing robustness guarantee that holds with respect to
edit distance.
Our main result is a watermarking scheme which achieves both undetectability
and robustness to edits when the alphabet size for the language model is allowed
to grow as a polynomial in the security parameter. To derive such a scheme, we
follow an approach introduced in [CG24], which proceeds via first constructing
pseudorandom codes satisfying undetectability and robustness properties analogous
to those above; our key idea is to handle adversarial insertions and deletions by
interpreting the symbols as indices into the codeword, which we call indexing
pseudorandom codes. Additionally, our codes rely on weaker computational
assumptions than used in previous work. Then we show that there is a generic
transformation from such codes over large alphabets to watermarking schemes for
arbitrary language models.

1

Introduction

The rapid increase in AI-generated content represents a significant challenge for numerous societal
institutions, ranging from education to social media. For instance, the ability of large language models
such as GPT-4 to generate long bodies of text such as essays raises the possibility of increasing
amounts of plagiarism, and the proliferation of AI-generated text, images, and videos on social
media presents challenges regarding large-scale manipulation of online audiences. An important
tool at our disposal in preventing the misuse of such content is watermarking schemes, which are
procedures that embed hidden patterns in AI-produced content using a secret key. Watermarking
schemes allow a detection algorithm with the aid of the secret key to determine with high probability
that the content was produced by the AI model. They do so without noticeably altering the content
from the perspective of any algorithm not possessing the secret key.
Despite a number of recently proposed watermarking schemes, taking both a theoretical perspective
(e.g., [CGZ24, CG24, Zam24, FGJ+ 23]) as well as a more empirical one (e.g., [KGW+ 23, KGW+ 24,
KTHL23]), a crucial challenge that remains elusive is that of ensuring the watermark be robust to
adversaries which can modify the generated content. A watermarking scheme is of little use if it is too
easy to change the model’s output so as to remove the watermark. On the other hand, a sufficiently
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

