Self-Labeling the Job Shop Scheduling Problem

Andrea Corsini

Angelo Porrello

Simone Calderara

Mauro Dell’Amico

University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract
This work proposes a self-supervised training strategy designed for combinatorial
problems. An obstacle in applying supervised paradigms to such problems is
the need for costly target solutions often produced with exact solvers. Inspired
by semi- and self-supervised learning, we show that generative models can be
trained by sampling multiple solutions and using the best one according to the
problem objective as a pseudo-label. In this way, we iteratively improve the model
generation capability by relying only on its self-supervision, eliminating the need
for optimality information. We validate this Self-Labeling Improvement Method
(SLIM) on the Job Shop Scheduling (JSP), a complex combinatorial problem that is
receiving much attention from the neural combinatorial community. We propose a
generative model based on the well-known Pointer Network and train it with SLIM.
Experiments on popular benchmarks demonstrate the potential of this approach
as the resulting models outperform constructive heuristics and state-of-the-art
learning proposals for the JSP. Lastly, we prove the robustness of SLIM to various
parameters and its generality by applying it to the Traveling Salesman Problem.

1

Introduction

The Job Shop Problem (JSP) is a classic optimization problem with many practical applications in
industry and academia [56]. At its core, the JSP entails scheduling a set of jobs across multiple
machines, where each job has to be processed on the machines following a specific order. The goal
of this problem is generally to minimize the makespan: the time required to complete all jobs [40].
Over the years, various approaches have been developed to tackle the JSP. A common one is adopting
exact methods such as Mixed Integer Programming solvers (MIP). However, these methods often
struggle to provide optimal or high-quality solutions on medium and large instances in a reasonable
timeframe [29]. As a remedy, metaheuristics have been extensively investigated [36, 13, 24] and
constitute an alternative to exact methods. Although state-of-the-art metaheuristics like [37] can
rapidly provide quality solutions, typically within minutes, they are rather complex to implement
and their results can be difficult to reproduce [6]. Therefore, due to their lower complexity, Priority
Dispatching Rules (PDR) [40] are frequently preferred in practical applications with tighter time
constraints. The main issue of PDRs is their tendency to perform well in some cases and poorly in
others, primarily due to their rigid, hand-crafted prioritization schema based on hardcoded rules [21].
Recent works have increasingly investigated Machine Learning (ML) to enhance or replace some of
these approaches, primarily focusing on PDRs. ML-based approaches, specifically Reinforcement
Learning (RL) ones, proved to deliver higher-quality solutions than classic PDRs at the cost of a
small increase in execution time [33]. Despite the potential of RL [54, 25], training RL agents is a
complex task [45, 34], is sensitive to hyper-parameters [43], and has reproducibility issues [22].
Contrary, supervised learning is less affected by these issues but heavily relies on expensive annotations [32]. This is particularly problematic in combinatorial problems, where annotations in the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

