Collaborative Video Diffusion: Consistent Multi-video
Generation with Camera Control
Zhengfei Kuang*1
Hongsheng Li2

Shengqu Cai*1
Leonidas Guibas1
1

Stanford Univerity

Hao He2
Yinghao Xu1
Gordon Wetzstein1
2

CUHK

Abstract
Research on video generation has recently made tremendous progress, enabling
high-quality videos to be generated from text prompts or images. Adding control to the video generation process is an important goal moving forward and
recent approaches that condition video generation models on camera trajectories make strides towards it. Yet, it remains challenging to generate a video of
the same scene from multiple different camera trajectories. Solutions to this
multi-video generation problem could enable large-scale 3D scene generation with
editable camera trajectories, among other applications. We introduce collaborative video diffusion (CVD) as an important step towards this vision. The CVD
framework includes a novel cross-video synchronization module that promotes
consistency between corresponding frames of the same video rendered from different camera poses using an epipolar attention mechanism. Trained on top of
a state-of-the-art camera-control module for video generation, CVD generates
multiple videos rendered from different camera trajectories with significantly better consistency than baselines, as shown in extensive experiments. Project page:
https://collaborativevideodiffusion.github.io/.

1

Introduction

With the impressive progress of diffusion models [22, 51, 28, 44, 46, 43], video generation has
significantly advanced [12, 17, 26, 5, 6, 15, 64, 23, 32], with a transformative impact on digital
content creation workflows. Recent models like SORA [7] exhibit the ability to generate long highquality videos with complex dynamics. Yet, these methods typically leverage text or image inputs to
control the generation process and lack precise control over content and motion, which is essential for
practical applications. Prior efforts explore the use of other input modalities, such as flow, keypoints,
and depths, and develop novel control modules to incorporate these conditions effectively, enabling
precise guidance of the generated contents [60, 63, 67, 26, 56, 9]. Despite these advancements, these
methods still fail to provide camera control to the video generation process.
Recent works have started to focus on camera control using various techniques, such as motion
LoRAs [25, 17] or scene flows [63, 67]. Some representative works such as MotionCtrl [60] and
CameraCtrl [18] offer more flexible camera control by conditioning the video generative models
on a sequence of camera poses, showing the feasibility of freely controlling the camera movements
of videos. However, these methods are limited to single-camera trajectories, leading to significant
inconsistencies in content and dynamics when generating multiple videos of the same scene from
different camera trajectories. Consistent multi-video generation with camera control is desirable in
many downstream applications, such as large-scale 3D scene generation. Training video generation
models for consistent videos with different camera trajectories, however, is very challenging, partly
due to the lack of large-scale multi-view dynamic in-the-wild scene data.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

