Latent Paraphrasing: Perturbation on Layers
Improves Knowledge Injection in Language Models

Minki Kang1,2

Sung Ju Hwang2

Gibbeum Lee1

Jaewoong Cho1

1
KRAFTON, 2 KAIST
zzxc1133@krafton.com, sjhwang@kaist.ac.kr, {pirensisco, jwcho}@krafton.com

Abstract
As Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed in specialized domains with continuously evolving knowledge, the need for timely and precise
knowledge injection has become essential. Fine-tuning with paraphrased data is
a common approach to enhance knowledge injection, yet it faces two significant
challenges: high computational costs due to repetitive external model usage and
limited sample diversity. To this end, we introduce LaPael, a latent-level paraphrasing method that applies input-dependent noise to early LLM layers. This approach
enables diverse and semantically consistent augmentations directly within the
model. Furthermore, it eliminates the recurring costs of paraphrase generation
for each knowledge update. Our extensive experiments on question-answering
benchmarks demonstrate that LaPael improves knowledge injection over standard
fine-tuning and existing noise-based approaches. Additionally, combining LaPael
with data-level paraphrasing further enhances performance.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) encode extensive factual information from their training
data, enabling them to answer factoid questions such as “Who is the director of Dune: Part Two?” [4,
32]. However, knowledge in LLMs is static, which can lead to outdated information as real-world
knowledge evolves. Additionally, LLMs often lack specificity for specialized or private domains. To
address this, it is common practice to fine-tune LLMs with updated or domain-specific documents,
keeping the model’s knowledge up-to-date and enhancing expertise in particular domains [14, 17, 19].

F1 Score

Fine-Tuning (FT)
Ours
However, does fine-tuning LLMs on a single document allow
Ours + Para.
FT + Paraphrases
them to fully internalize its knowledge? Even in pre-training,
QA Task Performance
95
Kandpal et al. [20] found that LLMs cannot perfectly learn all the
90
information in the training data, particularly long-tail knowledge
that appears rarely or only once. Existing work [33] has shown
85
that this issue persists with fine-tuning and suggested that data
80
augmentation, such as paraphrasing, is a simple yet effective way
75 StreamingQA SQuAD ArchivalQA
to enhance knowledge injection. As shown in Figure 1, fine-tuning
with paraphrases enhances knowledge injection, as evidenced by Figure 1: Effect of paraphrasing data
in knowledge injection.
improved Question-Answering (QA) task performance.

While data-augmented approach via paraphrasing is effective for knowledge learning, it has two main
limitations: (1) High computational cost: Generating high-quality paraphrases requires significant
computational resources. As shown in Figure 2, paraphrasing models such as LLMs [5, 7, 11, 58]
need to repeatedly generate paraphrases for each document with the new incoming knowledge. This
leads to higher costs as the number of documents being learned continually increases; and (2) Limited
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

