QGFN: Controllable Greediness with Action Values
∗

Elaine Lau1 2 Stephen Zhewen Lu2 Ling Pan1 5
Doina Precup1 2 3 Emmanuel Bengio4
1
Mila - Québec AI Institute 2 McGill University 3 Google Deepmind
4
Valence Labs 5 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets; GFNs) are a family of energy-based
generative methods for combinatorial objects, capable of generating diverse and
high-utility samples. However, consistently biasing GFNs towards producing
high-utility samples is non-trivial. In this work, we leverage connections between
GFNs and reinforcement learning (RL) and propose to combine the GFN policy
with an action-value estimate, Q, to create greedier sampling policies which can
be controlled by a mixing parameter. We show that several variants of the proposed method, QGFN, are able to improve on the number of high-reward samples
generated in a variety of tasks without sacrificing diversity.

1

Introduction

Generative Flow Networks [Bengio et al., 2021a,b], also known as GFlowNets, or GFNs, were
recently introduced as a novel generative framework in the family of energy-based models [Malkin
et al., 2022b, Zhang et al., 2022]. Given some energy function f (x) over objects X , the promise
of GFNs is to train a sampler pθ such that at convergence pθ (x) ∝ exp(−f (x)); exp(−f (x)) is
also referred to as the reward R(x) in GFN literature, inheriting terminology from Reinforcement
Learning (RL). GFNs achieve this sampling via a constructive approach, treating the creation of some
object x as a sequential additive process (rather than an iterative local process à la Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) that can suffer from mode-mixing issues). The main advantage of a GFN is
its ability to generate a greater diversity of low-energy/high-reward objects compared to approaches
based on MCMC or RL [Bengio et al., 2021a, Jain et al., 2022, 2023], or even Soft-RL–which, while
related to GFNs, accomplishes something different by default [Tiapkin et al., 2023, Mohammadpour
et al., 2024, Deleu et al., 2024].
To generate more interesting samples and avoid oversampling from low-reward regions, it is common
to train a model to sample in proportion to R(x)β ; β is an inverse temperature, typically ≫ 1, which
pushes the model to become greedier. The use of this temperature (hyper)parameter is an important
control knob in GFNs. However, tuning this hyperparameter is non-trivial, which complicates training
certain GFNs; for example, trajectory balance [Malkin et al., 2022a] is sensitive to the “peakiness" of
the reward landscape [Madan et al., 2023]. Although it is possible to train temperature-conditional
models [Kim et al., 2023a], doing so essentially requires learning a whole family of GFNs–no easy
task, albeit doable, e.g., in multiobjective settings [Jain et al., 2023].
In this work, we propose an approach that allows selecting arbitrary greediness at inference time,
which preserves the generality of temperature-conditionals, while simplifying the training process.
We do so without the cost of learning a complicated family of functions and without conditionals,
instead only training two models: a GFlowNet and an action-value function Q [Watkins and Dayan,
1992, Mnih et al., 2013].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
Correspondence to: Elaine Lau <tsoi.lau@mail.mcgill.ca>
Source code available at: https://github.com/yunglau/QGFN/
*
This work was done during an internship at Valence Labs.

