Improving Generalization of Dynamic Graph
Learning via Environment Prompt
Kuo Yang1, 2 , Zhengyang Zhou1, 2, 3∗ , Qihe Huang1, 2 , Limin Li1, 2 ,
Yuxuan Liang4 , Yang Wang1, 2∗
1

University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China
2
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, Suzhou, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental Information System, Beijing, China
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
yangkuo@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zzy0929@ustc.edu.cn, {hqh, lilimin}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
yuxliang@outlook.com, angyan@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization issue is a well-known challenge within
deep learning tasks. In dynamic graphs, the change of temporal environments is
regarded as the main cause of data distribution shift. While numerous OOD studies focusing on environment factors have achieved remarkable performance, they
still fail to systematically solve the two issue of environment inference and utilization. In this work, we propose a novel dynamic graph learning model named EpoD
based on prompt learning and structural causal model to comprehensively enhance
both environment inference and utilization. Inspired by the superior performance
of prompt learning in understanding underlying semantic and causal associations,
we ﬁrst design a self-prompted learning mechanism to infer unseen environment
factors. We then rethink the role of environment variable within spatio-temporal
causal structure model, and introduce a novel causal pathway where dynamic subgraphs serve as mediating variables. The extracted dynamic subgraph can effectively capture the data distribution shift by incorporating the inferred environment
variables into the node-wise dependencies. Theoretical discussions and intuitive
analysis support the generalizability and interpretability of EpoD. Extensive experiments on seven real-world datasets across domains showcase the superiority of
EpoD against baselines, and toy example experiments further verify the powerful
interpretability and rationality of our EpoD.

1

Introduction

Dynamic graph learning aims to capture the evolution patterns of individual feature and global topology in spatio-temporal graphs over time. It has extensive applications in real-world scenarios, such
as social relationship analysis [6, 61], trafﬁc ﬂow forecasting [3, 59, 64] and air quality prediction
[16, 23]. The dynamic evolution is a prominent characteristic of spatio-temporal graphs [4, 16, 47],
such as human interest and social development naturally undergo changes over time. This characteristic inevitably gives rise to a issue of data distribution shifts. Given this issue, enabling models
to get temporal out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization ability poses a major challenge in dynamic
graph learning [51, 55, 63].
Actually, recent studies have paid attention to tackling the issue of temporal OOD generalization
[53, 58, 61]. They demonstrate that unseen temporal environments contribute to such distribution
∗

Yang Wang and Zhengyang Zhou are corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

