Enhancing Robustness in Deep Reinforcement
Learning: A Lyapunov Exponent Approach

Rory Young∗
Nicolas Pugeault
School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning agents achieve state-of-the-art performance in a
wide range of simulated control tasks. However, successful applications to realworld problems remain limited. One reason for this dichotomy is because the
learnt policies are not robust to observation noise or adversarial attacks. In this
paper, we investigate the robustness of deep RL policies to a single small state
perturbation in deterministic continuous control tasks. We demonstrate that RL
policies can be deterministically chaotic, as small perturbations to the system state
have a large impact on subsequent state and reward trajectories. This unstable
non-linear behaviour has two consequences: first, inaccuracies in sensor readings,
or adversarial attacks, can cause significant performance degradation; second, even
policies that show robust performance in terms of rewards may have unpredictable
behaviour in practice. These two facets of chaos in RL policies drastically restrict
the application of deep RL to real-world problems. To address this issue, we
propose an improvement on the successful Dreamer V3 architecture, implementing
Maximal Lyapunov Exponent regularisation. This new approach reduces the
chaotic state dynamics, rendering the learnt policies more resilient to sensor noise
or adversarial attacks and thereby improving the suitability of deep reinforcement
learning for real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have revolutionised reinforcement learning (RL) [25], enabling
agents to excel in a diverse set of simulated control tasks [12, 16, 22, 23, 24]. However, trained
deep RL policies are not robust controllers as DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [7, 26].
Adding a small amount of noise to each observation can cause these policies to make poor decisions,
considerably degrading their overall performance [10, 11, 13]. This lack of stability poses a significant
threat when applying deep RL to real-world environments, where inaccurate sensors can easily
introduce noise [5]. In this work, we argue that even high-performing deep RL policies are not
robust controllers as they can create a chaotic closed-loop control system [4, 14]. These systems are
characterised by a high sensitivity to initial conditions, with small changes in initial system states
producing vastly different long-term outcomes.
In this paper, we use the spectrum of Lyapunov Exponents [15] to empirically measure the stability
of the policies learnt by state-of-the-art deep RL approaches subject to small state perturbations.
We show that these controllers can produce chaotic state and reward dynamics when controlling
continuous environments. Consequently, a single noisy observation has a dramatic long-term impact
on these control systems, with the subsequent approximate state and reward trajectories diverging
significantly (Figure 1). This instability poses two problems for the safe deployment of deep RL in
real-world environments.
∗

Corresponding email: R.Young.4@research.gla.ac.uk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

