How Does Black-Box Impact the Learning Guarantee
of Stochastic Compositional Optimization?

Jun Chen
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
cj850487243@163.com
Hong Chen∗
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, China
chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn
Bin Gu
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
jsgubin@gmail.com

Abstract
Stochastic compositional optimization (SCO) problem constitutes a class of optimization problems characterized by the objective function with a compositional
form, including the tasks with known derivatives, such as AUC maximization,
and the derivative-free tasks exemplified by black-box vertical federated learning
(VFL). From the learning theory perspective, the learning guarantees of SCO algorithms with known derivatives have been studied in the literature. However, the
potential impacts of the derivative-free setting on the learning guarantees of SCO
remains unclear and merits further investigation. This paper aims to reveal the
impacts by developing a theoretical analysis for two derivative-free algorithms,
black-box SCGD and SCSC. Specifically, we first provide the sharper generalization upper bounds of convex SCGD and SCSC based on a new stability analysis
framework more effective than prior work under some milder conditions, which is
further developed to the non-convex case using the almost co-coercivity property
of smooth function. Then, we derive the learning guarantees of three black-box
variants of non-convex SCGD and SCSC with additional optimization analysis.
Comparing these results, we theoretically uncover the impacts that a better gradient
estimation brings a tighter learning guarantee and a larger proportion of unknown
gradients may lead to a stronger dependence on the gradient estimation quality.
Finally, our analysis is applied to two SCO algorithms, FOO-based vertical VFL
and VFL-CZOFO, to build the first learning guarantees for VFL that align with the
findings of SCGD and SCSC.

1

Introduction

In recent years, stochastic compositional optimization (SCO), a class of optimization methods
that incorporate the compositional form f (g(w)), has garnered significant attention in the research
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

