Continual Learning in the Frequency Domain

Ruiqi Liu1,2 , Boyu Diao1,2,† , Libo Huang1 , Zijia An1,2 , Zhulin An1,2 , Yongjun Xu1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
liuruiqi23@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
{diaoboyu2012, anzijia23p, anzhulin, xyj}@ict.ac.cn,
www.huanglibo@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) is designed to learn new tasks while preserving existing
knowledge. Replaying samples from earlier tasks has proven to be an effective
method to mitigate the forgetting of previously acquired knowledge. However, the
current research on the training efficiency of rehearsal-based methods is insufficient,
which limits the practical application of CL systems in resource-limited scenarios.
The human visual system (HVS) exhibits varying sensitivities to different frequency
components, enabling the efficient elimination of visually redundant information.
Inspired by HVS, we propose a novel framework called Continual Learning in
the Frequency Domain (CLFD). To our knowledge, this is the first study to utilize frequency domain features to enhance the performance and efficiency of CL
training on edge devices. For the input features of the feature extractor, CLFD
employs wavelet transform to map the original input image into the frequency
domain, thereby effectively reducing the size of input feature maps. Regarding the
output features of the feature extractor, CLFD selectively utilizes output features for
distinct classes for classification, thereby balancing the reusability and interference
of output features based on the frequency domain similarity of the classes across
various tasks. Optimizing only the input and output features of the feature extractor
allows for seamless integration of CLFD with various rehearsal-based methods.
Extensive experiments conducted in both cloud and edge environments demonstrate that CLFD consistently improves the performance of state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods in both precision and training efficiency. Specifically, CLFD can increase
the accuracy of the SOTA CL method by up to 6.83% and reduce the training time
by 2.6×. Code is available at https://github.com/EMLS-ICTCAS/CLFD.git

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) enables machine learning models to adjust to new data while preserving
previous knowledge in dynamic environments [25]. Traditional training methods often underperform
in CL because the adjustments to the parameters prioritize new information over old information,
leading to what is commonly known as catastrophic forgetting [36]. While recent CL methods
primarily concentrate on addressing the issue of forgetting, it is imperative to also consider learning
efficiency when implementing CL applications on edge devices with constrained resources [37, 31],
such as the NVIDIA Jetson Orin NX.
To mitigate catastrophic forgetting, a wide range of methods have been employed: regularizationbased methods [49, 42, 30, 11, 3] constrain updates to essential parameters, minimizing the drift in
network parameters that are crucial for addressing previous tasks; architecture-based methods [14, 24,
†

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

