State-free Reinforcement Learning

Mingyu Chen
Boston University
mingyuc@bu.edu

Aldo Pacchiano
Boston University
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
pacchian@bu.edu

Xuezhou Zhang
Boston University
xuezhouz@bu.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study the state-free RL problem, where the algorithm does not
have the states information before interacting with the environment. Specifically,
denote the reachable state set by S Π := {s| maxπ∈Π q P,π (s) > 0}, we design
an algorithm which requires no information on the state space S while having a
regret that is completely independent of S and only depend on S Π . We view this
as a concrete first step towards parameter-free RL, with the goal of designing RL
algorithms that require no hyper-parameter tuning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) studies the problem where an agent interacts with an unknown environment to optimize cumulative rewards/losses [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. While the nature of the
environment is in principle hidden from the agent, many existing algorithms [Azar et al., 2017, Jin
et al., 2018, Zanette and Brunskill, 2019, Zhang et al., 2020, 2021] implicitly require prior knowledge
of parameters of the environment, such as the size of the state space, action space, time horizon and
so on. Such parameters play a crucial role in these algorithms, as they are used in the construction
of variable initializations, exploration bonuses, confidence sets, etc. However, in most real-world
problems, these parameters are not known a priori, resulting in the need for the system designer to
perform hyper-parameter tuning in a black-box fashion, which is known to be extremely costly in RL
compared to their supervised learning counterparts [Pacchiano et al., 2020]. In supervised learning
algorithms, selecting among M hyper-parameters only degrades
√ the sample complexity by a factor
of O(log(M )). In contrast, in RL problems it will incur a O( M ) multiplier on the regret, making
hyper-parameter tuning prohibitively expensive. This is one of the major roadblocks to broader
applicability of RL to real-world scenarios.
Motivated by the above observation, we propose and advocate for the study of parameter-free
reinforcement learning, i.e. the design of RL algorithms that have no or as few hyper-parameters as
possible, with the eventual goal of eliminating the need for heavy hyper-parameter tuning in practice.
As a concrete first step, in this paper, we focus on the problem of state-free RL in tabular MDPs. In
particular, we will show that there exist state-free RL algorithms which do not require the state space
S as an input parameter to the algorithm, nor do their regret scale with the innate state space size |S|.
In particular, we design a black-box reduction framework called State-Free Reinforcement Learning
(SFRL). Given any existing RL algorithm for stochastic or adversarial MDPs, this framework can
transform it into a state-free RL algorithm through a black-box reduction. We also show that the
same framework can be adapted to induce action-free and horizon-free algorithms, the three of which
now makes a tabular MDP algorithm completely parameter-free, i.e. it requires no input parameters
whatsoever, and their regret bound automatically adapt to the intrinsic complexity of the problem.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Following the discussion of related works and problem
formulation, we start by discussing the technical challenges of state-free learning and why existing
algorithmic and analysis framework are not able to achieve it (Section 4). Built upon these insights,
we propose an intuitive black-box reduction framework SF-RL, that transforms any RL algorithm
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

