Voxel Proposal Network via Multi-Frame Knowledge
Distillation for Semantic Scene Completion

Lubo Wang1 ∗ Di Lin1 ∗

Kairui Yang1

Miaohui Wang4
1

Ruonan Liu2 † Qing Guo3

Lingyu Liang5 6

Yi Wang4

Wuyuan Xie4

Ping Li7

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
IHPC and CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
4
5
Shenzhen University
Pazhou Lab 6 South China University of Technology
7
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
wanglubo@tju.edu.cn di.lin@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic scene completion is a difficult task that involves completing the geometry
and semantics of a scene from point clouds in a large-scale environment. Many
current methods use 3D/2D convolutions or attention mechanisms, but these have
limitations in directly constructing geometry and accurately propagating features
from related voxels, the completion likely fails while propagating features in a
single pass without considering multiple potential pathways. And they are generally
only suitable for static scenes and struggle to handle dynamic aspects. This paper
introduces Voxel Proposal Network (VPNet) that completes scenes from 3D and
Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) perspectives. It includes Confident Voxel Proposal based
on voxel-wise coordinates to propose confident voxels with high reliability for
completion. This method reconstructs the scene geometry and implicitly models
the uncertainty of voxel-wise semantic labels by presenting multiple possibilities
for voxels. VPNet employs Multi-Frame Knowledge Distillation based on the
point clouds of multiple adjacent frames to accurately predict the voxel-wise labels
by condensing various possibilities of voxel relationships. VPNet has shown
superior performance and achieved state-of-the-art results on the SemanticKITTI
and SemanticPOSS datasets.

1

Introduction

Understanding 3D scenes based on LiDAR point clouds is essential for tasks like autonomous driving.
However, due to the limitations of LiDAR sensors and the occlusion of instances by themselves
or other instances in the real world, including large-scale information in the point clouds poses a
significant challenge to understanding 3D scenes.
Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) aims to simultaneously infer a scene’s occupancy and semantic
information based on point clouds using deep learning. Several methods [1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9;
10; 11; 12; 13; 14; 15; 16; 17; 18] use convolutions to complete the partial scene. Some completion
methods [19; 20; 21; 22] heavily rely on diverse attention mechanisms as the attention mechanism
can capture spatial relationships and update the features. The diffusion model [23] also applies to the
∗
†

Co-first authors.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

