Biologically Inspired Learning Model for
Instructed Vision
Roy Abel
Weizmann Institute of Science
roy.abel@weizmann.ac.il

Shimon Ullman
Weizmann Institute of Science
shimon.ullman@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
As part of the effort to understand how the brain learns, ongoing research seeks to
combine biological knowledge with current artificial intelligence (AI) modeling
in an attempt to find an efficient biologically plausible learning scheme. Current
models often use a cortical-like combination of bottom-up (BU) and top-down
(TD) processing, where the TD part carries feedback signals for learning. However,
in the visual cortex, the TD pathway plays a second major role in visual attention,
by guiding the visual process toward locations and tasks of interest. A biological
model should therefore integrate both learning and visual guidance. We introduce a
model that uses a cortical-like combination of BU and TD processing that naturally
integrates the two major functions of the TD stream. This integration is achieved
through an appropriate connectivity pattern between the BU and TD streams,
a novel processing cycle that uses the TD stream twice, and a ’Counter-Hebb’
learning mechanism that operates across both streams. We show that the ’CounterHebb’ mechanism can provide an exact backpropagation synaptic modification.
Additionally, our model can effectively guide the visual stream to perform a task
of interest, achieving competitive performance on standard multi-task learning
benchmarks compared to AI models. The successful combination of learning and
visual guidance could provide a new view on combining BU and TD processing
in human vision and suggests possible directions for both biologically plausible
models and artificial instructed models, such as vision-language models (VLMs).

1

Introduction

Understanding how the human brain learns has been a longstanding pursuit in both neuroscience
and artificial intelligence (AI). An extensive research area at this intersection is the development
of biologically plausible models of cortical learning, particularly in visual processes [Lee et al.,
2015, Lillicrap et al., 2016, Scellier and Bengio, 2017, Whittington and Bogacz, 2017, Bozkurt
et al., 2024]. While the ultimate goal is to develop a detailed biological model, current research
primarily focuses on potential schemes for modifying synaptic weights during learning, including
how these modifications are determined and how they propagate through the cortical network (the
credit assignment problem) [Whittington and Bogacz, 2019].
Biologically plausible learning models typically incorporate a combination of feedforward (bottomup) and feedback (top-down) pathways, with the top-down (TD) stream playing a central role in the
learning process, similar to the structure of the human cortex [Lillicrap et al., 2020, Song et al., 2021].
However, a key distinction between these models and the cortex is that, while most biological models
primarily use the TD stream to propagate feedback signals, in the cortex, the TD stream also plays a
crucial role in perception by directing attention [Manita et al., 2015].
Top-down attention is an essential part of human vision and has been extensively studied in human
physiology, anatomy, and psychophysics [Treisman and Gelade, 1980, Itti and Koch, 2001, Carrasco,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

