IMAGPose: A Unified Conditional Framework for
Pose-Guided Person Generation
Fei Shen, Jinhui Tang∗
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{feishen, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models represent a promising avenue for image generation, having
demonstrated competitive performance in pose-guided person image generation.
However, existing methods are limited to generating target images from a source
image and a target pose, overlooking two critical user scenarios: generating multiple target images with different poses simultaneously and generating target images
from multi-view source images. To overcome these limitations, we propose IMAGPose, a unified conditional framework for pose-guided image generation, which
incorporates three pivotal modules: a feature-level conditioning (FLC) module, an
image-level conditioning (ILC) module, and a cross-view attention (CVA) module.
Firstly, the FLC module combines the low-level texture feature from the VAE
encoder with the high-level semantic feature from the image encoder, addressing
the issue of missing detail information due to the absence of a dedicated person
image feature extractor. Then, the ILC module achieves an alignment of images
and poses to adapt to flexible and diverse user scenarios by injecting a variable
number of source image conditions and introducing a masking strategy. Finally, the
CVA module introduces decomposing global and local cross-attention, ensuring
local fidelity and global consistency of the person image when multiple source
image prompts. The three modules of IMAGPose work together to unify the task
of person image generation under various user scenarios. Extensive experiment
results demonstrate the consistency and photorealism of our proposed IMAGPose under challenging user scenarios. The code and model will be available at
https://github.com/muzishen/IMAGPose.

1

Introduction

Pose-guided person generation [51, 29] aims to transform a source person image into a target person
image under a specific pose while maintaining appearance consistency. It has many applications,
including virtual reality, film production, and e-commerce. Besides, the generated images can be used
to enhance the performance of downstream tasks, such as person re-identification [32, 54, 48, 34].
Early methods [4, 57, 42] usually are developed based on generative adversarial networks (GANs).
However, GAN-based methods easily suffer from the instability of the min-max training objective
and the difficulty of generating high-quality images in a single forward pass. Recently, methods
based on diffusion models [1, 22, 11, 36] are becoming increasingly popular in the community.
As a promising alternative to GAN for image generation, diffusion models utilize the source image and target pose as conditions. They generate the target image through a multi-step denoising process instead of completing it in a single step. So, diffusion models help better retain the
input information. For example, PIDM [1] proposes a texture diffusion module that inserts features of the source image, extracted by a frozen encoder, into different stages of the diffusion
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

