HARMONIC: Harnessing LLMs for Tabular Data
Synthesis and Privacy Protection

Yuxin Wang
Sichuan University
Chengdu, China
wangyuxin1st@gmail.com
Yongfu Dai
Sichuan University
Chengdu, China
wal.daishen@gmail.com

Duanyu Feng
Sichuan University
Chengdu, China
fengduanyuscu@stu.scu.edu.cn

Zhengyu Chen
Wuhan University
Wuhan, China
2019302120293@whu.edu.cn

Sophia Ananiadou
The University of Manchester
Manchester, UK
sophia.ananiadou@manchester.ac.uk

Jimin Huang
The Fin AI
Singapore
jimin.huang@thefin.ai

Qianqian Xie∗
The Fin AI
Singapore
qianqian.xie@thefin.ai

Hao Wang∗
Sichuan University
Chengdu, China
wangh@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Data serves as the fundamental basis for advancing deep learning. The tabular
data presented in a structured format is highly valuable for modeling and training.
However, even in the era of LLM, obtaining tabular data from sensitive domains
remains a challenge due to privacy or copyright concerns. Therefore, exploring
the methods for effectively using models like LLMs to generate synthetic tabular
data, which is privacy-preserving but similar to original one, is urgent. In this
paper, we introduce a new framework HARMONIC for tabular data generation
and evaluation by LLMs. In the data generation part of our framework, we employ
fine-tuning to generate tabular data and enhance privacy rather than continued
pre-training which is often used by previous small-scale LLM-based methods. In
particular, we construct an instruction fine-tuning dataset based on the idea of the
k-nearest neighbors algorithm to inspire LLMs to discover inter-row relationships.
By such fine-tuning, LLMs are trained to remember the format and connections of
the data rather than the data itself, which reduces the risk of privacy leakage. The
experiments find that our tabular data generation achieves equivalent performance
as existing methods but with better privacy by the metric of MLE, DCR, etc. In the
evaluation part of our framework, we develop a specific privacy risk metric DLT for
LLM synthetic data generation, which quantifies the extent to which the generator
itself leaks data. We also developed LLE, a performance evaluation metric for
downstream LLM tasks, which is more practical and credible than previous metrics.
The experiments show that our data generation method outperform the previous
methods in the metrics DLT and LLE.
∗

Co-Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

