STONE: A Submodular Optimization Framework for
Active 3D Object Detection

Ruiyu Mao

Sarthak Kumar Maharana Rishabh K Iyer Yunhui Guo
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, USA
{rxm210041, skm200005, rishabh.iyer, yunhui.guo}@utdallas.edu

Abstract
3D object detection is fundamentally important for various emerging applications,
including autonomous driving and robotics. A key requirement for training an
accurate 3D object detector is the availability of a large amount of LiDAR-based
point cloud data. Unfortunately, labeling point cloud data is extremely challenging,
as accurate 3D bounding boxes and semantic labels are required for each potential
object. This paper proposes a unified active 3D object detection framework, for
greatly reducing the labeling cost of training 3D object detectors. Our framework
is based on a novel formulation of submodular optimization, specifically tailored
to the problem of active 3D object detection. In particular, we address two fundamental challenges associated with active 3D object detection: data imbalance
and the need to cover the distribution of the data, including LiDAR-based point
cloud data of varying difficulty levels. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance with high computational efficiency compared to existing active learning methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/RuiyuM/STONE

1

Introduction

In many emerging applications such as autonomous driving, it is critical to localize objects in a 3D
scene for accurate scene understanding [8, 56]. This is usually achieved by using a 3D detection
model based on LiDAR point cloud data with oriented bounding boxes and semantic labels. While
highly accurate recognition and localization of objects can be achieved due to recent advancements
in deep learning, this performance often comes at the expense of requiring a large volume of labeled
point cloud data, which is much more costly to collect compared to typical RGB images [51, 52].
Active learning (AL) is the standard method for reducing labeling costs in machine learning [7, 45].
AL often starts with a small labeled set and iteratively selects the most informative samples for
label acquisition from a large pool of unlabeled data, given a labeling budget. The informativeness,
of a selected sample, can be measured in various ways. For example, by computing the sampling
uncertainty as measured by maximum Shannon entropy [48, 32] or estimated model changes or
finding the most representative samples to avoid sample redundancy [36, 17, 40] by using greedy
coreset algorithms [44, 18] or clustering-based approaches [38, 57, 3, 42].
Active learning has proven highly effective in reducing labeling costs for recognition tasks, but
its application in LiDAR-based object detection remains limited and under-explored [11, 22, 43].
Compared to standard recognition tasks, there are two fundamental challenges: 1) Depending on the
specific scene, each category involves different difficulty levels (EASY, MODERATE, or HARD), which
are determined by the size, occlusion level, and truncation of 3D objects. Ideally, the selected labeled
point cloud data should include varying difficulty levels. 2) Each 3D scene can contain multiple
objects, leading to highly imbalanced label distributions in the point cloud data. For example, most
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

