Strategic Littlestone Dimension:
Improved Bounds on Online Strategic Classification∗
Saba Ahmadi†,* , Kunhe Yang‡,* , and Hanrui Zhang§,*
†
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, saba@ttic.edu
University of California, Berkeley, kunheyang@berkeley.edu
§
Chinese University of Hong Kong, hanrui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
‡

Abstract
We study the problem of online binary classification in settings where strategic
agents can modify their observable features to receive a positive classification.
We model the set of feasible manipulations by a directed graph over the feature
space, and assume the learner only observes the manipulated features instead
of the original ones. We introduce the Strategic Littlestone Dimension, a new
combinatorial measure that captures the joint complexity of the hypothesis class
and the manipulation graph. We demonstrate that it characterizes the instanceoptimal mistake bounds for deterministic learning algorithms in the realizable
setting. We also achieve improved regret in the agnostic setting by a refined
agnostic-to-realizable reduction that accounts for the additional challenge of not
observing agents’ original features. Finally, we relax the assumption that the learner
knows the manipulation graph, instead assuming their knowledge is captured by a
family of graphs. We derive regret bounds in both the realizable setting where all
agents manipulate according to the same graph within the graph family, and the
agnostic setting where the manipulation graphs are chosen adversarially and not
consistently modeled by a single graph in the family.

1

Introduction

Strategic considerations in machine learning have gained significant attention during the past decades.
When ML algorithms are used to assist decisions that affect a strategic entity (e.g., a person, a
company, or an LLM agent), this entity — henceforth the agent — naturally attempts to game the
ML algorithms into making decisions that better serve the agent’s goals, which in many cases differ
from the decision maker’s. Examples include loan applicants optimizing their credit score without
actually improving their financial situation.2 It is therefore desirable, if not imperative, that the ML
algorithms used for decision-making be robust against such strategic manipulation.
Indeed, extensive effort has been made towards designing ML algorithms in the presence of strategic
behavior, shaping the research area of strategic machine learning [Brückner and Scheffer, 2011, Hardt
et al., 2016]. In particular, powerful frameworks have been proposed for offline environments, where
the decision maker has access to historical data, on which they train a model that is subsequently used
to make decisions about (i.e., to classify) members of a static population. These frameworks provide
almost optimal learnability results and sample complexity bounds for strategic machine learning in
offline environments, which gracefully generalize their non-strategic counterparts (see, e.g., [Zhang
and Conitzer, 2021, Sundaram et al., 2023]).
∗

Authors are ordered alphabetically.
The following article (among others) discusses some well-known tricks for this: https://www.
nerdwallet.com/article/finance/raise-credit-score-fast.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

