RLE: A Unified Perspective of Data Augmentation for
Cross-Spectral Re-identification

Lei, Tan1 , Yukang Zhang1 , Keke Han1 ,
Pingyang Dai1∗, Yan Zhang1 , Yongjian Wu2 , Rongrong Ji1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, China.
tanlei@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zhangyk@stu.xmu.edu.cn, hankeke303@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
pydai@xmu.edu.cn, bzhy986@xmu.edu.cn, littlekenwu@tencent.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper makes a step towards modeling the modality discrepancy in the crossspectral re-identification task. Based on the Lambertain model, we observe that the
non-linear modality discrepancy mainly comes from diverse linear transformations
acting on the surface of different materials. From this view, we unify all data
augmentation strategies for cross-spectral re-identification by mimicking such
local linear transformations and categorizing them into moderate transformation
and radical transformation. By extending the observation, we propose a Random
Linear Enhancement (RLE) strategy which includes Moderate Random Linear
Enhancement (MRLE) and Radical Random Linear Enhancement (RRLE) to
push the boundaries of both types of transformation. Moderate Random Linear
Enhancement is designed to provide diverse image transformations that satisfy the
original linear correlations under constrained conditions, whereas Radical Random
Linear Enhancement seeks to generate local linear transformations directly without
relying on external information. The experimental results not only demonstrate
the superiority and effectiveness of RLE but also confirm its great potential as a
general-purpose data augmentation for cross-spectral re-identification. The code is
available at https://github.com/stone96123/RLE.

1

Introduction

Identity recognition has attracted intensive attention in the last few years due to its wide applications
in surveillance systems [1, 2, 3, 4]. Since silicon-based digital cameras are naturally sensitive to nearinfrared (NIR), most cameras provide infrared (IR) images instead of visible (VIS) images for better
visual quality under poor illumination conditions. In practice, this puts the re-identification (Re-ID)
problem in a cross-spectral setting and requires the approaches to properly handle both the intra-class
variance and the more significant modality discrepancies between cross-spectral images [5, 6, 7].
Encouraged by the great success of single-modality re-identification, substantial research efforts
in cross-spectral re-identification attempt to transform the cross-spectral re-identification challenge
into a single-modality learning task. To achieve this goal, previous efforts utilize DNN-based image
processing such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8], to construct the translation from one
spectrum to another. These methods [9, 10] generally provide good visual effects and adjustability.
However, the limited visual quality of the generated images and the lack of large-scale databases
providing cross-spectral image pairs make GAN training challenging, thus limiting the performance
of these methods. Another mainstream strategy focuses on the channel difference between infrared
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

