ConvBench: A Multi-Turn Conversation Evaluation
Benchmark with Hierarchical Ablation Capability for
Large Vision-Language Models

Shuo Liu1 , Kaining Ying1 , Hao Zhang1 , Yue Yang1 , Yuqi Lin1 , Tianle Zhang1 ,
Chuanhao Li1 , Yu Qiao1 , Ping Luo2,1 , Wenqi Shao1B , Kaipeng Zhang1B
1

OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory,
2
The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Multi-turn visual conversation is an important ability of real-world AI assistants.
However, the related evaluation benchmark is missed. This paper presents ConvBench, a multi-turn conversation benchmark with hierarchical capabilities ablation
evaluation for Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs). ConvBench comprises
577 curated multi-turn conversations, encompassing 215 tasks. These tasks are
broad and open-ended, which resemble real-world user behaviors. ConvBench
progressively examines the LVLMs’ perception, reasoning, and creativity capabilities in each conversation and can decouple these capabilities in evaluations
and thus perform reliable error attribution. Besides, considering the diversity of
open-ended questions, we introduce an efficient and reliable automatic evaluation
framework. Experimental results reveal that ConvBench is a significant challenge
for current LVLMs, even for GPT4V, which achieves only a 39.51% score. Besides,
we have some insightful findings, such as the weak perception of LVLMs inhibits
authentic strengths in reasoning and creation. We believe our design of hierarchical capabilities, decoupling capabilities evaluation, and multi-turn conversation
can blaze a new trail in LVLMs evaluation. Code and benchmark are released at
https://github.com/shirlyliu64/ConvBench.

1

Introduction

Open-ended multi-turn visual conversations are usual in our daily lives and should be one of the
features of artificial general intelligence (AGI). Recent large vision language models (LVLMs, e.g.,
GPT4V [1], Claude [2], and InternVL-Chat [3]) have achieved impressive performance in such
conversations, which is also the common usage of LVLMs. However, existing benchmarks [4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] for LVLMs conduct single-turn conversations, and most use close-ended multichoice questions for evaluation. To this end, this paper presents a multi-turn conversation benchmark
named ConvBench to measure the advancement of LVLMs. Beyond open-ended and multi-turn,
our questions are hierarchical and real-world, and we introduce an automatic evaluation method.
In particular, in each conversation, ConvBench can decouple different capabilities evaluations and
perform reliable error attribution, blazing a new trail in LVLMs evaluation.
We first introduce the hierarchical structure of multi-turn questions. Previous benchmarks treat
different multimodal capabilities independently using independent questions while ignoring the
B Corresponding Authors: zhangkaipeng@pjlab.org.cn; shaowenqi@pjlab.org.cn
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

