QKFormer: Hierarchical Spiking Transformer using
Q-K Attention
Chenlin Zhou1∗, Han Zhang1,2∗, Zhaokun Zhou1,3∗, Liutao Yu1 , Liwei Huang1,3 ,
Xiaopeng Fan1,2 , Li Yuan1,3 , Zhengyu Ma1†, Huihui Zhou1†, Yonghong Tian1,3
1

Pengcheng Laboratory

2

Harbin Institute of Technology

3

Peking University

Abstract
Spiking Transformers, which integrate Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) with
Transformer architectures, have attracted significant attention due to their potential
for low energy consumption and high performance. However, there remains a
substantial gap in performance between SNNs and Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs). To narrow this gap, we have developed QKFormer, a direct training spiking transformer with the following features: i) Linear complexity and high energy
efficiency, the novel spike-form Q-K attention module efficiently models the token
or channel attention through binary vectors and enables the construction of larger
models. ii) Multi-scale spiking representation, achieved by a hierarchical structure
with the different number of tokens across blocks. iii) Spiking Patch Embedding
with Deformed Shortcut (SPEDS), enhances spiking information transmission
and integration, thus improving overall performance. It is shown that QKFormer
achieves significantly superior performance over existing state-of-the-art SNN
models on various mainstream datasets. Notably, with comparable size to Spikformer (66.34 M, 74.81%), QKFormer (64.96 M) achieves a groundbreaking top-1
accuracy of 85.65% on ImageNet-1k, substantially outperforming Spikformer by
10.84%. To our best knowledge, this is the first time that directly training SNNs
have exceeded 85% accuracy on ImageNet-1K. The code and models are available
at https://github.com/zhouchenlin2096/QKFormer.

1

Introduction

Regarded as the third generation of neural networks [1], the brain-inspired Spiking Neural Networks
(SNNs) are potential competitors to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) due to their high biological
plausibility and high energy efficiency attributed to their event-driven properties [2]. Transformer,
originally designed for natural language processing [3], has flourished in various computer vision
tasks, including image classification [4, 5], object detection [6, 7, 8] and semantic segmentation
[9, 10]. Spiking Transformers (Transformer-based SNNs) [11, 12, 13, 14, 15], which integrate spiking
neural networks with transformer architecture, have attracted significant attention. This innovative
combination provides great potential to develop advanced AI algorithms with high performance and
low energy consumption.
As the architecture of the transformers is essential to the model’s performance [4, 5, 16, 8, 10],
designing new architectures for transformer-based SNNs is quite challenging in terms of space
requirements for the following reasons [11, 13, 15]. i). Spiking Self Attention (SSA) [11], the core
module of spiking transformers, encodes Query, Key, and Value with sparse spikes. However, the
∗
†

Equal
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

