Learning Discrete Latent Variable Structures with
Tensor Rank Conditions
1,2

1,∗

3

1

Zhengming Chen , Ruichu Cai , Feng Xie , Jie Qiao ,
2,4
2
1,5
2,6,∗
Anpeng Wu , Zijian Li , Zhifeng Hao , Kun Zhang
1. School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology
2. Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3. Department of Applied Statistics, Beijing Technology and Business University
4. Department of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
5. College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, Guangdong, China
6. Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Unobserved discrete data are ubiquitous in many scientific disciplines, and how
to learn the causal structure of these latent variables is crucial for uncovering
data patterns. Most studies focus on the linear latent variable model or impose
strict constraints on latent structures, which fail to address cases in discrete data
involving non-linear relationships or complex latent structures. To achieve this,
we explore a tensor rank condition on contingency tables for an observed variable
set Xp , showing that the rank is determined by the minimum support of a specific
conditional set (not necessary in Xp ) that d-separates all variables in Xp . By this,
one can locate the latent variable through probing the rank on different observed
variables set, and further identify the latent causal structure under some structure
assumptions. We present the corresponding identification algorithm and conduct
simulated experiments to verify the effectiveness of our method. Our results
elegantly expand the application scope of causal discovery with latent variables.

1

Introduction

Social scientists, psychologists, and researchers from various disciplines are often interested in
understanding causal relationships between the latent variables that cannot be measured directly,
such as depression, coping, and stress (Silva et al., 2006). A common approach to grasp these latent
concepts is to construct a measurement model. For instance, experts design a set of measurable items
or survey questions that serve as indicators of the latent variable and then use them to infer causal
relationships among latent variables (Bollen, 2002; Bartholomew et al., 2011; Cui et al., 2018).
Numerous approaches exist for addressing structure learning among latent variables. In particular, if
the data generation process is assumed to be a linear relationship, known as linear latent variable
models, several approaches have been developed. These include the second-order statistic-based
approaches (Silva et al., 2006; Kummerfeld and Ramsey, 2016; Chen et al., 2024; Sullivant et al.,
2010), high-order moments-based ones (Xie et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022; Cai et al., 2019; Adams
et al., 2021), matrix decomposition-based methods (Anandkumar et al., 2013, 2014, 2015), and
copula model-based approaches (Cui et al., 2018). Moreover, the hierarchical latent variable structure
has been well-studied within the linear setting (Huang et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023;
Jin et al., 2023). However, the linear assumption is rather restrictive and the discrete data in the real
world could be more frequently encountered (e.g., responses from psychological and educational
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

