Remove that Square Root: A New Efficient
Scale-Invariant Version of AdaGrad
Sayantan Choudhury∗
MBZUAI & Johns Hopkins University
Nicolas Loizou
Johns Hopkins University

Samuel Horváth
MBZUAI

Nazarii Tupitsa
MBZUAI & Innopolis University
Martin Takáč
MBZUAI

Eduard Gorbunov
MBZUAI

Abstract
Adaptive methods are extremely popular in machine learning as they make learning
rate tuning less expensive. This paper introduces a novel optimization algorithm
named KATE, which presents a scale-invariant adaptation of the well-known AdaGrad algorithm. We prove the scale-invariance of KATE for the case of Generalized
Linear Models. Moreover, for general smooth non-convex problems, we establish
√
a convergence rate of O(log T/ T ) for KATE, matching the best-known ones for
AdaGrad and Adam. We also compare KATE to other state-of-the-art adaptive
algorithms Adam and AdaGrad in numerical experiments with different problems, including complex machine learning tasks like image classification and text
classification on real data. The results indicate that KATE consistently outperforms AdaGrad and matches/surpasses the performance of Adam in all considered
scenarios.

1

Introduction

In this work, we consider the following unconstrained optimization problem:
minw∈Rd f (w),

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a L-smooth and generally non-convex function. In particular, we are interested
in the situations
Pn when the objective has either expectation f (w) = Eξ∼D [fξ (w)] or finite-sum
f (w) = n1 i=1 fi (w) form. Such minimization problems are crucial in machine learning, where
w corresponds to the model parameters. Solving these problems with stochastic gradient-based
optimizers has gained much interest owing to their wider applicability and low computational cost.
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro, 1951) and similar algorithms require the
knowledge of parameters like L for convergence and are very sensitive to the choice of the stepsize in
general. Therefore, SGD requires hyperparameter tuning, which can be computationally expensive.
To address these issues, it is common practice to use adaptive variants of stochastic gradient-based
methods that can converge without knowing the function’s structure.
There exist many adaptive algorithms such as AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), Adam (Kingma and Ba,
2014), AMSGrad (Reddi et al., 2019), D-Adaptation (Defazio and Mishchenko, 2023), Prodigy
(Mishchenko and Defazio, 2023), AI-SARAH (Shi et al., 2023) and their variants. These adaptive
techniques are capable of updating their step sizes on the fly. For instance, the AdaGrad method
determines its step sizes using a cumulative sum of the coordinate-wise squared (stochastic) gradient
∗

Part of this work was done when S. Choudhury was an intern at MBZUAI, UAE.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

