On the Saturation Effects of Spectral Algorithms
in Large Dimensions

Weihao Lu
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
luwh19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Haobo Zhang
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
zhang-hb21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yicheng Li
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
liyc22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Qian Lin∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
qianlin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The saturation effects, which originally refer to the fact that kernel ridge regression
(KRR) fails to achieve the information-theoretical lower bound when the regression function is over-smooth, have been observed for almost 20 years and were
rigorously proved recently for kernel ridge regression and some other spectral
algorithms over a fixed dimensional domain. The main focus of this paper is to
explore the saturation effects for a large class of spectral algorithms (including the
KRR, gradient descent, etc.) in large dimensional settings where n ≍ dγ . More
precisely, we first propose an improved minimax lower bound for the kernel regression problem in large dimensional settings and show that the gradient flow with
early stopping strategy will result in an estimator achieving this lower bound (up to
a logarithmic factor). Similar to the results in KRR, we can further determine the
exact convergence rates (both upper and lower bounds) of a large class of (optimal
tuned) spectral algorithms with different qualification τ ’s. In particular, we find
that these exact rate curves (varying along γ) exhibit the periodic plateau behavior
and the polynomial approximation barrier. Consequently, we can fully depict the
saturation effects of the spectral algorithms and reveal a new phenomenon in large
dimensional settings (i.e., the saturation effect occurs in large dimensional setting
as long as the source condition s > τ while it occurs in fixed dimensional setting
as long as s > 2τ ).

1

Introduction

Let’s assume we have n i.i.d. samples (xi , yi ) from a joint distribution supported on Rd × R. The
regression problem, one of the most fundamental problems in statistics, aims to find a function fˆ
based on these samples such that the excess risk, ∥fˆ − f⋆ ∥2L2 = Ex [(f⋆ (x) − fˆ(x))2 ], is small, where
f⋆ (x) = E[Y |x] is the regression function. Many non-parametric regression methods are proposed
to solve the regression problem by assuming that f⋆ falls into certain function classes, including
polynomial splines Stone (1994), local polynomials Cleveland (1979); Stone (1977), the spectral
algorithms Caponnetto (2006); Caponnetto and De Vito (2007); Caponnetto and Yao (2010), etc.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

