Focus On What Matters: Separated Models For
Visual-Based RL Generalization
Di Zhang Bowen Lv Hai Zhang Feifan Yang Junqiao Zhao ∗
Hang Yu Chang Huang Hongtu Zhou Chen Ye Changjun Jiang
Department of Computer Science, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
MOE Key Lab of Embedded System and Service Computing, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{2331922, 2151769, zhanghai12138, 2153299, zhaojunqiao}@tongji.edu.cn
{2053881, 2130790, zhouhongtu, yechen, cjjiang}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
A primary challenge for visual-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) is to generalize
effectively across unseen environments. Although previous studies have explored
different auxiliary tasks to enhance generalization, few adopt image reconstruction
due to concerns about exacerbating overfitting to task-irrelevant features during
training. Perceiving the pre-eminence of image reconstruction in representation
learning, we propose SMG (Separated Models for Generalization), a novel approach that exploits image reconstruction for generalization. SMG introduces
two model branches to extract task-relevant and task-irrelevant representations
separately from visual observations via cooperatively reconstruction. Built upon
this architecture, we further emphasize the importance of task-relevant features for
generalization. Specifically, SMG incorporates two additional consistency losses
to guide the agent’s focus toward task-relevant areas across different scenarios,
thereby achieving free from overfitting. Extensive experiments in DMC demonstrate the SOTA performance of SMG in generalization, particularly excelling
in video-background settings. Evaluations on robotic manipulation tasks further
confirm the robustness of SMG in real-world applications. Source code is available
at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/SMG/.

1

Introduction

Visual-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated remarkable success across various
tasks, including Atari games [27, 11, 18], robotic manipulation [23, 9], and autonomous navigation
[26, 46]. However, deploying visual-based RL algorithms in real-world applications requires a
high generalization ability due to numerous factors that can induce distribution shifts between
training and deployment scenarios, such as variations in lighting conditions, camera viewpoints, and
backgrounds. Many visual-based RL algorithms are prone to overfitting to the training observations
[5, 34, 44], limiting their applicability in scenarios where fine-tuning with deployment observations
is not allowed.
To address the generalization gap in visual-based RL, current studies primarily focus on utilizing data
augmentation techniques [19, 20, 33] and exploring various auxiliary tasks [12, 3, 13]. However, few
of the previous works successfully incorporate reconstruction loss to this field, which is commonly
adopted in standard visual-based RL settings and has been demonstrated to improve the sample
efficiency of RL agents [41, 10, 7]. This is because reconstructing the entire input observation can
exacerbate the overfitting problem to task-irrelevant features and thus weaken the generalization ability.
Although several works also explored extracting task-relevant features from visual observations
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

