FindingEmo: An Image Dataset for Emotion
Recognition in the Wild

Laurent Mertens1,2

Elahe’ Yargholi3

Jan Van den Stock4

Hans Op de Beeck3
Joost Vennekens1,2,5

1

KU Leuven, De Nayer Campus, Dept. of Computer Science
J.-P. De Nayerlaan 5, 2860 Sint-Katelijne-Waver, Belgium
2
Leuven.AI - KU Leuven Institute for AI, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
3
Department of Brain and Cognition, Leuven Brain Institute,
Faculty of Psychology & Educational Sciences
KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
4
Neuropsychiatry, Leuven Brain Institute
KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
5
Flanders Make@KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
laurent.mertens@kuleuven.be

Abstract
We introduce FindingEmo, a new image dataset containing annotations for 25k
images, specifically tailored to Emotion Recognition. Contrary to existing datasets,
it focuses on complex scenes depicting multiple people in various naturalistic,
social settings, with images being annotated as a whole, thereby going beyond
the traditional focus on faces or single individuals. Annotated dimensions include
Valence, Arousal and Emotion label, with annotations gathered using Prolific.
Together with the annotations, we release the list of URLs pointing to the original
images, as well as all associated source code.

1

Introduction

Computer vision has known an explosive growth over the past decade, most notably due to the
resurgence of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). For many vision-related tasks, computer models
have been developed that match or exceed human performance, e.g., image classification [1] and
mammographic screening [2]. Many of these tasks, however, are relatively simplistic in nature:
detecting the absence or presence of an object, or naming an item in the picture. When it comes
to more complex tasks, Artificial Intelligence (AI) still has a long way to go. Affective Computing
[3], a field that combines disciplines such as computer science and cognitive psychology to study
human affect and attempt to make computers understand emotions, is an example of such a complex
problem. This paper is concerned in particular with the subtask of Emotion Recognition, i.e., building
AI models to recognize the emotional state of individuals, in our case from pictures. This problem
has many applications, ranging from psychology [4], to human-computer interaction [5], to robotics
[6]. It is, however, complex: in the field of psychology, the concept of what an emotion is exactly
is heavily debated [7, 8, 9], resulting in several ways of describing emotions, either by means of
continuous dimensions [10, 11], or by means of labels, with different competing label classification
schemes existing [12, 13, 14].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

