Training Compute-Optimal Protein Language Models

Xingyi Cheng1∗ , Bo Chen2∗† , Pan Li1 , Jing Gong1 , Jie Tang2 , Le Song1,3
1
BioMap Research 2 Tsinghua University 3 MBZUAI
derrickzy@gmail.com,cb21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Code: https://github.com/cxysteven/ScalingProteinLM

Abstract
We explore optimally training protein language models, an area of significant
interest in biological research where guidance on best practices is limited. Most
models are trained with extensive compute resources until performance gains
plateau, focusing primarily on increasing model sizes rather than optimizing the
efficient compute frontier that balances performance and compute budgets. Our
investigation is grounded in a massive dataset consisting of 939 million protein
sequences. We trained over 300 models ranging from 3.5 million to 10.7 billion
parameters on 5 to 200 billion unique tokens, to investigate the relations between
model sizes, training token numbers, and objectives. First, we observed the effect of
diminishing returns for the Causal Language Model (CLM) and that of overfitting
for the Masked Language Model (MLM) when repeating the commonly used
Uniref database. To address this, we included metagenomic protein sequences in
the training set to increase the diversity and avoid the plateau or overfitting effects.
Second, we obtained the scaling laws of CLM and MLM on Transformer, tailored
to the specific characteristics of protein sequence data. Third, we observe a transfer
scaling phenomenon from CLM to MLM, further demonstrating the effectiveness
of transfer through scaling behaviors based on estimated Effectively Transferred
Tokens. Finally, to validate our scaling laws, we compare the large-scale versions
of ESM-2 and PROGEN2 on downstream tasks, encompassing evaluations of
protein generation as well as structure- and function-related tasks, all within less or
equivalent pre-training compute budgets.

1

Introduction

Scaling up transformer-based models has become a guiding principle for enhancing model performance across broad domains, particularly in Natural Language Processing (NLP) [4, 12, 24, 64, 79]
and Computer Vision (CV) [20, 67, 89]. In recent years, large transformer-based Protein Language
Models (PLMs) such as PROGEN familiy [51, 61], ESM familiy [68, 47] and xTrimoPGLM [14]
have also been developed, which leads to significant improvements over model performance on
complex downstream tasks [27, 45]. Current language models utilize two main training objectives to
encode sequence information: the BERT-like [23] Masked Language Model (MLM) and the GPT-like
Causal Language Model (CLM) [11], each applied either separately or in a unified fashion. A
common understanding is that bi-directionally MLM excels in sample efficiency and shows enhanced
performance in downstream task fine-tuning. This is particularly true in tasks that emphasize understanding complex patterns, making it a prevalent learning objective in modeling protein sequences*
* XC and BC contributed equally.
†

Work done while interned at BioMap.

*Appendix D also compared CLM and MLM on the protein contact prediction task through fine-tuning and

freeze probing, with MLM demonstrating superior performance relative to CLM.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

