On the Scalability of GNNs for Molecular Graphs

Maciej Sypetkowski∗
Valence Labs, Montreal
maciej@valencelabs.com

Farimah Poursafaei
Valence Labs, Montreal
McGill University, Mila Quebec

Frederik Wenkel∗
Valence Labs, Montreal
Université de Montréal, Mila Quebec
frederik@valencelabs.com
Nia Dickson
NVIDIA Corporation

Philip Fradkin
Valence Labs, Montreal
University of Toronto, Vector Institute

Karush Suri
Valence Labs, Montreal

Dominique Beaini
Valence Labs, Montreal
Université de Montréal, Mila Quebec

Abstract
Scaling deep learning models has been at the heart of recent revolutions in language
modelling and image generation. Practitioners have observed a strong relationship
between model size, dataset size, and performance. However, structure-based
architectures such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are yet to show the benefits
of scale mainly due to lower efficiency of sparse operations, large data requirements,
and lack of clarity about the effectiveness of various architectures. We address this
drawback of GNNs by studying their scaling behavior. Specifically, we analyze
message-passing networks, graph Transformers, and hybrid architectures on the
largest public collection of 2D molecular graphs for supervised pretraining. For the
first time, we observe that GNNs benefit tremendously from the increasing scale
of depth, width, number of molecules and associated labels. A major factor is the
diversity of the pretraining data that comprises thousands of labels per molecule
derived from bio-assays, quantum simulations, transcriptomics and phenomic
imaging. We further demonstrate strong finetuning scaling behavior on 38 highly
competitive downstream tasks, outclassing previous large models. This gives rise
to MolGPS, a new graph foundation model that allows to navigate the chemical
space, outperforming the previous state-of-the-arts on 26 out the 38 downstream
tasks. We hope that our work paves the way for an era where foundational GNNs
drive pharmaceutical drug discovery.

1

Introduction

Recent successes in language modelling [47, 65] and image generation [52, 55] are driven by
the increasing amount of training data and computational resources. Across different domains,
practitioners have observed a direct relationship between model parameter count and performance on
novel tasks [27]. In natural language processing, large Transformer-based models have demonstrated
impressive generalization capabilities utilizing a causal autoregressive objective [51]. In the meantime,
image generation has undergone incredible leaps with large models trained utilizing pixel level
unsupervised objectives.
∗

Equal contribution; order determined alphabetically.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

