Mitigating Covariate Shift in Behavioral Cloning
via Robust Stationary Distribution Correction

Seokin Seo1 , Byung-Jun Lee2,3 , Jongmin Lee4 , HyeongJoo Hwang1 ,
Hongseok Yang1 , Kee-Eung Kim1
1

KAIST, 2 Korea University, 3 Gauss Labs Inc., 4 UC Berkeley

siseo@ai.kaist.ac.kr, byungjunlee@korea.ac.kr,
jongmin.lee@berkeley.edu, hjhwang@ai.kaist.ac.kr,
hongseok.yang@kaist.ac.kr, kekim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We consider offline imitation learning (IL), which aims to train an agent to imitate
from the dataset of expert demonstrations without online interaction with the
environment. Behavioral Cloning (BC) has been a simple yet effective approach to
offline IL, but it is also well-known to be vulnerable to the covariate shift resulting
from the mismatch between the state distributions induced by the learned policy and
the expert policy. Moreover, as often occurs in practice, when expert datasets are
collected from an arbitrary state distribution instead of a stationary one, these shifts
become more pronounced, potentially leading to substantial failures in existing
IL methods. Specifically, we focus on covariate shift resulting from arbitrary
state data distributions, such as biased data collection or incomplete trajectories,
rather than shifts induced by changes in dynamics or noisy expert actions. In this
paper, to mitigate the effect of the covariate shifts in BC, we propose DrilDICE,
which utilizes a distributionally robust BC objective by employing a stationary
distribution correction ratio estimation (DICE) to derive a feasible solution. We
evaluate the effectiveness of our method through an extensive set of experiments
covering diverse covariate shift scenarios. The results demonstrate the efficacy of
the proposed approach in improving the robustness against the shifts, outperforming
existing offline IL methods in such scenarios.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) aims to recover the expert behavior from the dataset of demonstrations. The
standard IL setting assumes that the imitator is allowed to interact with the environment during
training, as it provides valuable information regarding state transitions. On the other hand, offline IL
requires training without online interactions, reflecting scenarios where the interactions are either
infeasible or expensive [5, 12, 13, 28]. Despite recent works on offline IL that explore scenarios
involving supplementary datasets, such as suboptimal demonstrations [5, 14], behavioral cloning
(BC) remains a compelling option in practice since BC does not require additional datasets except
expert demonstrations. However, the efficacy of BC can be compromised when the imitator policy’s
behavior deviates from the underlying data distribution. This phenomenon, known as covariate
shift, presents a significant challenge, often resulting in performance degradation. Consequently, a
substantial body of IL research is dedicated to addressing this covariate shift issue [5, 24].
A common approach for solving offline IL problems is to use the so-called distribution matching
objective or its variant [11, 12, 14, 15, 31], which aims to align the stationary distribution of the
imitator policy with that of the expert policy. However, this approach crucially assumes that expert
demonstrations are sampled from the stationary distribution of the expert policy. In practice, this
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

