RG-SAN: Rule-Guided Spatial Awareness Network for
End-to-End 3D Referring Expression Segmentation

Changli Wu1,2∗ , Qi Chen1∗ , Jiayi Ji1,4∗ , Haowei Wang3 , Yiwei Ma1 ,
You Huang1 , Gen Luo1 , Hao Fei4 , Xiaoshuai Sun1 , Rongrong Ji1†
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute, Shanghai, P.R. China
3
Youtu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai, P.R. China
4
National University of Singapore

Abstract
3D Referring Expression Segmentation (3D-RES) aims to segment 3D objects
by correlating referring expressions with point clouds. However, traditional approaches frequently encounter issues like over-segmentation or mis-segmentation,
due to insufficient emphasis on spatial information of instances. In this paper,
we introduce a Rule-Guided Spatial Awareness Network (RG-SAN) by utilizing
solely the spatial information of the target instance for supervision. This approach
enables the network to accurately depict the spatial relationships among all entities
described in the text, thus enhancing the reasoning capabilities. The RG-SAN
consists of the Text-driven Localization Module (TLM) and the Rule-guided Weak
Supervision (RWS) strategy. The TLM initially locates all mentioned instances and
iteratively refines their positional information. The RWS strategy, acknowledging
that only target objects have supervised positional information, employs dependency tree rules to precisely guide the core instance’s positioning. Extensive testing
on the ScanRefer benchmark has shown that RG-SAN not only establishes new
performance benchmarks, with an mIoU increase of 5.1 points, but also exhibits
significant improvements in robustness when processing descriptions with spatial
ambiguity. All codes are available at https://github.com/sosppxo/RG-SAN.

1

Introduction

3D Referring Expression Segmentation (3D-RES) is an emerging field that segments 3D objects in
point cloud scenes based on given referring expressions [24]. Gaining significant attention for its
applications in autonomous robotics, human-machine interaction, and self-driving systems, 3D-RES
demands a deeper understanding than 3D Referring Expression Comprehension (3D-REC) [5, 73, 1,
75, 70], which focuses only on locating the referring objects via bounding boxes. 3D-RES, on the
other hand, requires identifying instances and providing precise 3D masks.
Early 3D-RES approaches [24, 73] adopted a two-stage paradigm, starting with an independent textagnostic segmentation model for generating instance proposals, followed by linking these proposals
with textual descriptions. This paradigm, separating segmentation and matching, proved suboptimal
in performance and efficiency. Recent explorations have shifted towards an end-to-end paradigm. For
instance, 3D-STMN [65] achieved efficient segmentation by directly matching superpoints with text,
while 3DRefTR [43] integrated 3D-RES and 3D-REC into a unified framework using a multi-task
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

