Towards the Transferability of Rewards Recovered
via Regularized Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Andreas Schlaginhaufen
SYCAMORE, EPFL
andreas.schlaginhaufen@epfl.ch

Maryam Kamgarpour
SYCAMORE, EPFL
maryam.kamgarpour@epfl.ch

Abstract
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) aims to infer a reward from expert
demonstrations, motivated by the idea that the reward, rather than the policy, is
the most succinct and transferable description of a task [Ng et al., 2000]. However,
the reward corresponding to an optimal policy is not unique, making it unclear
if an IRL-learned reward is transferable to new transition laws in the sense that
its optimal policy aligns with the optimal policy corresponding to the expert’s true
reward. Past work has addressed this problem only under the assumption of full
access to the expert’s policy, guaranteeing transferability when learning from two
experts with the same reward but different transition laws that satisfy a specific
rank condition [Rolland et al., 2022]. In this work, we show that the conditions
developed under full access to the expert’s policy cannot guarantee transferability
in the more practical scenario where we have access only to demonstrations of the
expert. Instead of a binary rank condition, we propose principal angles as a more
refined measure of similarity and dissimilarity between transition laws. Based on
this, we then establish two key results: 1) a sufficient condition for transferability
to any transition laws when learning from at least two experts with sufficiently
different transition laws, and 2) a sufficient condition for transferability to local
changes in the transition law when learning from a single expert. Furthermore, we
also provide a probably approximately correct (PAC) algorithm and an end-to-end
analysis for learning transferable rewards from demonstrations of multiple experts.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in various domains such as robotics
[Hwangbo et al., 2019], autonomous driving [Lu et al., 2023], or fine-tuning of large language
models [Stiennon et al., 2020]. Despite these advances, a key challenge lies in designing appropriate
reward functions that reflect the desired outcomes and align with human values. Misaligned rewards
can lead to suboptimal behaviors [Ngo et al., 2022], undermining the potential benefits of RL in
practical scenarios. Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), also known as inverse optimal control
[Kalman, 1964] or structural estimation [Rust, 1994], addresses this problem by inferring a reward
from demonstrations of an expert acting optimally in a Markov decision process (MDP).
Compared to behavioral cloning [Pomerleau, 1988], which directly fits a policy to the expert’s
demonstrations, IRL is believed to provide a more transferable description of the expert’s task [Ng
et al., 2000], as recovering the expert’s underlying reward would enable us to train a policy in a new
environment with different dynamics. However, it is also known that the reward corresponding to
some optimal policy is not unique [Ng et al., 1999], making it difficult to recover the expert’s true
underlying reward. This raises the question: Is a reward recovered via IRL transferable to a new
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

