R ECURSIVE I NTROSPECTION: Teaching
Language Model Agents How to Self-Improve

Yuxiao Qu1 , Tianjun Zhang2 , Naman Garg3 , Aviral Kumar1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 UC Berkeley, 3 MultiOn
Website: https://cohenqu.github.io/rise.github.io/, Email: yuxiaoq@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
A central piece in enabling intelligent agentic behavior in foundation models
is to make them capable of introspecting upon their behavior, reasoning, and
correcting their mistakes as more computation or interaction is available. Even
the strongest proprietary large language models (LLMs) do not quite exhibit the
ability of continually improving their responses sequentially. In this paper, we
develop RISE: Recursive IntroSpEction, an approach for fine-tuning LLMs to
introduce this capability, despite prior work hypothesizing that this capability
may not be possible to attain. Our approach prescribes an iterative fine-tuning
procedure, which attempts to teach the model how to alter its response after having
executed previously unsuccessful attempts to solve a hard test-time problem, with
optionally additional environment feedback. RISE poses fine-tuning for a singleturn prompt as solving a multi-turn Markov decision process (MDP), where the
initial state is the prompt. Inspired by principles in online imitation and offline
reinforcement learning, we propose strategies for multi-turn data collection and
training so as to imbue an LLM with the capability to recursively detect and correct
its previous mistakes in subsequent iterations. Our experiments show that RISE
enables Llama2, Llama3, and Mistral models to improve themselves with more
turns on reasoning tasks, outperforming several single-turn strategies given an equal
amount of inference-time computation. We also find that RISE scales well, often
attaining larger benefits with more capable models, without disrupting one-turn
abilities as a result of expressing more complex distributions.

1

Introduction

A promising approach to utilizing foundation models, and in particular, large language models
(LLMs), is to treat them as general-purpose decision-making machines, or ”agents”. To be successful,
an LLM agent must not just provide plausible completions for input text, but must exhibit interactive,
goal-directed behavior to accomplish a given task. Put in abstract terms, this requires mastering
two qualities: (a) producing responses that explicitly seek information about the task, followed by
(b) making decisions and improving them by ”thinking” and verifying them at inference time. For
instance, to succeed in using a new coding library, an effective LLM agent should first synthesize
programs, then try the most promising subset against a compiler, use the resulting feedback to
improve the program, and repeat the process for multiple turns. Having the ability to successfully
improve a response in sequential attempts is equivalent to a form of ”self-improvement”, at test time.
To enable test-time self-improvement, recent approaches attempt to repurpose the knowledge stored in
pre-trained models via few-shot prompting [8, 17, 33, 54, 69]. Although prompt tuning in conjunction
with feedback is effective in eliciting improved responses from capable models, it fails to produce
models that can succeed in complex tasks by correcting their own mistakes, such as those that require
logical reasoning [23, 59]. In many of these problems, models contain the “knowledge” needed to
answer a challenging prompt, but fail to elicit that knowledge even when asked to sequentially correct
their mistakes. Fine-tuning the LLM on domain-specific question-answering data [7, 31, 41] can help,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

