Estimating Ego-Body Pose from Doubly Sparse
Egocentric Video Data

Seunggeun Chi†
Purdue University
chi65@purdue.edu
Hengbo Ma†
Honda Research Institute USA
hengbo.academia@gmail.com

Pin-Hao Huang∗ , Enna Sachdeva∗
Honda Research Institute USA
{pin-hao_huang, enna_sachdeva}@honda-ri.com
Karthik Ramani
Purdue University
ramani@purdue.edu

Kwonjoon Lee
Honda Research Institute USA
kwonjoon_lee@honda-ri.com

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating the body movements of a camera wearer
from egocentric videos. Current methods for ego-body pose estimation rely on
temporally dense sensor data, such as IMU measurements from spatially sparse
body parts like the head and hands. However, we propose that even temporally
sparse observations, such as hand poses captured intermittently from egocentric
videos during natural or periodic hand movements, can effectively constrain overall
body motion. Naively applying diffusion models to generate full-body pose from
head pose and sparse hand pose leads to suboptimal results. To overcome this, we
develop a two-stage approach that decomposes the problem into temporal completion and spatial completion. First, our method employs masked autoencoders to
impute hand trajectories by leveraging the spatiotemporal correlations between the
head pose sequence and intermittent hand poses, providing uncertainty estimates.
Subsequently, we employ conditional diffusion models to generate plausible fullbody motions based on these temporally dense trajectories of the head and hands,
guided by the uncertainty estimates from the imputation. The effectiveness of our
method was rigorously tested and validated through comprehensive experiments
conducted on various HMD setup with AMASS and Ego-Exo4D datasets. Project
page: https://sgchi.github.io/dsposer/

1

Introduction

The evolution of augmented reality (AR) devices such as the Apple Vision Pro, Meta Quest 3,
Microsoft HoloLens 2, and etc. has dramatically reshaped interactive technologies. These headmounted displays (HMDs) feature inertial measurement units (IMUs) and video capture capabilities,
offering a unique egocentric perspective. However, their limited visibility of the user’s body parts
poses a significant challenge for accurate egocentric body pose estimation—a key element for
immersive AR experiences.
Previous approaches have tackled this problem by spatially reconstructing the entire body from
spatially sparse data. For instance, EgoEgo [16] first estimates head poses using SLAM on the
egocentric video, then generates body poses from these estimated head positions. Other methods,
such as AvatarPoser [13] and BoDiffusion [3], primarily depend on temporally dense tracking signal
from spatially sparse body parts, notably the head and hands. This dependency on specific hardware
∗
†

co-second authors
work done at Honda Research Institute USA.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

