Key-Grid: Unsupervised 3D Keypoints Detection using
Grid Heatmap Features

Chengkai Hou1,3 , Zhengrong Xue1,2 , Bingyang Zhou4 , Jinghan Ke5 ,
Lin Shao6 , Huazhe Xu1,2,7
1
Shanghai Qizhi Institute 2 Tsinghua University 3 Peking University
4
The University of Hong Kong 5 University of Science and Technology of China
6
National Unversity of Singapore 7 Shanghai AI Lab

Abstract
Detecting 3D keypoints with semantic consistency is widely used in many scenarios such as pose estimation, shape registration and robotics. Currently, most
unsupervised 3D keypoint detection methods focus on rigid-body objects. However,
when faced with deformable objects, the keypoints they identify do not preserve
semantic consistency well. In this paper, we introduce an innovative unsupervised
keypoint detector Key-Grid for both rigid-body and deformable objects, which
is an autoencoder framework. The encoder predicts keypoints and the decoder
utilizes the generated keypoints to reconstruct the objects. Unlike previous work,
we leverage the identified keypoint information to form a 3D grid feature heatmap
called grid heatmap, which is used in the decoder section. Grid heatmap is a novel
concept that represents the latent variables for grid points sampled uniformly in the
3D cubic space, where these variables are the shortest distance between the grid
points and the “skeleton” connected by keypoint pairs. Meanwhile, we incorporate
the information from each layer of the encoder into the decoder model. We conduct
an extensive evaluation of Key-Grid on a list of benchmark datasets. Key-Grid
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the semantic consistency and position
accuracy of keypoints. Moreover, we demonstrate the robustness of Key-Grid to
noise and downsampling. In addition, we achieve SE-(3) invariance of keypoints
though generalizing Key-Grid to a SE(3)-invariant backbone.

1

Introduction

Representing objects through a set of 3D keypoints is one of the most popular and intuitive approaches
to compress and comprehend 3D objects [31; 26]. Effectively exhibiting their utility, 3D keypoints
have contributed to the success of a number of downstream tasks, including pose estimation, shape
registration, object tracking in computer vision [15; 27; 4; 8; 44; 28; 34], as well as various kinds of
robotic manipulation tasks [40; 1; 16].
To make the detected keypoints as capable and accessible as possible, the research community is now
concentrating on the unsupervised learning of semantically consistent keypoints on 3D point clouds.
The implication of semantic consistency is typically twofold: the keypoints should be located at the
semantically salient parts of the objects; they are also desired to be aligned within the same category
even under large shape variations among diverse 3D object instances. To achieve these objectives,
previous works [26; 9; 41; 3; 46] often adopt autoencoder frameworks to facilitate self-supervised
training, where the encoders serving as the keypoint predictor are backbone networks [21; 22]
generalizable to the shape variation, and the decoders reconstruct the input shape conditioned on the
predicted keypoints. Since neural networks are in general better at compression than generation [20],
0

Corresponding to: Houchengkai1998@outlook.com, huazhe_xu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

