Data Acquisition via Experimental Design
for Data Markets
Charles Lu∗
MIT

Baihe Huang
UC Berkeley

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy
USC, UC Berkeley

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley

Praneeth Vepakomma
MBZUAI, MIT

Ramesh Raskar
MIT

Abstract
The acquisition of training data is crucial for machine learning applications. Data
markets can increase the supply of data, particularly in data-scarce domains such
as healthcare, by incentivizing potential data providers to join the market. A major
challenge for a data buyer in such a market is choosing the most valuable data points
from a data seller. Unlike prior work in data valuation, which assumes centralized
data access, we propose a federated approach to the data acquisition problem that
is inspired by linear experimental design. Our proposed data acquisition method
achieves lower prediction error without requiring labeled validation data and can
be optimized in a fast and federated procedure. The key insight of our work is that
a method that directly estimates the benefit of acquiring data for test set prediction
is particularly compatible with a decentralized market setting.

1

Introduction

While massive training datasets enable major machine learning breakthroughs, they remain largely
inaccessible outside of large companies, motivating mechanisms for broader data access. A related
point is that many data owners have become resistant to having their data collected indiscriminately
without their consent or without their participation in the fruits of predictive modeling, resulting in
legal challenges against prominent AI companies [16, 33]. These trends motivate the study of data
marketplaces, which aim to incentivize data sharing between sellers, that provide access to data, and
buyers, that pay compensation for data access [11, 1, 54].
For practical data acquisition scenarios, a data buyer has a specific goal in mind and, in particular,
wants training data to predict their test data in a specified context. Accessing different datapoints may
require varying prices associated with each datapoint, which may reflect heterogeneous cost, quality,
or privacy levels for each datapoint [44, 40].
For example, consider a hospital that wants to make a prediction for a specific patient’s X-ray. The
hospital can submit this X-ray as an unlabeled test query to the marketplace, along with a budget to
access relevant training data. The marketplace selects useful training data to build a model for this
specific prediction task, sharing only the final prediction rather than the raw data to protect privacy.
This process can be repeated for each new patient query (see Figure 1). However, not all X-ray
images will be equally relevant. Thus, we want to select only those seller datapoints that are most
useful for answering the buyer’s query and fit the buyer’s budget.
This goal of data acquisition has motivated the development of many data-valuation techniques
(e.g., [23, 29, 38, 60, 52, 39, 57, 46, 30]). However, we argue that current data valuation techniques
∗

luchar@mit.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

