Sparse Bayesian Generative Modeling
for Compressive Sensing

Benedikt Böck, Sadaf Syed, Wolfgang Utschick
TUM School of Computation, Information and Technology
Technical University of Munich
{benedikt.boeck,sadaf.syed,utschick}@tum.de

Abstract
This work addresses the fundamental linear inverse problem in compressive sensing
(CS) by introducing a new type of regularizing generative prior. Our proposed
method utilizes ideas from classical dictionary-based CS and, in particular, sparse
Bayesian learning (SBL), to integrate a strong regularization towards sparse solutions. At the same time, by leveraging the notion of conditional Gaussianity, it also
incorporates the adaptability from generative models to training data. However,
unlike most state-of-the-art generative models, it is able to learn from a few compressed and noisy data samples and requires no optimization algorithm for solving
the inverse problem. Additionally, similar to Dirichlet prior networks, our model
parameterizes a conjugate prior enabling its application for uncertainty quantification. We support our approach theoretically through the concept of variational
inference and validate it empirically using different types of compressible signals.

1

Introduction

Research in CS has shown that it is possible to reduce the number of measurements far below the one
determined by the Nyquist sampling theorem while still being able to extract the information-carrying
signal from the acquired observations. The fundamental problem in CS is an ill-posed linear inverse
problem, i.e., the goal is to recover the signal x∗ ∈ RN of interest from an under-determined set of
measurements y ∈ RM with M ≪ N , related by
y = Ax∗ + n,
∗

(1)

where x is compressed by the measurement matrix A and potentially corrupted by additive noise
n ∼ N (0, σn2 I). Since the under-determined observation y does not carry enough information alone
to faithfully reconstruct x∗ , additional prior (or model) knowledge about x∗ is required to make
the inverse problem “well-posed”. Classical CS algorithms such as Lasso regression or orthogonal
matching pursuit (OMP) address this problem by incorporating the model knowledge that x∗ is
sparse or compressible with respect to some dictionary [1]. Nowadays, modern deep learning (DL)based approaches such as unfolding algorithms, generative model-based CS and un-trained neural
networks (NNs) expand the possibilities by learning prior knowledge from a training set or designing
the network architecture to be biased towards a certain class of signals [2–7]. These approaches
typically require a (potentially large) training set of ground-truth data samples, or their architecture is
specifically biased towards natural images. However, in many applications, ground-truth training
data might not be easily accessible. In, e.g., electron microscopy, the amount of electron dose has to
be restricted to not induce damage on the probe resulting in low-contrast noisy data samples [8]. The
sensors in wearable electrocardiography (ECG) monitoring devices generally provide noisy signals
with artifacts [9], which limits the ability to learn from patient-specific data in real-world settings.
Another example is the wireless 5G communication standard, where mobile users receive compressed
and noisy so-called channel observations on a frequent basis (cf. [10]) while acquiring ground-truth
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

