Understanding the Differences in Foundation Models:
Attention, State Space Models, and Recurrent Neural
Networks
Jerome Sieber∗
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
jsieber@ethz.ch

Carmen Amo Alonso∗
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
camoalonso@ethz.ch

Melanie N. Zeilinger
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
mzeilinger@ethz.ch

Alexandre Didier
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
adidier@ethz.ch

Antonio Orvieto
ELLIS Institute Tübingen
Tübingen, Germany
antonio@tue.ellis.eu

Abstract
Softmax attention is the principle backbone of foundation models for various artificial intelligence applications, yet its quadratic complexity in sequence length can
limit its inference throughput in long-context settings. To address this challenge,
alternative architectures such as linear attention, State Space Models (SSMs), and
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been considered as more efficient alternatives. While connections between these approaches exist, such models are
commonly developed in isolation and there is a lack of theoretical understanding of
the shared principles underpinning these architectures and their subtle differences,
greatly influencing performance and scalability. In this paper, we introduce the
Dynamical Systems Framework (DSF), which allows a principled investigation
of all these architectures in a common representation. Our framework facilitates
rigorous comparisons, providing new insights on the distinctive characteristics of
each model class. For instance, we compare linear attention and selective SSMs,
detailing their differences and conditions under which both are equivalent. We
also provide principled comparisons between softmax attention and other model
classes, discussing the theoretical conditions under which softmax attention can be
approximated. Additionally, we substantiate these new insights with empirical validations and mathematical arguments. This shows the DSF’s potential to guide the
systematic development of future more efficient and scalable foundation models.

1

Introduction

Foundation models serve as the backbone for a wide range of tasks across Artificial Intelligence
due to their ability to learn complex interactions in large datasets [1]. In recent years, the attention
mechanism [2] has been the dominating token-mixing strategy in foundation models. However,
its major computational bottleneck, i.e., the quadratic complexity with context length, has posed a
challenge to scaling and deploying these models beyond moderate context lengths [3]. In order to
mitigate these issues, attention-free architectures have been proposed: prominent examples of these
are the novel State Space Models (SSMs) [4–8], as well as recent efforts to enhance Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) [9–12]. Although these models show great promise in boosting efficiency, efforts
∗

These authors contributed equally; ordered randomly.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

