MambaLRP: Explaining Selective State Space
Sequence Models

Farnoush Rezaei Jafari1,2∗

Grégoire Montavon3,2,1

Klaus-Robert Müller1,2,4,5,6

Oliver Eberle1,2∗
1

2

Machine Learning Group, Technische Universität Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, 10587 Berlin, Germany
3
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Freie Universität Berlin,
Arnimallee 14, 14195 Berlin, Germany
4
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, South Korea
5
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Stuhlsatzenhausweg 4, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
6
Google DeepMind, Berlin, Germany

Abstract
Recent sequence modeling approaches using selective state space sequence models,
referred to as Mamba models, have seen a surge of interest. These models allow
efficient processing of long sequences in linear time and are rapidly being adopted in
a wide range of applications such as language modeling, demonstrating promising
performance. To foster their reliable use in real-world scenarios, it is crucial
to augment their transparency. Our work bridges this critical gap by bringing
explainability, particularly Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP), to the Mamba
architecture. Guided by the axiom of relevance conservation, we identify specific
components in the Mamba architecture, which cause unfaithful explanations. To
remedy this issue, we propose MambaLRP, a novel algorithm within the LRP
framework, which ensures a more stable and reliable relevance propagation through
these components. Our proposed method is theoretically sound and excels in
achieving state-of-the-art explanation performance across a diverse range of models
and datasets. Moreover, MambaLRP facilitates a deeper inspection of Mamba
architectures, uncovering various biases and evaluating their significance. It also
enables the analysis of previous speculations regarding the long-range capabilities
of Mamba models.

1

Introduction

Sequence modeling has demonstrated its effectiveness and versatility across a wide variety of tasks
and data types, including text, time series, genomics, audio, and computer vision [24, 82, 32, 9, 26].
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in a new class of sequence modeling architectures, known
as structured state space sequence models (SSMs) [35, 66, 33]. This is due to their ability to process
sequences in linear time, as opposed to quadratic time required by the more established Transformer
architectures [69]. The recent Mamba architecture, a prominent and widely adopted instance of
state space models, has demonstrated competitive predictive performance on a variety of sequence
modeling tasks across domains and applications [33, 43, 83, 78, 70], while scaling linearly with
sequence length.
*

Correspondence to: rezaeijafari@campus.tu-berlin.de, oliver.eberle@tu-berlin.de

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

