MedSafetyBench: Evaluating and Improving the
Medical Safety of Large Language Models

Tessa Han
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
than@g.harvard.edu

Aounon Kumar
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
aokumar@hbs.edu

Chirag Agarwal
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA
chiragagarwal@virginia.edu

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
hlakkaraju@hbs.edu

Abstract
As large language models (LLMs) develop increasingly sophisticated capabilities and find applications in medical settings, it becomes important to assess
their medical safety due to their far-reaching implications for personal and public
health, patient safety, and human rights. However, there is little to no understanding of the notion of medical safety in the context of LLMs, let alone how
to evaluate and improve it. To address this gap, we first define the notion of
medical safety in LLMs based on the Principles of Medical Ethics set forth by
the American Medical Association. We then leverage this understanding to introduce MedSafetyBench, the first benchmark dataset designed to measure the
medical safety of LLMs. We demonstrate the utility of MedSafetyBench by using it to evaluate and improve the medical safety of LLMs. Our results show
that publicly-available medical LLMs do not meet standards of medical safety
and that fine-tuning them using MedSafetyBench improves their medical safety
while preserving their medical performance. By introducing this new benchmark
dataset, our work enables a systematic study of the state of medical safety in
LLMs and motivates future work in this area, paving the way to mitigate the safety
risks of LLMs in medicine. The benchmark dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/AI4LIFE-GROUP/med-safety-bench.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have been progressing at a breathtaking speed and have been shown
to be proficient in a variety of medical tasks such as answering medical questions [1], interpreting
histopathology data [2], and conversing with patients [3]. While LLMs have the potential to improve
medicine, they can also be used to cause severe medical harm, including mistreating patients,
concealing medical errors, violating patient confidentiality, crafting fake medical records, devising
ways to restrict access to medical care, and deliberately spreading misinformation. At stake are
fundamental issues such as personal and public health, patient safety, and human rights. Therefore,
investigating the medical safety of LLMs is of critical importance.
In light of the aforementioned risks, various organizations and communities have emphasized the
medical safety of LLMs. For instance, the European Union’s Artificial Intelligence (AI) Act, which
"aims to protect fundamental rights, democracy, the rule of law, and environmental sustainability
from high-risk AI"[4], classifies AI systems "that could put the life and health of citizens at risk" as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

