CleanDiffuser: An Easy-to-use Modularized Library
for Diffusion Models in Decision Making

Zibin Dong1∗, Yifu Yuan1∗, Jianye Hao1†, Fei Ni1 , Yi Ma2 , Pengyi Li1 , Yan Zheng1
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{zibindong,yuanyf,jianye.hao,fei_ni,lipengyi,yanzheng@tju.edu.cn}
2
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, mayi@sxu.edu.cn

Abstract
Leveraging the powerful generative capability of diffusion models (DMs) to build
decision-making agents has achieved extensive success. However, there is still a
demand for an easy-to-use and modularized open-source library that offers customized and efficient development for DM-based decision-making algorithms. In
this work, we introduce CleanDiffuser, the first DM library specifically designed
for decision-making algorithms. By revisiting the roles of DMs in the decisionmaking domain, we identify a set of essential sub-modules that constitute the
core of CleanDiffuser, allowing for the implementation of various DM algorithms with simple and flexible building blocks. To demonstrate the reliability and
flexibility of CleanDiffuser, we conduct comprehensive evaluations of various
DM algorithms implemented with CleanDiffuser across an extensive range of
tasks. The analytical experiments provide a wealth of valuable design choices and
insights, reveal opportunities and challenges, and lay a solid groundwork for future
research. CleanDiffuser will provide long-term support to the decision-making
community, enhancing reproducibility and fostering the development of more robust solutions. The code and documentation of CleanDiffuser are open-sourced
on the project website.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) [26, 33, 61] have emerged as a leading class of generative models, outperforming previous methods [9, 34] in both high-quality generation and training stability [73]. Their
remarkable capabilities in complex distribution modeling and conditional generation demonstrate
promising performance across various domains [71, 59, 42, 33], inspiring a series of works to apply
DMs in decision-making tasks [65, 67, 13, 64, 23, 4]. Open-source libraries can quantify progress
in this emerging field, enable researchers to better understand and compare algorithm details, and
promote the application of DMs. Currently, several high-quality libraries are available for DMs,
such as Diffusers [63] and Stable Diffusion [58], which provide exemplary designs for the computer
vision and multimedia. However, support for decision-making is lacking. Although some pioneering
research [4, 30, 1] on DMs for decision-making has provided excellent codes, their algorithm-specific
mechanisms and tightly coupled system architectures are not conducive to customized development.
In this paper, we present an easy-to-use modularized DM library tailored for decision-making named
CleanDiffuser, which comprehensively integrates different types of DM algorithmic branches. We
revisit various roles of DMs in decision-making tasks and identify core sub-modules: Diffusion
Models, Network Architectures and Guided Sampling Methods. CleanDiffuser also
∗
†

These authors contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding authors: Jianye Hao (jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

