Convolutional Differentiable Logic Gate Networks

Felix Petersen
Stanford University
InftyLabs Research

Hilde Kuehne
Tuebingen AI Center
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

mail@felix-petersen.de

h.kuehne@uni-tuebingen.de

Christian Borgelt
University of Salzburg

Julian Welzel
InftyLabs Research

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University

christian@borgelt.net

welzel@inftylabs.com

ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
With the increasing inference cost of machine learning models, there is a growing
interest in models with fast and efficient inference. Recently, an approach for
learning logic gate networks directly via a differentiable relaxation was proposed.
Logic gate networks are faster than conventional neural network approaches because their inference only requires logic gate operators such as NAND, OR, and
XOR, which are the underlying building blocks of current hardware and can be
efficiently executed. We build on this idea, extending it by deep logic gate tree
convolutions, logical OR pooling, and residual initializations. This allows scaling
logic gate networks up by over one order of magnitude and utilizing the paradigm
of convolution. On CIFAR-10, we achieve an accuracy of 86.29% using only 61
million logic gates, which improves over the SOTA while being 29× smaller.

1

Introduction
90%

80%
Accuracy

Deep learning has led to a variety of new
applications, opportunities, and use-cases
in machine vision. However, this advancement has come with considerable computational and energy costs for inference [1].
Therefore, an array of methods has been
developed for efficient deep learning inference [2]–[7]. These include binary weight
neural networks (BNNs) [2], a set of methods for quantizing neural network weights
down to binary representations (and sometimes also binary activations); quantized
low-precision neural networks [3], a superset of BNNs and sparse neural networks [4]–[6], a set of approaches for pruning neural networks and increasing sparsity.
These methods have been successfully utilized for efficient vision model inference.

Ours
Hirtzlin et al.
Zhao et al.
Guo et al.
Hubara et al.
Ghasemzadeh et al.
Rastegari et al.
Wang et al.
Umuroglu et al.
Benamira et al.
Petersen et al.

70%

60% 6
10

107

108 # Gates 109

1010

1011

Figure 1: Gate count vs. accuracy plot on the CIFAR-10 data
set. Our models (⋆) are substantially above the Pareto-front
of the SOTA baselines. Gate counts are proportional to chip
area. Our models are more efficient than the SOTA by factors
of ≥ 29×. Note that the x-axis (gate count) is on a log-scale.

The state-of-the-art (SOTA) method for small architectures, deep differentiable logic gate networks
(LGNs) [7], approaches efficient machine learning inference from a different direction: learning an
LGN (i.e., a network of logic gates such as NAND and XOR) directly via a differentiable relaxation.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

