Protein-Nucleic Acid Complex Modeling with Frame
Averaging Transformer

Tinglin Huang1∗

Zhenqiao Song2

Rex Ying1

Wengong Jin3,4

1

3

Yale University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University,
Northeastern University, Khoury College of Computer Sciences
4
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Abstract
Nucleic acid-based drugs like aptamers have recently demonstrated great therapeutic potential. However, experimental platforms for aptamer screening are costly,
and the scarcity of labeled data presents a challenge for supervised methods to
learn protein-aptamer binding. To this end, we develop an unsupervised learning
approach based on the predicted pairwise contact map between a protein and a nucleic acid and demonstrate its effectiveness in protein-aptamer binding prediction.
Our model is based on FAFormer2 , a novel equivariant transformer architecture that
seamlessly integrates frame averaging (FA) within each transformer block. This
integration allows our model to infuse geometric information into node features
while preserving the spatial semantics of coordinates, leading to greater expressive
power than standard FA models. Our results show that FAFormer outperforms
existing equivariant models in contact map prediction across three protein complex
datasets, with over 10% relative improvement. Moreover, we curate five real-world
protein-aptamer interaction datasets and show that the contact map predicted by
FAFormer serves as a strong binding indicator for aptamer screening.

1

Introduction

Nucleic acids have recently shown significant potential in drug discovery, as shown by the success of
mRNA vaccines [26, 61, 60] and aptamers [15, 32, 14, 41]. Aptamers are single-stranded nucleic acids
capable of binding to a wide range of molecules, including previously undruggable targets [20, 11].
Currently, aptamer discovery is driven by high-throughput screening, which is time-consuming and
labor-intensive. While machine learning can potentially accelerate this process, the limited availability
of labeled data presents a significant challenge in ML-guided aptamer discovery [57, 44, 16]. Given
this challenge, our goal is to build an unsupervised protein-nucleic acid interaction predictor for
large-scale aptamer screening.
Motivated by previous work on unsupervised protein-protein interaction prediction [34], we focus on
predicting the contact map between proteins and nucleic acids at the residue/nucleotide level. The
main idea is that a predicted contact map offers insights into the likelihood of a protein forming a
complex with an aptamer, thereby encoding the binding affinity between them. Concretely, as shown
in Figure 1(a), our model is trained to identify specific contact pairs between residues and nucleotides
when forming a complex. The maximum contact probability across all pairs is then interpreted as the
binding affinity, which is subsequently used for aptamer screening.
∗
2

Correspondence to tinglin.huang@yale.edu
https://github.com/Graph-and-Geometric-Learning/Frame-Averaging-Transformer

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

