Reprogramming Pretrained Target-Specific Diffusion
Models for Dual-Target Drug Design

Xiangxin Zhou1,2
Xingang Peng5

Jiaqi Guan3

Yijia Zhang4

Liang Wang1,2

Jianzhu Ma4,6,∗

1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
4
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
6
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Dual-target therapeutic strategies have become a compelling approach and attracted
significant attention due to various benefits, such as their potential in overcoming
drug resistance in cancer therapy. Considering the tremendous success that deep
generative models have achieved in structure-based drug design in recent years, we
formulate dual-target drug design as a generative task and curate a novel dataset
of potential target pairs based on synergistic drug combinations. We propose to
design dual-target drugs with diffusion models that are trained on single-target
protein-ligand complex pairs. Specifically, we align two pockets in 3D space with
protein-ligand binding priors and build two complex graphs with shared ligand
nodes for SE(3)-equivariant composed message passing, based on which we derive
a composed drift in both 3D and categorical probability space in the generative
process. Our algorithm can well transfer the knowledge gained in single-target
pretraining to dual-target scenarios in a zero-shot manner. We also repurpose
linker design methods as strong baselines for this task. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method compared with various baselines.

1

Introduction

A promising paradigm of rational drug design is structure-based drug design (SBDD) [1], which uses
computational chemistry tools in which the 3D structure of a protein target is used as the basis to
identify or design new chemical entities. The foundation of structure-based drug design has been
grounded in the lock-and-key hypothesis, positing that an optimal ligand molecule should possess
a structure that is complementary to the target site. Recently, dual-target drug design, which aims
to design “one key” for “two locks”, has attracted significant attention. Precisely, dual-target drug
design [4] is a strategy in pharmaceutical research that aims to design single ligand molecules capable
of interacting with two different biological targets simultaneously. A dual-target drug can potentially
lower the odds of resistance developing [62] and effectively manage the disease which involve
complex biological pathways with multiple proteins [49]. Recent years have witnessed a noticeable
∗

Correspondence to: Jianzhu Ma <majianzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

