A-FedPD: Aligning Dual-Drift is All Federated
Primal-Dual Learning Needs

Yan Sun
The University of Sydney
ysun9899@uni.sydney.edu.au

Li Shen∗
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
mathshenli@gmail.com

Dacheng Tao†
Nanyang Technological University
dacheng.tao@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
As a popular paradigm for juggling data privacy and collaborative training, federated learning (FL) is flourishing to distributively process the large scale of
heterogeneous datasets on edged clients. Due to bandwidth limitations and security
considerations, it ingeniously splits the original problem into multiple subproblems
to be solved in parallel, which empowers primal dual solutions to great application values in FL. In this paper, we review the recent development of classical
federated primal dual methods and point out a serious common defect of such
methods in non-convex scenarios, which we say is a “dual drift” caused by dual
hysteresis of those longstanding inactive clients under partial participation training.
To further address this problem, we propose a novel Aligned Federated Primal
Dual (A-FedPD) method, which constructs virtual dual updates to align global
consensus and local dual variables for those protracted unparticipated local clients.
Meanwhile, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the optimization and generalization efficiency for the A-FedPD method on smooth non-convex objectives, which
confirms its high efficiency and practicality. Extensive experiments are conducted
on several classical FL setups to validate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1

Introduction

Since McMahan et al. [2017] propose the federated average paradigm, FL has gradually become a
promising approach to handle both data privacy and efficient training on the large scale of edged
clients, which employs a global server to coordinate local clients jointly train one model. Due to
privacy protection, it disables the direct information interaction across clients. All clients must
only communicate with an accredited global server. This paradigm creates an unavoidable issue,
that is, bandwidth congestion caused by mass communication. Therefore, FL advocates training
models on local clients as much as possible within the maximum bandwidth utilization range and
only communicates with a part of clients per communication round in a partial participation manner.
Under this particular training mechanism, FL needs to effectively split the original problem into
several subproblems for local clients to solve in parallel. Because of this harsh limitation, general
algorithms are often less efficient in practice. But the primal dual methods just match this training
pattern, which empowers it with huge application potential and great values in FL.
∗
†

Li Shen is the corresponding author.
Dr Tao’s research is partially supported by NTU RSR and Start Up Grants.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

