FAST: A Dual-tier Few-Shot Learning Paradigm for
Whole Slide Image Classification

Kexue Fu16∗ , Xiaoyuan Luo23∗ , Linhao Qu23∗ , Shuo Wang23 , Ying Xiong4 ,
Ilias Maglogiannis5 , Longxiang Gao16‡ , Manning Wang23‡
1
Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of Education,
Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan),
Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan, China
2
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University
3
Shanghai Key Lab of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
4
5
Fudan University
University of Piraeus
6
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computing Power Internet and Service Computing,
Shandong Fundamental Research Center for Computer Science, Jinan, China
{fukx, gaolx}@sdas.org, {19111010030, mnwang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
The expensive fine-grained annotation and data scarcity have become the primary
obstacles for the widespread adoption of deep learning-based Whole Slide Images
(WSI) classification algorithms in clinical practice. Unlike few-shot learning
methods in natural images that can leverage the labels of each image, existing
few-shot WSI classification methods only utilize a small number of fine-grained
labels or weakly supervised slide labels for training in order to avoid expensive
fine-grained annotation. They lack sufficient mining of available WSIs, severely
limiting WSI classification performance. To address the above issues, we propose
a novel and efficient dual-tier few-shot learning paradigm for WSI classification,
named FAST. FAST consists of a dual-level annotation strategy and a dual-branch
classification framework. Firstly, to avoid expensive fine-grained annotation, we
collect a very small number of WSIs at the slide level, and annotate an extremely
small number of patches. Then, to fully mining the available WSIs, we use all
the patches and available patch labels to build a cache branch, which utilizes the
labeled patches to learn the labels of unlabeled patches and through knowledge
retrieval for patch classification. In addition to the cache branch, we also construct
a prior branch that includes learnable prompt vectors, using the text encoder of
visual-language models for patch classification. Finally, we integrate the results
from both branches to achieve WSI classification. Extensive experiments on
binary and multi-class datasets demonstrate that our proposed method significantly
surpasses existing few-shot classification methods and approaches the accuracy of
fully supervised methods with only 0.22% annotation costs. All codes and models
will be publicly available on https://github.com/fukexue/FAST.

1

Introduction

With the advent of Whole Slide Images (WSI) scanners, automated diagnosis based on WSIs has
become a critical problem in the field of computational pathology [53, 48, 26]. Due to the huge
size of WSI [51], deep learning-based methods typically divide it into a series of patches and apply
classification models to each patch individually. Fully supervised methods annotate each patch
*Equal Contribution

‡Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

