RClicks: Realistic Click Simulation
for Benchmarking Interactive Segmentation
Anton Antonov1∗ # Andrey Moskalenko1, 2∗ Denis Shepelev1∗
Alexander Krapukhin1 Konstantin Soshin1 Anton Konushin1, 2 Vlad Shakhuro1, 2†
1
AIRI, Moscow, Russia 2 Lomonosov Moscow State University
{lastname}@airi.net
∗
Equal contribution † Project leader # Corresponding author
§ https://github.com/emb-ai/rclicks

Abstract
The emergence of Segment Anything (SAM) sparked research interest in the field
of interactive segmentation, especially in the context of image editing tasks and
speeding up data annotation. Unlike common semantic segmentation, interactive segmentation methods allow users to directly influence their output through
prompts (e.g. clicks). However, click patterns in real-world interactive segmentation scenarios remain largely unexplored. Most methods rely on the assumption
that users would click in the center of the largest erroneous area. Nevertheless,
recent studies show that this is not always the case. Thus, methods may have poor
performance in real-world deployment despite high metrics in a baseline benchmark. To accurately simulate real-user clicks, we conducted a large crowdsourcing
study of click patterns in an interactive segmentation scenario and collected 475K
real-user clicks. Drawing on ideas from saliency tasks, we develop a clickability
model that enables sampling clicks, which closely resemble actual user inputs.
Using our model and dataset, we propose RClicks benchmark for a comprehensive
comparison of existing interactive segmentation methods on realistic clicks. Specifically, we evaluate not only the average quality of methods, but also the robustness
w.r.t. click patterns. According to our benchmark, in real-world usage interactive
segmentation models may perform worse than it has been reported in the baseline
benchmark, and most of the methods are not robust. We believe that RClicks is a
significant step towards creating interactive segmentation methods that provide the
best user experience in real-world cases.

1

Introduction

The task of interactive segmentation involves providing additional hints or prompts to the method,
allowing it to produce more precise annotations compared to conventional semantic segmentation.
The most famous member of interactive segmentation methods is Segment Anything (SAM) [1, 2].
Nowadays, SAM-like methods are applied in various fields, including the thin object segmentation [3,
4], medical segmentation [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10], 3D segmentation [11, 12], tracking [13] and video [2].
Typically, interactions occur in several rounds, where in each round the user corrects the prediction
errors of the previous one. Evaluation of such methods requires user inputs. However, collecting
many real-user inputs for multiple rounds is impractical since such a dataset needs to be rebuilt for
every method and every interaction round due to its iterative nature. Thus, researchers often resort to
a simple strategy to simulate user inputs. According to this strategy, a single click for each interaction
round is generated as follows: (1) select the largest error region in the previous interaction round, and
(2) click in the furthest point from the boundaries of this region (center point). Hereinafter, we refer
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

