Enhancing Feature Diversity Boosts Channel-Adaptive
Vision Transformers
Bryan A. Plummer
Boston University
Boston, MA
bplum@bu.edu

Chau Pham
Boston University
Boston, MA
chaupham@bu.edu

Abstract
Multi-Channel Imaging (MCI) contains an array of challenges for encoding useful
feature representations not present in traditional images. For example, images from
two different satellites may both contain RGB channels, but the remaining channels
can be different for each imaging source. Thus, MCI models must support a variety
of channel configurations at test time. Recent work has extended traditional visual
encoders for MCI, such as Vision Transformers (ViT), by supplementing pixel information with an encoding representing the channel configuration. However, these
methods treat each channel equally, i.e., they do not consider the unique properties
of each channel type, which can result in needless and potentially harmful redundancies in the learned features. For example, if RGB channels are always present,
the other channels can focus on extracting information that cannot be captured by
the RGB channels. To this end, we propose DiChaViT, which aims to enhance
the diversity in the learned features of MCI-ViT models. This is achieved through
a novel channel sampling strategy that encourages the selection of more distinct
channel sets for training. Additionally, we employ regularization and initialization
techniques to increase the likelihood that new information is learned from each
channel. Many of our improvements are architecture agnostic and can be incorporated into new architectures as they are developed. Experiments on both satellite
and cell microscopy datasets, CHAMMI, JUMP-CP, and So2Sat, report DiChaViT
yields a 1.5 − 5.0% gain over the state-of-the-art. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/chaudatascience/diverse_channel_vit.

1

Introduction

Most visual encoders assume they are provided with a fixed-channel representation as input (e.g.,
they take RGB inputs as input at train and test time) [1–10]. However, many applications find a
variety of imaging techniques beyond just the traditional RGB channels beneficial. For example,
satellite images or sensors onboard a robot often contain an infrared camera in addition to traditional
RGB, and microscopes can also host a significant range of potential imaging channels [11–17]. Thus,
Multi-Channel Imaging (MCI) models aim to learn good feature representations from datasets with
heterogeneous channels, where the number and type of channels can vary for each input at test time.
Training a model that is robust to changes in channel configurations can save time and resources as
only a single model needs to be learned, while also helping to prevent overfitting in small datasets
through transfer learning [14]. Prior work proposed methods to make MCI models robust to missing
channels by randomly masking them during training [18]. As shown in Fig. 1(a) left and (b) top,
this results in redundancies being learned across channels during training rather than encoding new
information. A consequence of this repetition is a model focused on learning strong cues that are easy
to identify, making it less capable of learning unique and/or challenging cues within each channel.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

