FastSurvival: Hidden Computational Blessings in
Training Cox Proportional Hazards Models

Jiachang Liu1 , Rui Zhang2 , Cynthia Rudin2
1
Cornell University, 2 Duke University
jiachang.liu@cornell.edu, r.zhang@duke.edu, cynthia@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Survival analysis is an important research topic with applications in healthcare,
business, and manufacturing. One essential tool in this area is the Cox proportional
hazards (CPH) model, which is widely used for its interpretability, flexibility, and
predictive performance. However, for modern data science challenges such as high
dimensionality (both n and p) and high feature correlations, current algorithms to
train the CPH model have drawbacks, preventing us from using the CPH model at
its full potential. The root cause is that the current algorithms, based on the Newton
method, have trouble converging due to vanishing second order derivatives when
outside the local region of the minimizer. To circumvent this problem, we propose
new optimization methods by constructing and minimizing surrogate functions that
exploit hidden mathematical structures of the CPH model. Our new methods are
easy to implement and ensure monotonic loss decrease and global convergence.
Empirically, we verify the computational efficiency of our methods. As a direct
application, we show how our optimization methods can be used to solve the
cardinality-constrained CPH problem, producing very sparse high-quality models
that were not previously practical to construct. We list several extensions that our
breakthrough enables, including optimization opportunities, theoretical questions
on CPH’s mathematical structure, as well as other CPH-related applications.

1

Introduction

Survival analysis, which studies time-to-event data, is an important research topic with a wide range
of real-world applications. In medicine, survival analysis has been employed to model when a patient
will die [44, 38, 10]. In business, it is useful for attrition prediction [30] (when an employees resigns)
and churn prediction [31] (when a customer unsubscribes), and in manufacturing, it is used to predict
when a physical system breaks down [42, 50]. A fundamental tool in analyzing such data is the Cox
proportional hazards (CPH) model [8], a linear model under the assumption that features have a
multiplicative effect on the risk of failure/event. Simple yet powerful, the CPH model has enjoyed
great popularity due to its modeling flexibility (when coupled with additive models [27, 28, 67, 11, 1]).
Moreover, in contrast to black box models, it is both interpretable and accurate.
However, with the advent of larger sample and feature spaces and more complex data, new challenges
arise in using the CPH model to its full potential. Ideally, practitioners want to produce CPH models
repeatedly, with feature engineering and preprocessing between iterations. Additionally, they want
the CPH model to identify important variables [64, 14], even in presence of highly correlated features.
However, current optimization methods for training the CPH model do not meet these needs. Current
algorithms [62, 22, 23, 54], based on the generic Newton’s method, are computationally intensive.
More importantly, due to both vanishing second-order derivatives [53] and the use of approximation
strategies that trade precision for efficiency, existing optimization methods have trouble converging,
either with the loss blowing up or the algorithm converging very slowly when we require the precision
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

