DeBaRA: Denoising-Based 3D Room Arrangement
Generation
Léopold Maillard1,2
1

Nicolas Sereyjol-Garros∗ Tom Durand2

LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris

{maillard,maks}@lix.polytechnique.fr

2

Maks Ovsjanikov1

Dassault Systèmes

{firsname.lastname}@3ds.com

Abstract
Generating realistic and diverse layouts of furnished indoor 3D scenes unlocks
multiple interactive applications impacting a wide range of industries. The inherent
complexity of object interactions, the limited amount of available data and the
requirement to fulfill spatial constraints all make generative modeling for 3D scene
synthesis and arrangement challenging. Current methods address these challenges
autoregressively or by using off-the-shelf diffusion objectives by simultaneously
predicting all attributes without 3D reasoning considerations. In this paper, we
introduce DeBaRA, a score-based model specifically tailored for precise, controllable and flexible arrangement generation in a bounded environment. We argue
that the most critical component of a scene synthesis system is to accurately establish the size and position of various objects within a restricted area. Based on
this insight, we propose a lightweight conditional score-based model designed
with 3D spatial awareness at its core. We demonstrate that by focusing on spatial
attributes of objects, a single trained DeBaRA model can be leveraged at test time
to perform several downstream applications such as scene synthesis, completion
and re-arrangement. Further, we introduce a novel Self Score Evaluation procedure
so it can be optimally employed alongside external LLM models. We evaluate our
approach through extensive experiments and demonstrate significant improvement
upon state-of-the-art approaches in a range of scenarios.

1

Introduction

Systems capable of generating realistic environments comprising multiple interacting objects would
impact several industries including video games, robotics, augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR)
and computer-aided interior design. As a result and in tandem with the growing availability of
synthetic datasets of indoor layouts [10, 44, 42, 63, 7], which can be populated with high-quality
3D assets [11, 63, 1], data-driven approaches for automatically generating and arranging 3D scenes
have been actively investigated by the computer vision community. Notably, the ongoing success of
deep generative models for controllable content creation in the text and image domains has recently
been extended to scene synthesis, allowing users to craft realistic indoor environments from a set of
multimodal constraints [38, 37, 55, 54, 27, 35].
Challenges associated with 3D indoor scene generation are numerous as the intricate nature of multiobject interactions is difficult to capture and model precisely. Items should be placed, potentially
resized and oriented relative to one another, in a way that is both plausible and aligned with subjective and context-dependent priors such as style, as well as ergonomic and functional preferences.
Additionally, objects should fit within a bounded, restricted area, and a subtle mismatch can break
the perceived validity of the synthesized environment (e.g., overlapping, floating or out-of-bounds
∗

Work done during internship at Dassault Systèmes.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

