Credal Learning Theory

Michele Caprio
Department of Computer Science
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
michele.caprio@manchester.ac.uk
Maryam Sultana
Eleni G. Elia
Fabio Cuzzolin
School of Engineering Computing & Mathematics
Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK
{msultana,eelia,fabio.cuzzolin}@brookes.ac.uk

Abstract
Statistical learning theory is the foundation of machine learning, providing theoretical bounds for the risk of models learned from a (single) training set, assumed to issue from an unknown probability distribution. In actual deployment,
however, the data distribution may (and often does) vary, causing domain adaptation/generalization issues. In this paper we lay the foundations for a ‘credal’ theory
of learning, using convex sets of probabilities (credal sets) to model the variability
in the data-generating distribution. Such credal sets, we argue, may be inferred
from a finite sample of training sets. Bounds are derived for the case of finite
hypotheses spaces (both assuming realizability or not), as well as infinite model
spaces, which directly generalize classical results.

1

Introduction

Statistical Learning Theory (SLT) considers the problem of predicting an output y ∈ Y given
an input x ∈ X using a mapping h : X → Y, h ∈ H, called model or hypothesis, belonging
to a model (or hypotheses) space H. The loss function l : (X × Y) × H → R measures the
.
error committed by a model h ∈ H. For instance, the zero-one loss is defined as l((x, y), h) =
I[y ̸= h(x)], where I denotes the indicator function, and assigns a zero value to correct predictions
and one to incorrect ones. Input-output pairs are usually assumed to be generated i.i.d. by a
probability distribution P ⋆ , which is unknown.
The expected risk – or expected loss – of the model h,
R
.
L(h) ≡ LP ⋆ (h) = EP ⋆ [l((x, y), h)] = X ×Y l((x, y), h)P ⋆ (d(x, y)), measures the expected value
– taken with respect to P ⋆ – of loss l. The expected risk minimizer h⋆ ∈ arg minh∈H L(h) is any
hypothesis in the given model space H that minimizes the expected risk. Given a training dataset
D = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )} whose elements are drawn independently and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) from probability distribution P ⋆ , the empirical risk of a hypothesis h is the average loss over
D. The empirical risk minimizer (ERM), i.e., the model ĥ one actually learns from the training set D,
is the one minimizing the empirical risk [44]. Statistical Learning Theory seeks upper bounds for
the expected risk L(ĥ) of the ERM ĥ, and in turn, for the excess risk, that is, the difference between
L(ĥ) and the lowest expected risk L(h⋆ ). This endeavor is pursued under increasingly more relaxed
assumptions about the nature of the hypotheses space H. Two common such assumptions are that
either the model space is finite, or that there exists a model with zero expected risk (realizability).
In real-world situations, however, the data distribution may (and often does) vary, causing issues of
domain adaptation (DA) [11] or generalization (DG) [59]. Domain adaptation and generalization
are interrelated yet distinctive concepts in machine learning, as they both deal with the challenges of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

