Dual Prototype Evolving for Test-Time
Generalization of Vision-Language Models

Ce Zhang Simon Stepputtis Katia Sycara Yaqi Xie
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
{cezhang, sstepput, katia, yaqix}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Test-time adaptation, which enables models to generalize to diverse data with
unlabeled test samples, holds significant value in real-world scenarios. Recently,
researchers have applied this setting to advanced pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs), developing approaches such as test-time prompt tuning to further
extend their practical applicability. However, these methods typically focus solely
on adapting VLMs from a single modality and fail to accumulate task-specific
knowledge as more samples are processed. To address this, we introduce Dual
Prototype Evolving (DPE), a novel test-time adaptation approach for VLMs that effectively accumulates task-specific knowledge from multi-modalities. Specifically,
we create and evolve two sets of prototypes—textual and visual—to progressively
capture more accurate multi-modal representations for target classes during test
time. Moreover, to promote consistent multi-modal representations, we introduce and optimize learnable residuals for each test sample to align the prototypes
from both modalities. Extensive experimental results on 15 benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our proposed DPE consistently outperforms previous state-of-theart methods while also exhibiting competitive computational efficiency. Code is
available at https://github.com/zhangce01/DPE-CLIP.

1

Introduction

Although deep learning models have achieved great success in various machine learning tasks [48, 49],
they often suffer from significant performance degradation due to distribution shifts between the
training data from the source domain and the testing data from the target domain [34, 64, 15]. To
address this challenge, a number of works [22, 58, 65] adopt the transductive learning principle,
assuming access to both labeled source data and unlabeled target data—a scenario known as the
domain adaptation setting. However, this setting contrasts with most practical scenarios, where we
only have access to a well-trained model and cannot re-access the source data due to privacy or data
retention policies. In response, researchers have proposed test-time adaptation, which leverages only
the unlabeled target data stream to adapt the model to out-of-distribution domains [79, 60, 62].
Recently, large-scale vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP [46] and ALIGN [25], have
garnered increasing attention in the research community. These models, pre-trained on massive webscale datasets, exhibit remarkable zero-shot capabilities and open-world visual understanding [46,
70, 74, 32]. While the large-scale pre-trained (source) datasets like LAION-5B [50] are accessible,
it is impractical for individuals to train on them due to their immense size. Consequently, adapting
VLMs to downstream tasks via efficient fine-tuning with limited annotated samples from the target
domain has become a focus of recent research [85, 84, 81, 71]. However, although these methods
have proven effective, they pose a significant limitation: they assume the availability of annotated
samples from the target domain, which is often not practical in real-world scenarios. This constraint
hinders the broader deployment of VLMs in diverse and dynamic environments [20, 21, 47, 75].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

