Sketchy Moment Matching: Toward Fast and Provable
Data Selection for Finetuning

Yijun Dong∗
Courant Institute
New York University
yd1319@nyu.edu

Hoang Phan∗
Center of Data Science
New York University
hvp2011@nyu.edu

Xiang Pan∗
Center of Data Science
New York University
xiangpan@nyu.edu

Qi Lei
Center of Data Science
New York University
ql518@nyu.edu

Abstract
We revisit data selection in a modern context of finetuning from a fundamental
perspective. Extending the classical wisdom of variance minimization in low
dimensions to high-dimensional finetuning, our generalization analysis unveils
the importance of additionally reducing bias induced by low-rank approximation.
Inspired by the variance-bias tradeoff in high dimensions from the theory, we introduce Sketchy Moment Matching (SkMM), a scalable data selection scheme with
two stages. (i) First, the bias is controlled using gradient sketching that explores
the finetuning parameter space for an informative low-dimensional subspace S;
(ii) then the variance is reduced over S via moment matching between the original
and selected datasets. Theoretically, we show that gradient sketching is fast and
provably accurate: selecting n samples by reducing variance over S preserves the
fast-rate generalization O(dim(S)/n), independent of the parameter dimension.
Empirically, we concretize the variance-bias balance via synthetic experiments and
demonstrate the effectiveness of SkMM for finetuning in real vision tasks.

1

Introduction

As the data volume and training cost explode with the unprecedented model performance, the longstanding problem of data selection [1, 2] is getting increasing attention in the modern context of deep
learning from various perspectives, including data pruning [3, 4], coreset selection [1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9],
and data filtering [2, 10, 11, 12, 13]. A common goal shared by these perspectives is to train a model
from scratch on less data to learn high-quality representations and achieve competitive generalization.
However, empirical observations also suggest the limitation of data removal during pre-training: a
seemingly inevitable tradeoff between less computation and higher-quality representations [14, 15].
While existing works on data selection have a dominating focus on the training-from-scratch setting,
the sensitivity of representation learning to data and the growing availability of powerful pre-trained
models calls for attention to a less studied [16] but equally important problem: data selection for
finetuning.
In the simplest finetuning setting—linear probing on low-dimensional representations2 , data selection
falls in the classical frames of coreset selection for linear regression [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24] and optimal experimental design [25, 26, 27, 28, 29] where the generalization gap can be
∗

Equal contribution.
Throughout this work, we refer to “low-dimension” as the setting where the number of finetuning parameters
r is smaller than the selected downstream sample size n, while “high-dimension” refers to the opposite, r > n.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

