Continuous Contrastive Learning for Long-Tailed
Semi-Supervised Recognition

Zi-Hao Zhou1,2∗ Siyuan Fang1,2∗ Zi-Jing Zhou3 Tong Wei1,2†
Yuanyu Wan4 Min-Ling Zhang1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China
3
Xiaomi Inc., China
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
{zhouzih, syfang, weit}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Long-tailed semi-supervised learning poses a significant challenge in training models with limited labeled data exhibiting a long-tailed label distribution. Current
state-of-the-art LTSSL approaches heavily rely on high-quality pseudo-labels for
large-scale unlabeled data. However, these methods often neglect the impact of representations learned by the neural network and struggle with real-world unlabeled
data, which typically follows a different distribution than labeled data. This paper
introduces a novel probabilistic framework that unifies various recent proposals
in long-tail learning. Our framework derives the class-balanced contrastive loss
through Gaussian kernel density estimation. We introduce a continuous contrastive
learning method, CCL, extending our framework to unlabeled data using reliable
and smoothed pseudo-labels. By progressively estimating the underlying label
distribution and optimizing its alignment with model predictions, we tackle the diverse distribution of unlabeled data in real-world scenarios. Extensive experiments
across multiple datasets with varying unlabeled data distributions demonstrate
that CCL consistently outperforms prior state-of-the-art methods, achieving over
4% improvement on the ImageNet-127 dataset. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/zhouzihao11/CCL.

1

Introduction

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) serves as a powerful approach for improving the generalization
capabilities of deep neural networks (DNNs) in scenarios where labeled data is scarce [37, 59, 6, 23].
The core concept of SSL methods typically involves assigning pseudo-labels to unlabeled data and
utilizing those with high confidence for model training [56, 71, 10]. However, many existing SSL
algorithms presuppose a balanced label distribution across both labeled and unlabeled datasets. In
real-world applications, datasets commonly exhibit a long-tailed label distribution [65, 28, 50, 67, 55],
leading to biased pseudo-label generation favoring majority classes [40, 3, 68, 24]. This discrepancy
challenges the effectiveness of SSL algorithms in addressing real-world datasets.
The exploration of long-tailed semi-supervised learning (LTSSL) has gained momentum to address the
challenge of biased pseudo-label distribution arising from class imbalance in labeled and unlabeled
data. Recent LTSSL approaches propose compensating for the learning of minority classes by
∗
†

equal contribution
corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

