emg2qwerty: A Large Dataset with Baselines for
Touch Typing using Surface Electromyography
Viswanath Sivakumar∗, Jeffrey Seely†, Alan Du, Sean R Bittner, Adam Berenzweig,
Anuoluwapo Bolarinwa, Alexandre Gramfort, and Michael I Mandel
Reality Labs, Meta

Abstract
Surface electromyography (sEMG) non-invasively measures signals generated by
muscle activity with sufficient sensitivity to detect individual spinal neurons and
richness to identify dozens of gestures and their nuances. Wearable wrist-based
sEMG sensors have the potential to offer low friction, subtle, information rich,
always available human-computer inputs. To this end, we introduce emg2qwerty,
a large-scale dataset of non-invasive electromyographic signals recorded at the
wrists while touch typing on a QWERTY keyboard, together with ground-truth
annotations and reproducible baselines1 . With 1,135 sessions spanning 108 users
and 346 hours of recording, this is the largest such public dataset to date. These
data demonstrate non-trivial, but well defined hierarchical relationships both in
terms of the generative process, from neurons to muscles and muscle combinations,
as well as in terms of domain shift across users and user sessions. Applying
standard modeling techniques from the closely related field of Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR), we show strong baseline performance on predicting keypresses using sEMG signals alone. We believe the richness of this task and dataset
will facilitate progress in several problems of interest to both the machine learning
and neuroscientific communities.

1

Introduction

The bandwidth of communication from computers to humans has increased dramatically over the past
several decades through the development of high fidelity visual and auditory displays (Koch et al.,
2006). The bandwidth from humans to computers, however, has remained severely rate-limited by
keyboard, mouse, and touch screen control for the vast majority of applications—modalities that have
changed little in the past 50 years. One potential approach to increasing human-to-machine bandwidth
is to leverage the high dimensional output of the human peripheral motor system. Ultimately, it is
this system that evolved to perform all human actions on the world.
Non-invasive interfaces based on electromyographic signals (sEMG) capturing neuro-muscular
activity at the wrist (CTRL-labs at Reality Labs et al., 2024), have the potential to achieve higher
bandwidth human-to-machine input by measuring not just the activity of individual muscles, but also
the individual motor neurons that control them. With each muscle composed of hundreds of motor
units (Floeter and Karpati, 2010; Enoka and Pearson, 2013), this expansion has the potential to unlock
orders of magnitude higher bandwidth if subjects can learn to control them individually (Harrison
and Mortensen, 1962; Basmajian, 1963). In comparison, methods that capture brain activity non∗

Correspondence: viswanath@meta.com
Work done while at Meta.
1
https://github.com/facebookresearch/emg2qwerty

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

