OSLO:
One-Shot Label-Only Membership Inference Attacks

Yuefeng Peng
University of Massachusetts Amherst
yuefengpeng@cs.umass.edu

Jaechul Roh
University of Massachusetts Amherst
jroh@umass.edu

Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts Amherst
smaji@cs.umass.edu

Amir Houmansadr
University of Massachusetts Amherst
amir@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
We introduce One-Shot Label-Only (OSLO) membership inference attacks (MIAs),
which accurately infer a given sample’s membership in a target model’s training
set with high precision using just a single query, where the target model only
returns the predicted hard label. This is in contrast to state-of-the-art label-only
attacks which require ∼ 6000 queries, yet get attack precisions lower than OSLO’s.
OSLO leverages transfer-based black-box adversarial attacks. The core idea is
that a member sample exhibits more resistance to adversarial perturbations than
a non-member. We compare OSLO against state-of-the-art label-only attacks
and demonstrate that, despite requiring only one query, our method significantly
outperforms previous attacks in terms of precision and true positive rate (TPR)
under the same false positive rates (FPR). For example, compared to previous
label-only MIAs, OSLO achieves a TPR that is at least 7× higher under a 1% FPR
and at least 22× higher under a 0.1% FPR on CIFAR100 for a ResNet18 model.
We evaluated multiple defense mechanisms against OSLO.

1

Introduction

Deep learning (DL) models are vulnerable to membership inference attacks (MIAs), where an attacker
attempts to infer whether a given sample is in the target model’s training set [1]. The success of
such MIAs may lead to severe individual privacy breaches as DL models are often trained on private
data such as medical records [2] and facial images [3]. Existing black-box MIAs fall into two
categories: score-based MIAs [1, 4, 5] and decision-based MIAs [6, 7], also known as label-only
MIAs. Score-based attacks assume access to the model’s output confidence scores, which can be
defended against if the model only outputs a label. In contrast, label-only attacks infer membership
based on the labels returned by the target model, which is a stricter and more practical threat model.
State-of-the-art label-only MIAs measure the sample’s robustness to adversarial perturbations, classifying samples with higher robustness as members. This robustness serves as a proxy for model
confidence, which is typically higher for training samples. These attacks utilize query-based blackbox adversarial attacks [8, 9] to determine the amount of necessary adversarial perturbation for
each sample. However, accurately estimating this requires a large number of queries to the model,
sometimes up to thousands for each sample. This approach is not only costly but also easily detectable
[10]. Furthermore, these attacks often lack precision and are unsuccessful in the low false positive
rate regime, as indicated by previous studies [11] and our evaluations. In summary, existing label-only
MIAs are not practical.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

