Synergistic Dual Spatial-aware Generation
of Image-to-Text and Text-to-Image

Yu Zhao1 , Hao Fei2∗, Xiangtai Li3 , Libo Qin4 , Jiayi Ji2 ,
Hongyuan Zhu5 , Meishan Zhang6 , Min Zhang6 , Jianguo Wei1
1
Tianjin University 2 National University of Singapore 3 Bytedance 4 Central South University
5 2
I R & CFAR, A*STAR† 6 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
zhaoyucs@tju.edu.cn, haofei37@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In the visual spatial understanding (VSU) area, spatial image-to-text (SI2T) and
spatial text-to-image (ST2I) are two fundamental tasks that appear in dual form.
Existing methods for standalone SI2T or ST2I perform imperfectly in spatial
understanding, due to the difficulty of 3D-wise spatial feature modeling. In this
work, we consider modeling the SI2T and ST2I together under a dual learning
framework. During the dual framework, we then propose to represent the 3D spatial
scene features with a novel 3D scene graph (3DSG) representation that can be
shared and beneficial to both tasks. Further, inspired by the intuition that the easier
3D→image and 3D→text processes also exist symmetrically in the ST2I and SI2T,
respectively, we propose the Spatial Dual Discrete Diffusion (SD3 ) framework,
which utilizes the intermediate features of the 3D→X processes to guide the hard
X→3D processes, such that the overall ST2I and SI2T will benefit each other.
On the visual spatial understanding dataset VSD, our system outperforms the
mainstream T2I and I2T methods significantly. Further in-depth analysis reveals
how our dual learning strategy advances.

1

Introduction

Within the research topic of Visual Spatial Understanding (VSU) [42, 95, 74, 89, 8], Spatial Imageto-Text (SI2T) [95, 97] and Spatial Text-to-Image (ST2I) [58] are two representative task forms
across vision and language. SI2T aims to understand the spatial relationships of objects in the
given image, while ST2I focuses on synthesizing a spatial-faithful image based on the input text
prompts. Existing efforts mostly formalize SI2T and ST2I tasks as the normal I2T and T2I problems,
applying general-purpose I2T and T2I models for task solutions [95, 97, 58, 37, 38]. Technically,
researchers widely employ the vision-language generative architecture [79, 10, 83] for I2T tasks,
i.e., generally, there is a visual encoder and a text decoder. For the T2I task, recent diffusion-based
methods have shown the extraordinary capability of image generation and achieved state-of-the-art
(SoTA) performance on a mount of benchmarks [4, 12, 28, 71, 63, 86, 18, 11].
Unfortunately, these strong-performing I2T and T2I methods, without the deliberate spatial semantics
modeling in VSU tasks, largely fall short in precisely extracting spatial features from visual or textual
inputs. For instance, in the SI2T process, the spatial relationships are often incorrectly recognized
due to layout overlap and perspective illusion [97]. This is due to the inherent characteristics of 2D
images, which, lacking 3D feature modeling, inevitably fail to understand spatial relations. On the
other hand, in ST2I, synthetic images frequently fail to match strictly the spatial constraints specified
∗
†

Corresponding Author: Hao Fei
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R) & Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

