DiffLight: A Partial Rewards Conditioned Diffusion
Model for Traffic Signal Control with Missing Data

Hanyang Chen1,2 , Yang Jiang1,2 , Shengnan Guo1,2∗, Xiaowei Mao1,2 ,
Youfang Lin1,2 , Huaiyu Wan1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
{hanyangchen, jiangyang, guoshn, maoxiaowei, yflin, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The application of reinforcement learning in traffic signal control (TSC) has been
extensively researched and yielded notable achievements. However, most existing works for TSC assume that traffic data from all surrounding intersections is
fully and continuously available through sensors. In real-world applications, this
assumption often fails due to sensor malfunctions or data loss, making TSC with
missing data a critical challenge. To meet the needs of practical applications,
we introduce DiffLight, a novel conditional diffusion model for TSC under datamissing scenarios in the offline setting. Specifically, we integrate two essential
sub-tasks, i.e., traffic data imputation and decision-making, by leveraging a Partial Rewards Conditioned Diffusion (PRCD) model to prevent missing rewards
from interfering with the learning process. Meanwhile, to effectively capture the
spatial-temporal dependencies among intersections, we design a Spatial-Temporal
transFormer (STFormer) architecture. In addition, we propose a Diffusion Communication Mechanism (DCM) to promote better communication and control
performance under data-missing scenarios. Extensive experiments on five datasets
with various data-missing scenarios demonstrate that DiffLight is an effective
controller to address TSC with missing data. The code of DiffLight is released at
https://github.com/lokol5579/DiffLight-release.

1

Introduction

With the acceleration of urbanization, the surge in the number of vehicles in cities has led to increasingly severe traffic congestion and pollution problems [1]. Intersections, where traffic congestion
often occurs, become a key in addressing these problems. To this end, solving the traffic signal control
(TSC) problem is crucial for reducing traffic congestion in intersections by controlling traffic lights.
Over the years, many approaches have been developed to tackle the TSC problem, which can be
categorized into conventional approaches and reinforcement learning-based (RL-based) approaches.
Conventional approaches, like Fixed-time [2], SCOOT [3] and SCATS [4], have been widely deployed
in different cities. However, these approaches struggle to adapt to the inherent stochasticity and
highly dynamic nature of real-time traffic conditions, limiting their effectiveness in responding to
dynamic traffic demands.
Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) is introduced into TSC to enable adaptive traffic signal control
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. Unlike conventional approaches, RL-based approaches for TSC deploy
a learnable agent at each intersection, allowing traffic signals to be adjusted dynamically based on
real-time traffic conditions. However, most existing RL-based approaches for TSC assume that traffic
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

