Compositional 3D-aware Video Generation
with LLM Director
Hanxin Zhu1∗, Tianyu He2 , Anni Tang3 , Junliang Guo2 , Zhibo Chen1 , Jiang Bian2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
hanxinzhu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tianyuhe@microsoft.com, memory97@sjtu.edu.cn,
junliangguo@microsoft.com, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn, jiang.bian@microsoft.com

Abstract
Significant progress has been made in text-to-video generation through the use of
powerful generative models and large-scale internet data. However, substantial
challenges remain in precisely controlling individual concepts within the generated
video, such as the motion and appearance of specific characters and the movement
of viewpoints. In this work, we propose a novel paradigm that generates each
concept in 3D representation separately and then composes them with priors from
Large Language Models (LLM) and 2D diffusion models. Specifically, given an
input textual prompt, our scheme consists of three stages: 1) We leverage LLM
as the director to first decompose the complex query into several sub-prompts
that indicate individual concepts within the video (e.g., scene, objects, motions),
then we let LLM to invoke pre-trained expert models to obtain corresponding
3D representations of concepts. 2) To compose these representations, we prompt
multi-modal LLM to produce coarse guidance on the scales and coordinates of
trajectories for the objects. 3) To make the generated frames adhere to natural image
distribution, we further leverage 2D diffusion priors and use Score Distillation
Sampling to refine the composition. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method can generate high-fidelity videos from text with diverse motion and flexible
control over each concept. Project page: https://aka.ms/c3v.

1

Introduction

Benefitting from large-scale data and the advancement of the generative models [1, 2], we have
witnessed plenty of astonishing results across a wide array of tasks. For example, Large Language
Models (LLM) pre-trained on web-scale datasets are revolutionizing machine learning with strong
capability of zero-shot learning [3] and planning [4, 5], while diffusion models [6] empower text-toimage generation with a rapid surge in both quality and diversity [7–9].
To harness the power of text-to-image models in text-to-video generation, modern solutions directly
view video as multiple images. In this way, tremendous efforts have been dedicated to extending
text-to-image models with temporal interaction to ensure consistency between frames [10–17].
However, generating visual content conditioned on the textual prompt alone struggles to express
multiple concepts with precise spatial layout control [18–20]. To tackle this issue, LVD [21] and
VideoDirectorGPT [22] propose to first generate spatiotemporal bounding boxes of each object based
on the textual prompt with LLM, and then condition the video generation on the obtained layouts.
Although rough layout control can be realized, they still have inherent limitations for detailed concept
control, e.g., the motion and appearance of specific characters, and the movement of viewpoints.
∗

This work is accomplished in Microsoft, April 2024.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

