Gradient Cuff: Detecting Jailbreak Attacks on
Large Language Models by Exploring
Refusal Loss Landscapes

Xiaomeng Hu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
xmhu23@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
New York, USA
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Tsung-Yi Ho
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
tyho@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Project Page: TrustSafeAI/GradientCuff-Jailbreak-Defense
Live Demo: pinyuchen/Gradient-Cuff

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are becoming a prominent generative AI tool,
where the user enters a query and the LLM generates an answer. To reduce
harm and misuse, efforts have been made to align these LLMs to human values
using advanced training techniques such as Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback (RLHF). However, recent studies have highlighted the vulnerability
of LLMs to adversarial jailbreak attempts aiming at subverting the embedded
safety guardrails. To address this challenge, this paper defines and investigates
the Refusal Loss of LLMs and then proposes a method called Gradient Cuff to
detect jailbreak attempts. Gradient Cuff exploits the unique properties observed
in the refusal loss landscape, including functional values and its smoothness,
to design an effective two-step detection strategy. Experimental results on two
aligned LLMs (LLaMA-2-7B-Chat and Vicuna-7B-V1.5) and six types of jailbreak
attacks (GCG, AutoDAN, PAIR, TAP, Base64, and LRL) show that Gradient Cuff
can significantly improve the LLM’s rejection capability for malicious jailbreak
queries, while maintaining the model’s performance for benign user queries by
adjusting the detection threshold.

1

Introduction

With the stupendous success of large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 [19], LLaMA-2 [23],
and Vicuna [32], there is a trend to integrate these LLMs into various applications such as ChatGPT
and Bing Search. In these applications, LLMs are used as the service backend. The front end of
these applications receives the user input query from the interface, encapsulates it into a system
prompt, and then sends it to the LLM to get a response. With the rapidly increasing social impact of
these applications, model alignment and safety assurance to reduce harm and misuse have become
significant considerations when developing and deploying LLMs. Methods such as Reinforcement
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

