Rethinking Human Evaluation Protocol for
Text-to-Video Models: Enhancing Reliability,
Reproducibility, and Practicality

Tianle Zhang1,2 , Langtian Ma3 , Yuchen Yan4 , Yuchen Zhang2 , Kai Wang2 , Yue Yang1 ,
Ziyao Guo1 , Wenqi Shao1 , Yang You2 , Yu Qiao1 , Ping Luo5 , Kaipeng Zhang1∗.
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 National University of Singapore 3 University of Wisconsin-Madison
4
University of California San Diego 5 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Recent text-to-video (T2V) technology advancements, as demonstrated by models
such as Gen2, Pika, and Sora, have significantly broadened its applicability and popularity. Despite these strides, evaluating these models poses substantial challenges.
Primarily, due to the limitations inherent in automatic metrics, manual evaluation
is often considered a superior method for assessing T2V generation. However,
existing manual evaluation protocols face reproducibility, reliability, and practicality issues. To address these challenges, this paper introduces the Text-to-Video
Human Evaluation (T2VHE) protocol, a comprehensive and standardized protocol
for T2V models. The T2VHE protocol includes well-defined metrics, thorough
annotator training, and an effective dynamic evaluation module. Experimental
results demonstrate that this protocol not only ensures high-quality annotations
but can also reduce evaluation costs by nearly 50%. We will open-source the
entire setup of the T2VHE protocol, including the complete protocol workflow, the
dynamic evaluation component details, and the annotation interface code2 . This
will help communities establish more sophisticated human assessment protocols.

1

Introduction

Text-to-video (T2V) technology has made significant advancements in the last two years and garnered
increasing attention from the general community. T2V products such as Gen2 [20] and Pika [18]
have attracted many users. More recently, Sora [65], a powerful T2V model from OpenAI, further
heightened public anticipation for the T2V technology. Predictably, the evaluation of the T2V
generation will also become increasingly important, which can guide the development of T2V and
assist the public in selecting appropriate models [40, 54]. This paper does a comprehensive paper
survey (see Appendix F for details) and explores a human evaluation protocol for T2V generation.
Automatic and human evaluation are the two main kinds of evaluation for video generation. In recent
years, nearly half of video generation papers conduct only automatic evaluation, such as Inception
Score (IS) [76], Frechet Inception Distance (FID) [34], Frechet Video Distance (FVD) [84], CLIP
Similarity [70] and Video Quality Assessment (VQA) [82, 49]. However, these metrics meet various
challenges, such as relying on reference videos for calculation, overlooking temporal motion changes,
and, more importantly, not aligning well with human perception [67, 54]. Undoubtedly, automatic
evaluation is a promising research direction, but human evaluation is more convincing so far.
∗
2

Coressponding author
The code is available at https://github.com/ztlmememe/T2VHE.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

