STA RK: Benchmarking LLM Retrieval on Textual
and Relational Knowledge Bases

Shirley Wu∗§ , Shiyu Zhao∗§ , Michihiro Yasunaga§ , Kexin Huang§ , Kaidi Cao§ , Qian Huang§ ,
Vassilis N. Ioannidis† , Karthik Subbian† , James Zou‡§ , Jure Leskovec‡§
§
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University † Amazon
https://stark.stanford.edu/

Abstract
Answering real-world complex queries, such as complex product search, often
requires accurate retrieval from semi-structured knowledge bases that involve blend
of unstructured (e.g., textual descriptions of products) and structured (e.g., entity relations of products) information. However, many previous works studied
textual and relational retrieval tasks as separate topics. To address the gap, we
develop STA RK, a large-scale Semi-structure retrieval benchmark on Textual
and Relational Knowledge Bases. Our benchmark covers three domains: product
search, academic paper search, and queries in precision medicine. We design a
novel pipeline to synthesize realistic user queries that integrate diverse relational
information and complex textual properties, together with their ground-truth answers (items). We conduct rigorous human evaluation to validate the quality of
our synthesized queries. We further enhance the benchmark with high-quality
human-generated queries to provide an authentic reference. STA RK serves as a
comprehensive testbed for evaluating the performance of retrieval systems driven
by large language models (LLMs). Our experiments suggest that STA RK presents
significant challenges to the current retrieval and LLM systems, highlighting the
need for more capable semi-structured retrieval systems.
STA RK
Generate
Participants

Need Fabric Guard
water repellant that
blocks harmful UV rays

…

[ ]
…

Provide reference
Can you find a
push-along tricycle
from Radio Flyer that is
both fun and safe for
my kids?

Synthesized
Q&A Pairs (Large)
Please suggest a HEAD
tennis racquet for casual
player?

…

Looking for stylish kids
bike helmets that suit a
Superman bike.

[

Construct with
simulated users

[ ]
…
…

Human-Generated
Q&A Pairs (Small)

]

Evaluate
Query

Retrieve

…

Answer:
User

[

]

LLM Retrieval system

Semi-structured KB (SKB)

Figure 1: STA RK features queries on Semi-structured Knowledge Base (SKB) with textual and
relational knowledge, with node entities as ground-truth answers. STA RK consists of synthesized
queries simulating user interactions with a SKB and human-generated queries which provide an
authentic reference. It evaluates LLM retrieval systems’ performance in providing accurate responses.
∗‡

Equal first-author / senior contribution.
Correspondence: {shirwu, jamesz, jure}@cs.stanford.edu.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

