Parallelizing Linear Transformers with the Delta Rule
over Sequence Length

⋄

Songlin Yang⋄ Bailin Wang⋄
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Yu Zhang† Yikang Shen‡ Yoon Kim⋄
Soochow University ‡ MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

†

yangsl66@mit.edu

Abstract
Transformers with linear attention (i.e., linear transformers) and state-space models have recently been suggested as a viable linear-time alternative to transformers
with softmax attention. However, these models still underperform transformers
especially on tasks that require in-context retrieval. While more expressive variants of linear transformers which replace the additive update in linear transformers
with the delta rule [DeltaNet; 101] have been found to be more effective at associative recall, existing algorithms for training such models do not parallelize over
sequence length and are thus inefficient to train on modern hardware. This work
describes a hardware-efficient algorithm for training linear transformers with the
delta rule, which exploits a memory-efficient representation for computing products of Householder matrices [11]. This algorithm allows us to scale up DeltaNet
to standard language modeling settings. We train a 1.3B model for 100B tokens
and find that it outperforms recent linear-time baselines such as Mamba [31] and
GLA [124] in terms of perplexity and zero-shot performance on downstream tasks.
We also experiment with two hybrid models which combine DeltaNet layers with
(1) sliding-window attention layers every other layer or (2) two global attention
layers, and find that these hybrids outperform strong transformer baselines.

1

Introduction

The attention mechanism [8, 116] has been shown to be an important primitive for accurate sequence
modeling. Attention is moreover efficient during training as it is rich in matrix multiplications and
can thus take advantage of highly parallel processing capabilities and specialized accelerators on
modern GPUs. However, the complexity of attention is quadratic in sequence length, and hence it is
a fundamentally expensive primitive. And while recent techniques have made it possible to scale attention to longer sequences through hardware-aware restructuring of the intermediate computations
[20, 18, 59, 14], these methods still require storing the key/value vectors of previous elements, and
this “KV cache” (whose size grows linearly) can be unwieldy to manage for long sequences.
Linear attention transformers [48] replace the exponential kernel in softmax attention with a dotproduct over (possibly transformed) key and query vectors. This makes it possible to formulate
linear attention as a linear RNN with matrix-valued hidden states, thus obviating the need for a KV
cache and enabling constant-memory inference. While initial variants of linear attention generally
underperformed softmax attention on language modeling, gated variants of linear attention which
incorporate a data-dependent gating factor have recently been shown to be competitive against strong
transformer baselines [124, 92, 9, 79]. These gated linear transformers, along with time-varying state
space models such as Mamba [31, 19] (which can be reparameterized as a gated linear transformer
[124]), have been suggested as a potential alternative to ordinary transformers. However, despite
The parallel DeltaNet layer is made available as part of the F LASH L INEAR ATTENTION library [124, 123]:
https://github.com/fla-org/flash-linear-attention
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

