Light Unbalanced Optimal Transport

Arip Asadulaev
ITMO University
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
asadulaev@airi.net

Milena Gazdieva
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
milena.gazdieva@skoltech.ru
Evgeny Burnaev
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
e.burnaev@skoltech.ru

Alexander Korotin
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
a.korotin@skoltech.ru

Abstract
While the continuous Entropic Optimal Transport (EOT) field has been actively developing in recent years, it became evident that the classic EOT problem is prone to
different issues like the sensitivity to outliers and imbalance of classes in the source
and target measures. This fact inspired the development of solvers that deal with
the unbalanced EOT (UEOT) problem − the generalization of EOT allowing for
mitigating the mentioned issues by relaxing the marginal constraints. Surprisingly,
it turns out that the existing solvers are either based on heuristic principles or heavyweighted with complex optimization objectives involving several neural networks.
We address this challenge and propose a novel theoretically-justified, lightweight,
unbalanced EOT solver. Our advancement consists of developing a novel view on
the optimization of the UEOT problem yielding tractable and a non-minimax optimization objective. We show that combined with a light parametrization recently
proposed in the field our objective leads to a fast, simple, and effective solver which
allows solving the continuous UEOT problem in minutes on CPU. We prove that
our solver provides a universal approximation of UEOT solutions and obtain its
generalization bounds. We give illustrative examples of the solver’s performance.
The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/milenagazdieva/LightUnbalancedOptimalTransport

1

Introduction

The computational optimal transport (OT) has proven to be a powerful tool for solving various
popular tasks, e.g., image-to-image translation [68, 17, 50, 28], image generation [67, 13, 7] and
biological data transfer [5, 42, 66]. Historically, the majority of early works in the field were built
upon solving the OT problem between discrete probability measures [10, 53]. Only recently the
advances in the field of generative models have led to explosive interest from the ML community in
developing the continuous OT solvers, see [38] for a survey. The setup of this problem assumes that
the learner needs to estimate the OT plan between continuous measures given only empirical samples
of data from them. Due to convexity-related issues of OT problem [40], many works consider the
EOT problem, i.e., use entropy regularizers which guarantee, e.g., the uniqueness of learned plans.
Meanwhile, researches attract attention to other shortcomings of the classic OT problem. It enforces
hard constraints on the marginal measures and, thus, does not allow for mass variations. As a
result, OT shows high sensitivity to an imbalance of classes and outliers in the source and target
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

