VMamba: Visual State Space Model

Yue Liu 1 Yunjie Tian1 Yuzhong Zhao1 Hongtian Yu1
Lingxi Xie2 Yaowei Wang3 Qixiang Ye1 Jianbin Jiao1 Yunfan Liu1‡
1
UCAS 2 Huawei Inc. 3 Pengcheng Lab.
{liuyue171,tianyunjie19,zhaoyuzhong20,yuhongtian17}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
198808xc@gmail.com, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn, {qxye,jiaojb,liuyunfan}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Designing computationally efficient network architectures remains an ongoing
necessity in computer vision. In this paper, we adapt Mamba, a state-space language
model, into VMamba, a vision backbone with linear time complexity. At the core of
VMamba is a stack of Visual State-Space (VSS) blocks with the 2D Selective Scan
(SS2D) module. By traversing along four scanning routes, SS2D bridges the gap
between the ordered nature of 1D selective scan and the non-sequential structure
of 2D vision data, which facilitates the collection of contextual information from
various sources and perspectives. Based on the VSS blocks, we develop a family of
VMamba architectures and accelerate them through a succession of architectural
and implementation enhancements. Extensive experiments demonstrate VMamba’s
promising performance across diverse visual perception tasks, highlighting its
superior input scaling efficiency compared to existing benchmark models. Source
code is available at https://github.com/MzeroMiko/VMamba

1

Introduction

Visual representation learning remains as a fundamental research area in computer vision that has
witnessed remarkable progress in the era of deep learning. To represent complex patterns in vision
data, two primary categories of backbone networks, i.e., Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [49,
27, 29, 53, 37] and Vision Transformers (ViTs) [13, 36, 57, 66], have been proposed and extensively
utilized in a variety of visual tasks. Compared to CNNs, ViTs generally demonstrate superior learning
capabilities on large-scale data due to their integration of the self-attention mechanism [58, 13].
However, the quadratic complexity of self-attention w.r.t. the number of tokens imposes substantial
computational overhead in downstream tasks involving large spatial resolutions.
To address this challenge, significant efforts have been made to improve the efficiency of attention
computation [54, 36, 12]. However, existing approaches either restrict the size of the effective
receptive field [36] or suffer from notable performance degradation across various tasks [30, 60].
This motivates us to develop a novel architecture for vision data, while maintaining the inherent
advantages of the vanilla self-attention mechanism, i.e., global receptive fields and dynamic weighting
parameters [23].
Recently, Mamba [17], a innovative State Space Model (SSM) [17, 43, 59, 71, 48], in the field
of natural language processing (NLP), has emerged as a promising approach for long-sequence
modeling with linear complexity. Drawing inspiration from this advancement, we introduce VMamba,
a vision backbone that integrates SSM-based blocks to enable efficient visual representation learning.
However, the core algorithm of Mamba, i.e., the parallelized selective scan operation, is essentially
designed for processing one-dimensional sequential data. This presents a challenge when adapting it
for processing vision data, which lacks an inherent sequential arrangement of visual components. To
address this issue, we propose 2D Selective Scan (SS2D), a four-way scanning mechanism designed
for spatial domain traversal. In contrast to the self-attention mechanism (Figure 1 (a)), SS2D ensures
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

