Learning to Edit Visual Programs with
Self-Supervision

R. Kenny Jones
Brown University
russell_jones@brown.edu

Renhao Zhang
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
renhaozhang@cs.umass.edu

Aditya Ganeshan
Brown University
aditya_ganeshan@brown.edu

Daniel Ritchie
Brown University
daniel_ritchie@brown.edu

Abstract
We design a system that learns how to edit visual programs. Our edit network
consumes a complete input program and a visual target. From this input, we
task our network with predicting a local edit operation that could be applied to
the input program to improve its similarity to the target. In order to apply this
scheme for domains that lack program annotations, we develop a self-supervised
learning approach that integrates this edit network into a bootstrapped finetuning
loop along with a network that predicts entire programs in one-shot. Our joint
finetuning scheme, when coupled with an inference procedure that initializes a
population from the one-shot model and evolves members of this population with
the edit network, helps to infer more accurate visual programs. Over multiple
domains, we experimentally compare our method against the alternative of using
only the one-shot model, and find that even under equal search-time budgets, our
editing-based paradigm provides significant advantages.

1

Introduction

People seldom write code with a linear workflow. The process of authoring code often involves
substantial trial-and-error: possibly correct programs are evaluated through execution to see if they
raise exceptions or break input-output assumptions. When an error is identified, an edit is made,
and this process is repeated. It is difficult to imagine writing any moderately complex program in a
one-shot paradigm, without being able to debug intermediate program versions.
The field of program synthesis studies how to automatically infer a program that meets an input
specification [13]. In this work, we consider the sub-problem of visual program induction (VPI),
where the input specification is a visual target (e.g. an image) and the goal is to find a program whose
execution recreates the target [33]. This task has numerous applications across visual computing
disciplines, including reverse-engineering, structure analysis, manipulation, and generative modeling.
This problem area has garnered significant interest, with many works exploring learning-based
solutions. For domains with annotated data, supervised approaches perform well [41, 43]. For
domains that lack program annotations, a variety of unsupervised and self-supervised learning
paradigms have been proposed [19, 34, 38, 45]. Moreover, initial investigations have explored the
capabilities of Large Language Models for solving simple VPI tasks [3].
Though these prior approaches have made impressive progress, a common limitation is that they
operate within the aforementioned one-shot paradigm. For instance, when using an autoregressive
network these systems will condition on a visual target and iteratively predict program tokens until
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

