One-to-Multiple: A Progressive Style Transfer
Unsupervised Domain-Adaptive Framework for
Kidney Tumor Segmentation

Kai Hu
Xiangtan University
kaihu@xtu.edu.cn

Yuan Zhang∗
Xiangtan University
yuanz@xtu.edu.cn

Jinhao Li
Xiangtan University
jhli@smail.xtu.edu.cn

Xiongjun Ye
Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
yexiongjun@cicams.ac.cn

Xieping Gao∗
Hunan Normal University
xpgao@hunnu.edu.cn

Abstract
In multi-sequence Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), the accurate segmentation of the kidney and tumor based on traditional supervised methods typically
necessitates detailed annotation for each sequence, which is both time-consuming
and labor-intensive. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) methods can effectively mitigate inter-domain differences by aligning cross-modal features, thereby
reducing the annotation burden. However, most existing UDA methods are limited to one-to-one domain adaptation, which tends to be inefficient and resourceintensive when faced with multi-target domain transfer tasks. To address this
challenge, we propose a novel and efficient One-to-Multiple Progressive Style
Transfer Unsupervised Domain-Adaptive (PSTUDA) framework for kidney and
tumor segmentation in multi-sequence MRI. Specifically, we develop a multi-level
style dictionary to explicitly store the style information of each target domain at
various stages, which alleviates the burden of a single generator in a multi-target
transfer task and enables effective decoupling of content and style. Concurrently,
we employ multiple cascading style fusion modules that utilize point-wise instance
normalization to progressively recombine content and style features, which enhances cross-modal alignment and structural consistency. Experiments conducted
on the private MSKT and public KiTS19 datasets demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed PSTUDA over comparative methods in multi-sequence kidney and tumor
segmentation. The average Dice Similarity Coefficients are increased by at least
1.8% and 3.9%, respectively. Impressively, our PSTUDA not only significantly
reduces the floating-point computation by approximately 72% but also reduces
the number of model parameters by about 50%, bringing higher efficiency and
feasibility to practical clinical applications. 2

1

Introduction

Kidney tumor segmentation is a crucial task in medical image analysis, playing an essential role in the
diagnosis, staging, and treatment of kidney cancer [1, 2, 3]. Previous studies have primarily focused on
computed tomography (CT) images [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], but in recent years, magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) has emerged as a safer alternative due to its non-radiative nature [10, 11, 12]. Compared to CT,
∗
2

Corresponding authors.
Code is publicly available at: https://github.com/MLMIP/PSTUDA.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

