ActFusion: a Unified Diffusion Model
for Action Segmentation and Anticipation

Dayoung Gong
Suha Kwak
Minsu Cho
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
{dayoung.gong, suha.kwak, mscho}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Temporal action segmentation and long-term action anticipation are two popular
vision tasks for the temporal analysis of actions in videos. Despite apparent relevance and potential complementarity, these two problems have been investigated
as separate and distinct tasks. In this work, we tackle these two problems, action segmentation and action anticipation, jointly using a unified diffusion model
dubbed ActFusion. The key idea to unification is to train the model to effectively
handle both visible and invisible parts of the sequence in an integrated manner;
the visible part is for temporal segmentation, and the invisible part is for future
anticipation. To this end, we introduce a new anticipative masking strategy during
training in which a late part of the video frames is masked as invisible, and learnable
tokens replace these frames to learn to predict the invisible future. Experimental
results demonstrate the bi-directional benefits between action segmentation and
anticipation. ActFusion achieves the state-of-the-art performance across the standard benchmarks of 50 Salads, Breakfast, and GTEA, outperforming task-specific
models in both of the two tasks with a single unified model through joint learning.

1

Introduction

In everyday life, when interacting with people, we anticipate their future actions while recognizing
their actions observed in the present and the past. Similarly, for effective human-robot interaction,
robotic agents must recognize ongoing actions while anticipating future behaviors. Two essential
tasks in computer vision for such a temporal understanding of human actions are temporal action
segmentation (TAS) [38, 19, 32, 61, 12, 65, 3, 43, 63, 8] and long-term action anticipation (LTA) [2,
34, 25, 45]. The task of TAS aims at translating observed video frames into a sequence of action
segments, while the goal of LTA is to predict a plausible sequence of actions in the future based on
the observed video frames. These tasks are closely related in terms of understanding the relations
between actions; recognizing actions in the present and the past may improve anticipating action in
the future, and the ability to anticipate the future may also enhance recognizing observable actions
when facing visual ambiguities.
Despite the apparent relevance and potential complementarity, these two problems have been investigated as separate and distinct tasks. While a growing body of work has shown remarkable progress
on both TAS and LTA, these methods are primarily designed for one task (see Fig. 1a) and show
poor generalization when applied to the other (e.g., see FUTR [25] and DiffAct [43] in Fig. 1c).
Some prior methods tackle both tasks simultaneously, but they rely on task-specific architectures and
require separate training for each individual task (e.g., see TempAgg [52] in Fig. 1c).
In this paper, we introduce ActFusion, a unified diffusion model that addresses TAS and LTA through
a single architecture and training process, as illustrated in Fig. 1b. The core idea of our unification
lies in training the model to effectively handle two different parts of the sequence: visible parts
for action segmentation and invisible parts for action anticipation. Accordingly, we propose a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

