Boosting the Transferability of Adversarial Attack on
Vision Transformer with Adaptive Token Tuning

Di Ming, Peng Ren, Yunlong Wang, Xin Feng∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chongqing University of Technology
Chongqing, China
diming@cqut.edu.cn, misterr_2019@163.com, {ylwang, xfeng}@cqut.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViTs) perform exceptionally well in various computer vision
tasks but remain vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Recent studies have shown that
the transferability of adversarial examples exists for CNNs, and the same holds
true for ViTs. However, existing ViT attacks aggressively regularize the largest
token gradients to exact zero within each layer of the surrogate model, overlooking
the interactions between layers, which limits their transferability in attacking blackbox models. Therefore, in this paper, we focus on boosting the transferability of
adversarial attacks on ViTs through adaptive token tuning (ATT). Specifically, we
propose three optimization strategies: an adaptive gradient re-scaling strategy to
reduce the overall variance of token gradients, a self-paced patch out strategy to enhance the diversity of input tokens, and a hybrid token gradient truncation strategy
to weaken the effectiveness of attention mechanism. We demonstrate that scaling
correction of gradient changes using gradient variance across different layers can
produce highly transferable adversarial examples. In addition, introducing attentional truncation can mitigate the overfitting over complex interactions between
tokens in deep ViT layers to further improve the transferability. On the other hand,
using feature importance as a guidance to discard a subset of perturbation patches
in each iteration, along with combining self-paced learning and progressively more
sampled attacks, significantly enhances the transferability over attacks that use
all perturbation patches. Extensive experiments conducted on ViTs, undefended
CNNs, and defended CNNs validate the superiority of our proposed ATT attack
method. On average, our approach improves the attack performance by 10.1%
compared to state-of-the-art transfer-based attacks. Notably, we achieve the best
attack performance with an average of 58.3% on three defended CNNs. Code is
available at https://github.com/MisterRpeng/ATT.

1

Introduction

The Vision Transformer (ViT) [1] was the first to apply the transformer architecture to computer
vision models, demonstrating excellent performance in image classification tasks. Since then, various
ViT-based transformer structures have shown comparable success in a range of computer vision
tasks, including object detection [2, 3], semantic segmentation [4, 5], and human pose estimation
[6]. However, similar to convolutional neural networks (CNNs), ViT models are also vulnerable to
adversarial attacks [7, 8, 9, 10]. For ViT to be widely adopted in real-world applications, particularly
in secure systems, it is crucial to identify model weaknesses [11, 12, 13] and develop more robust
ViT models. Specifically, adversarial attacks generate perturbations that can cause incorrect model
classifications, which are often too subtle for humans to notice. The transferability of the adversarial
∗

Corresponding Author: Xin Feng

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

