Alleviating Hallucinations in Large Vision-Language
Models through Hallucination-Induced Optimization

Xinyu Lyu1,5∗
xinyulyu68@gmail.com

Beitao Chen2∗
chenbeitao@gmail.com

Jingkuan Song2
jingkuan.song@gmail.com

Lianli Gao2†
lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn

Heng Tao Shen3,4
shenhengtao@hotmail.com

1

Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
Tongji University
5
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Finance, Ministry of Education
https://github.com/BT-C/HIO

Abstract
Although Large Visual Language Models (LVLMs) have demonstrated exceptional
abilities in understanding multimodal data, they invariably suffer from hallucinations, leading to a disconnection between the generated text and the corresponding images. Almost all current visual contrastive decoding methods attempt to
mitigate these hallucinations by introducing visual uncertainty information that
appropriately widens the contrastive logits gap between hallucinatory and targeted
ones. However, due to uncontrollable nature of the global visual uncertainty, they
struggle to precisely induce the hallucinatory tokens, which severely limits their
effectiveness in mitigating hallucinations and may even lead to the generation
of undesired hallucinations. To tackle this issue, we conducted the theoretical
analysis to promote the effectiveness of contrast decoding. Building on this insight, we introduce a novel optimization strategy named Hallucination-Induced
Optimization (HIO). This strategy seeks to amplify the contrast between hallucinatory and targeted tokens relying on a fine-tuned theoretical preference model (i.e.,
Contrary Bradley-Terry Model), thereby facilitating efficient contrast decoding to
alleviate hallucinations in LVLMs. Extensive experimental research demonstrates
that our HIO strategy can effectively reduce hallucinations in LVLMs, outperforming state-of-the-art methods across various benchmarks. Code is released at
https://github.com/BT-C/HIO.

1

Introduction

The recent success of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) marks a major milestone in artificial
intelligence research [OpenAI, 2023, Alayrac et al., 2022, Li et al., 2023a, Liu et al., 2023c, Zhu
et al., 2023, Bai et al., 2023, Dai et al., 2023, Wang et al., 2023b, Driess et al., 2023]. By seamlessly
integrating visual cues with Large Language Models (LLMs), LVLMs have demonstrated unparalleled expertise in multimodal comprehension, logical reasoning, and interactive engagement. This
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

