START: A Generalized State Space Model with
Saliency-Driven Token-Aware Transformation

Jintao Guo1 Lei Qi2∗ Yinghuan Shi1∗ Yang Gao1†
1
Nanjing University 2 Southeast University
guojintao@smail.nju.edu.cn, qilei@seu.edu.cn, {syh, gaoy}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain Generalization (DG) aims to enable models to generalize to unseen target
domains by learning from multiple source domains. Existing DG methods primarily rely on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which inherently learn texture
biases due to their limited receptive fields, making them prone to overfitting source
domains. While some works have introduced transformer-based methods (ViTs) for
DG to leverage the global receptive field, these methods incur high computational
costs due to the quadratic complexity of self-attention. Recently, advanced state
space models (SSMs), represented by Mamba, have shown promising results in
supervised learning tasks by achieving linear complexity in sequence length during
training and fast RNN-like computation during inference. Inspired by this, we
investigate the generalization ability of the Mamba model under domain shifts and
find that input-dependent matrices within SSMs could accumulate and amplify
domain-specific features, thus hindering model generalization. To address this
issue, we propose a novel SSM-based architecture with saliency-based token-aware
transformation (namely START), which achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performances and offers a competitive alternative to CNNs and ViTs. Our START can
selectively perturb and suppress domain-specific features in salient tokens within
the input-dependent matrices of SSMs, thus effectively reducing the discrepancy
between different domains. Extensive experiments on five benchmarks demonstrate that START outperforms existing SOTA DG methods with efficient linear
complexity. Our code is available at https://github.com/lingeringlight/START.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have achieved impressive progress in various computer vision tasks over the
past years [1–3]. Such a huge success is mostly based on the independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) assumption, i.e., the training and testing data follow the same distribution [4]. However, when
evaluated on test data following different distributions from the training data, these models often
suffer severe performance degradation. This issue, which is known as domain shift [4], has greatly
hindered the applications of deep learning models in the real world.
To improve the generalization of the model under domain shifts, Domain Adaptation (DA) has been
widely studied, which aims to transfer the knowledge learned from labeled source domains to the
unlabeled or partially labeled target domain [5, 6]. However, DA methods cannot guarantee the
performance of the model on unknown target domains that have not been observed during training
[7, 8]. Since the accessibility of the target domain could not always be satisfied in real scenarios,
∗

Corresponding authors: Yinghuan Shi and Lei Qi.
Jintao Guo, Yinghuan Shi, and Yang Gao are with the National Key Laboratory for Novel Software
Technology and the National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

