REBEL: Reinforcement Learning
via Regressing Relative Rewards

Zhaolin Gao1 , Jonathan D. Chang2∗, Wenhao Zhan3 , Owen Oertell1 , Gokul Swamy4 ,
Kianté Brantley5 , Thorsten Joachims1 , J. Andrew Bagnell4,6 , Jason D. Lee3 , Wen Sun1
1
Cornell University, 2 Databricks Mosaic Research, 3 Princeton University,
4
Carnegie Mellon University, 5 Harvard University, 6 Aurora Innovation

Abstract
While originally developed for continuous control problems, Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) has emerged as the work-horse of a variety of reinforcement
learning (RL) applications, including the fine-tuning of generative models. Unfortunately, PPO requires multiple heuristics to enable stable convergence (e.g.
value networks, clipping), and is notorious for its sensitivity to the precise implementation of these components. In response, we take a step back and ask what
a minimalist RL algorithm for the era of generative models would look like. We
propose REBEL, an algorithm that cleanly reduces the problem of policy optimization to regressing the relative reward between two completions to a prompt in
terms of the policy, enabling strikingly lightweight implementation. In theory, we
prove that fundamental RL algorithms like Natural Policy Gradient can be seen
as variants of REBEL, which allows us to match the strongest known theoretical
guarantees in terms of convergence and sample complexity in the RL literature.
REBEL can also cleanly incorporate offline data and be extended to handle the
intransitive preferences we frequently see in practice. Empirically, we find that
REBEL provides a unified approach to language modeling and image generation
with stronger or similar performance as PPO and DPO, all while being simpler
to implement and more computationally efficient than PPO. When fine-tuning
Llama-3-8B-Instruct, REBEL achieves strong performance in AlpacaEval 2.0, MTBench, and Open LLM Leaderboard. Implementation of REBEL can be found at
https://github.com/ZhaolinGao/REBEL, and models trained by REBEL can
be found at https://huggingface.co/Cornell-AGI.

1

Introduction

The generality of the reinforcement learning (RL) paradigm is striking: from continuous control problems (Kalashnikov et al., 2018) to, more recently, the fine-tuning of generative models (Stiennon et al.,
2022; Ouyang et al., 2022), RL has enabled concrete progress across a variety of decision-making
tasks. Specifically, when it comes to fine-tuning generative models, Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO, Schulman et al. (2017)) has emerged as the de-facto RL algorithm of choice, from language
models (LLMs) (Ziegler et al., 2020; Stiennon et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023)
to generative image models (Black et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2024; Oertell et al., 2024).
∗
Work done at Cornell
{zg292,ojo2,tj36,ws455}@cornell.edu, j.chang@databricks.com, kdbrantley@g.harvard.edu,
{wenhao.zhan,jasonlee}@princeton.edu, {gswamy,bagnell2}@andrew.cmu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

