TopoFR: A Closer Look at Topology Alignment on
Face Recognition

Jun Dan*1,2 , Yang Liu*2,3 , Jiankang Deng4 , Haoyu Xie2,5 , Siyuan Li2 ,
Baigui Sun†2,5 , Shan Luo3
1
Zhejiang University 2 FaceChain Community 3 King’s College London
4
Imperial College London 5 Alibaba Group
danjun@zju.edu.cn, {yang.15.liu, shan.luo}@kcl.ac.uk, j.deng16@imperial.ac.uk
xiehaoyu.xhy@alibaba-inc.com, sunbaigui85@gmail.com

Abstract
The field of face recognition (FR) has undergone significant advancements with
the rise of deep learning. Recently, the success of unsupervised learning and
graph neural networks has demonstrated the effectiveness of data structure information. Considering that the FR task can leverage large-scale training data, which
intrinsically contains significant structure information, we aim to investigate how
to encode such critical structure information into the latent space. As revealed
from our observations, directly aligning the structure information between the
input and latent spaces inevitably suffers from an overfitting problem, leading to
a structure collapse phenomenon in the latent space. To address this problem,
we propose TopoFR, a novel FR model that leverages a topological structure
alignment strategy called PTSA and a hard sample mining strategy named SDE.
Concretely, PTSA uses persistent homology to align the topological structures of
the input and latent spaces, effectively preserving the structure information and
improving the generalization performance of FR model. To mitigate the impact of
hard samples on the latent space structure, SDE accurately identifies hard samples
by automatically computing structure damage score (SDS) for each sample, and
directs the model to prioritize optimizing these samples. Experimental results
on popular face benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our TopoFR over the
state-of-the-art methods. Code and models are available at: https://github.
com/modelscope/facechain/tree/main/face_module/TopoFR.

1

Introduction

Face recognition (FR) is a critical biometric authentication technique that is widely applied in various
applications. In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in FR task, thanks to their powerful ability to autonomously extract face features from images.
Existing studies on FR primarily focuses on constructing more discriminative face features by
developing margin-based loss functions [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and powerful network architectures [6, 7, 8, 9].
Recently, the success of unsupervised learning [10, 11, 12, 13, 14] and graph neural networks [15, 16,
17] has demonstrated the importance of data structure information in improving model generalization.
However, to the best of our knowledge, how to effectively mine the potential structure information in
large-scale face data has not investigated. Thus, in this paper, we extend our interests on building a
cutting-edge FR framework through exploiting such powerful and substantial structure information.
First, we use Persistent Homology (PH) [20, 21], a mathematical tool used in topological data
analysis [22] to capture the underlying topological structure of complex point clouds, to investigate
*

Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

