Generalized Fast Exact Conformalization
Diyang Li
Cornell University
diyang01@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Conformal prediction converts nearly any point estimator into a prediction interval
under standard assumptions while ensuring valid coverage. However, the extensive
computational demands of full conformal prediction are daunting in practice, as it
necessitates a comprehensive number of trainings across the entire latent label space.
Unfortunately, existing efforts to expedite conformalization often carry strong
assumptions and are developed specifically for certain models, or they only offer
approximate solution sets. To address this gap, we develop a method for fast exact
conformalization of generalized statistical estimation. Our analysis reveals that the
structure of the solution path is inherently piecewise smooth, and indicates that
utilizing second-order information of difference equations suffices to approximate
the entire solution spectrum arbitrarily. We provide a unified view that not only
encompasses existing work but also attempts to offer geometric insights. Practically,
our framework integrates seamlessly with well-studied numerical solvers. The
significant speedups of our algorithm as compared to the existing standard methods
are demonstrated across numerous benchmarks.

1

Introduction

In modern algorithmic practice, quantifying uncertainty is crucial for accurate and reliable model
predictions. Conformal prediction [1] serves as a powerful statistical tool that leverages the observed
data to construct prediction intervals containing the outcome with a predefined probability level.
It enjoys model-free coverage guarantee regardless of the underlying distribution of the data. In
recent years, conformal prediction has gained increasing attention from the community of machine
learning [2–5], data mining [6–8] and computer vision [9, 10]. This growing interest is attributed to
the attractive properties that it operates under the assumption of exchangeability, which is a weaker
condition than independence and identical distribution, allowing for a wider range of applications in
real-world scenarios where data may not meet strict statistical assumptions. Meanwhile, conformal
prediction can be combined with almost any existing point estimators, even when the model is
potentially misspecified [5].
While exhibits appealing properties, the application of conformal prediction often comes at a high
computational cost [11, 12]. Kindly note that in this paper we refer to the full conformal prediction
that does not discard training points as opposed to the split conformal prediction, as the latter involves
only one single fitting. From a numerical perspective, when constructing a conformal prediction
set, one needs to exhaustively search all points (potential candidates) in the label space, where for
each point the learning model needs to be refitted and the conformity score needs to be re-calculated.
In many scenarios like regression, the number of possible candidates is infinite as the latent label
can take an uncountable number of possible values. Conventional conformal prediction works by
a grid-search type method to loop over the label space [13, 14], which discretize the interval of
interest and subsequently solve a sequence of individual optimization subproblems. To improve such
brute-force approach, there have been many efforts in community that devoted to develop better
algorithms for computing the prediction set. A natural idea is to generate the set of all solutions
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

