Beyond Task Diversity: Provable Representation
Transfer for Sequential Multi-Task Linear Bandits

Thang Duong
University of Arizona
thangduong@arizona.edu

Zhi Wang
University of Wisconsin–Madison
zhi.wang@wisc.edu

Chicheng Zhang
University of Arizona
chichengz@cs.arizona.edu

Abstract
We study lifelong learning in linear bandits, where a learner interacts with a
sequence of linear bandit tasks whose parameters lie in an m-dimensional subspace
of Rd , thereby sharing a low-rank representation. Current literature typically
assumes that the tasks are diverse, i.e., their parameters uniformly span the mdimensional subspace. This assumption allows the low-rank representation to
be learned before all tasks are revealed, which can be unrealistic in real-world
applications. In this work, we present the first nontrivial result for sequential multitask linear bandits without the task diversity assumption. We develop an algorithm
that efficiently learns and transfers low-rank representations. When facing N
tasks, each played over τ rounds, our algorithm
achieves a regret guarantee of

√
2
2
1
Õ N m τ + N 3 τ 3 dm 3 + N d2 + τ md under the ellipsoid action set assumption.
√
This result can significantly improve upon the baseline of Õ (N d τ ) that does not
leverage the low-rank structure when the number of tasks N is sufficiently large
and m ≪ d. We also demonstrate empirically on synthetic data that our algorithm
outperforms baseline algorithms, which rely on the task diversity assumption.

1

Introduction

Recommendation systems that interact with customers to promote the best items for each user have
been widely adopted around the world. These interactions are often sequential and can be modelled
as linear bandit problems [Abe and Long, 1999, Dani et al., 2008, Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis,
2010, Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011], where the characteristics of items can be represented as context
vectors, and a user’s preference for an item (i.e., reward) can be modelled using a linear combination
of the context of the item. Even though the problem is typically high-dimensional, different users
may exhibit similar preferences, leading to a low-dimensional underlying reward structure.
Motivated by this observation, there has been growing interest in representation learning within
the context of linear bandits. For instance, in the item recommendation example, each session of
interaction with a user can be seen as a linear bandit task, and similarity across tasks can be captured
by the existence of a global feature extractor that applies to all problem instances.
Formally, we consider a problem where the learner sequentially faces N d-dimensional linear
bandit tasks, each with horizon τ , with a key assumption that the reward predictors of the N tasks,
θ1 , . . . , θN , lie in an m-dimensional linear subspace of Rd . The goal of the learner is to minimize
their meta (pseudo-)regret, which is the sum of regret across all tasks (see Equation (1) below), by
exploiting the shared subspace structure.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

