Generalizable Implicit Motion Modeling
for Video Frame Interpolation

Zujin Guo, Wei Li, Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{zujin.guo, wei.l, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
https://gseancdat.github.io/projects/GIMMVFI

Abstract
Motion modeling is critical in flow-based Video Frame Interpolation (VFI). Existing paradigms either consider linear combinations of bidirectional flows or directly
predict bilateral flows for given timestamps without exploring favorable motion
priors, thus lacking the capability of effectively modeling spatiotemporal dynamics
in real-world videos. To address this limitation, in this study, we introduce Generalizable Implicit Motion Modeling (GIMM), a novel and effective approach to
motion modeling for VFI. Specifically, to enable GIMM as an effective motion
modeling paradigm, we design a motion encoding pipeline to model spatiotemporal
motion latent from bidirectional flows extracted from pre-trained flow estimators,
effectively representing input-specific motion priors. Then, we implicitly predict
arbitrary-timestep optical flows within two adjacent input frames via an adaptive
coordinate-based neural network, with spatiotemporal coordinates and motion
latent as inputs. Our GIMM can be easily integrated with existing flow-based VFI
works by supplying accurately modeled motion. We show that GIMM performs
better than the current state of the art on standard VFI benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) is a fundamental task in computer vision, which involves generating
intermediate frames between two adjacent video frames. This technique is crucial for various
practical applications, including novel view synthesis [57, 14, 30], video generation [47], and video
compression [52]. This task is highly challenging due to the complex motions typically found in
real-world videos. To address this, recent research [29, 55, 42, 40, 20] has focused on flow-based
frameworks, which have shown substantial success. Generally, these frameworks for VFI involve two
main phases: 1) transforming the input frames based on estimated optical flows, and 2) merging and
enhancing the warped frames to produce intermediate frames. Consequently, the accuracy of flow
estimation is crucial for the fidelity of the synthesized frames.
Accurately modeling flow from two distant frames is challenging due to the complexities of capturing
subtle and dynamic movements caused by varying motion speeds, object occlusions, and lighting
conditions. A commonly used approach in the literature combines bidirectional flows derived
from input frames [22, 40, 45, 53, 39] (Figure 1(a)). This method assumes overlapped and linear
motion for flow estimation, which does not accurately reflect real-world dynamics. Several studies
[20, 29, 55, 42] directly predict bilateral flows based on intermediate discrete timestamps (Figure 1(b)).
These approaches model the correlation between frame motions and timestamps without leveraging
motion priors within input frames; they thus fall short of capturing complex spatial-temporal changes
and handling occluded regions and unexpected deformations. Moreover, this discrete-time-based
modeling paradigm is ineffective for arbitrary-time interpolation.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

