Procedure-Aware Surgical Video-language Pretraining
with Hierarchical Knowledge Augmentation

1

Kun Yuan1,2,3 Vinkle Srivastav1,2 Nassir Navab3 Nicolas Padoy1,2
University of Strasbourg, CNRS, INSERM, ICube, UMR7357, Strasbourg, France
2
IHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France
3
CAMP, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
{kyuan,srivastav,npadoy}@unistra.fr
nassir.navab@tum.de

Abstract
Surgical video-language pretraining (VLP) faces unique challenges due to the
knowledge domain gap and the scarcity of multi-modal data. This study aims to
bridge the gap by addressing issues regarding textual information loss in surgical
lecture videos and the spatial-temporal challenges of surgical VLP. To tackle these
issues, we propose a hierarchical knowledge augmentation approach and a novel
Procedure-Encoded Surgical Knowledge-Augmented Video-Language Pretraining
(PeskaVLP) framework. The proposed knowledge augmentation approach uses
large language models (LLM) to refine and enrich surgical concepts, thus providing
comprehensive language supervision and reducing the risk of overfitting. The
PeskaVLP framework combines language supervision with visual self-supervision,
constructing hard negative samples and employing a Dynamic Time Warping
(DTW) based loss function to effectively comprehend the cross-modal procedural
alignment. Extensive experiments on multiple public surgical scene understanding
and cross-modal retrieval datasets show that our proposed method significantly
improves zero-shot transferring performance and offers a generalist visual representation for further advancements in surgical scene understanding. The source
code will be available at https://github.com/CAMMA-public/PeskaVLP.

1

Introduction

The recent advancements in multi-modal representation learning, particularly with the introduction of
CLIP [52], have led to the development of models capable of understanding a wide range of visual
concepts using natural language supervision [34, 41]. The expressive natural language has allowed
these models to shift from task-specific to more generalist applications [49, 82, 83]. The learned
representations of these models are robust, facilitating effective performance across diverse visual
tasks without the need for task-specific fine-tuning [68, 81]. However, despite the impressive progress
made by these models in the general computer vision domain, the effectiveness of these methods in
domain-specific settings remains uncertain.
This concern is particularly relevant to the field of Surgical Data Science (SDS), an emerging
interdisciplinary domain that utilizes deep learning and computer vision techniques to analyze
surgical data [44, 43, 74]. A key component of SDS is the analysis of intraoperative surgical videos
captured through endoscopes or laparoscopes. Analyzing these videos presents several unique
challenges compared to the general computer vision datasets. Unlike general computer vision
datasets [47, 52, 7], surgical videos can last several hours and capture complex and fine-grained
activities within a narrow field of view. This requires development of computational approaches to
decompose and model the surgical procedures at multiple hierarchical levels, including the entire
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

