Re-assembling the past: The RePAIR dataset and
benchmark for real world 2D and 3D puzzle solving

Theodore Tsesmelis1⋆ Luca Palmieri2⋆ Marina Khoroshiltseva2 Adeela Islam1,8
Gur Elkin3 Or Itzhak Shahar3 Gianluca Scarpellini1 Stefano Fiorini1 Yaniv Ohayon3
Nadav Alali3 Sinem Aslan2,7 Pietro Morerio1 Sebastiano Vascon2 Elena Gravina4
Maria Cristina Napolitano4 Giuseppe Scarpati4 Gabriel Zuchtriegel4 Alexandra Spühler5
Michel E. Fuchs5 Stuart James1,6 Ohad Ben-Shahar3 Marcello Pelillo2 Alessio Del Bue1
1
Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia 2 Ca’ Foscari University of Venice
3
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev 4 Parco Archeologico di Pompei
5
University of Lausanne 6 Durham University 7 University of Milan 8 University of Genoa

Figure 1: A subset of the RePAIR dataset, containing over one thousand real-life object fragments.
The dataset is unique in its doing, with an international team of archaeologists providing the puzzle
ground truth through years of eldwork in the Pompeii archaeological park. This dataset stands as a
realistic computational challenge for both methods on 2D and 3D puzzle solving, as modern baselines
struggle to achieve competitive results on the RePAIR dataset.

Abstract
This paper proposes the RePAIR dataset that represents a challenging benchmark
to test modern computational and data driven methods for puzzle-solving and
reassembly tasks. Our dataset has unique properties that are uncommon to current
benchmarks for 2D and 3D puzzle solving. The fragments and fractures are realistic,
caused by a collapse of a fresco during a World War II bombing at the Pompeii
archaeological park. The fragments are also eroded and have missing pieces
with irregular shapes and different dimensions, challenging further the reassembly
algorithms. The dataset is multi-modal providing high resolution images with
characteristic pictorial elements, detailed 3D scans of the fragments and metadata annotated by the archaeologists. Ground truth has been generated through
several years of unceasing eldwork, including the excavation and cleaning of
each fragment, followed by manual puzzle solving by archaeologists of a subset of
approx. 1000 pieces among the 16000 available. After digitizing all the fragments
in 3D, a benchmark was prepared to challenge current reassembly and puzzlesolving methods that often solve more simplistic synthetic scenarios. The tested
baselines show that there clearly exists a gap to ll in solving this computationally
complex problem.
⋆: equal contribution
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

