Generating Highly Designable Proteins with
Geometric Algebra Flow Matching

Simon Wagner∗ 1,2

Leif Seute∗ 1,2,3 Vsevolod Viliuga1,3,4
Frauke Gräter1,2,3 Jan Stühmer1,5

Nicolas Wolf1,2,3

1

Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies, Heidelberg, Germany
2
IWR, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
3
Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz, Germany
4
SciLifeLab and DBB at Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
5
IAR, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany

Abstract
We introduce a generative model for protein backbone design utilizing geometric
products and higher order message passing. In particular, we propose Clifford
Frame Attention (CFA), an extension of the invariant point attention (IPA) architecture from AlphaFold2, in which the backbone residue frames and geometric
features are represented in the projective geometric algebra. This enables to construct geometrically expressive messages between residues, including higher order
terms, using the bilinear operations of the algebra. We evaluate our architecture by
incorporating it into the framework of FrameFlow, a state-of-the-art flow matching
model for protein backbone generation. The proposed model achieves high designability, diversity and novelty, while also sampling protein backbones that follow
the statistical distribution of secondary structure elements found in naturally occurring proteins, a property so far only insufficiently achieved by many state-of-the-art
generative models.

1

Introduction

Recent years have shown tremendous progress in applying deep learning to computational chemistry,
where applications of learning-based approaches have enabled unprecedented progress across a
broad range of problems, such as molecular property prediction [55, 28, 50, 11], protein-ligand
docking [22], protein structure prediction [32, 3, 38], and de novo protein design [63, 68, 10, 67, 37].
In case of protein design, state-of-the-art methods typically represent the structure of a protein of
N residues as an element of SE(3)N , i.e. as a collection of N frames, each of which describes the
position and orientation of an individual protein residue. Among the most successful methods are
those based on diffusion models [53, 54, 63, 68, 37, 1] and flow matching [39, 19, 56, 67], which
make use of architectures that incorporate the invariant point attention (IPA) of AlphaFold2 [32]. By
modeling a protein through the frames of its backbone, the task of protein structure generation is
reformulated as to model the distribution of a set of frames, an inherently geometric problem.
Advances in geometric deep learning have lead to architectures that are equivariant towards rotations
and translations [14, 21, 15], which can be regarded as a geometric inductive bias that enhances
performance and data efficiency. Most generative models for protein design achieve equivariance by
using geometric features that are expressed in the canonical local coordinate frames representing the
protein backbone. The coordinates of these features are thus invariant with respect to global rotations
and translations, which allows to apply general layers and non-linearities.
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

