How Diffusion Models Learn to Factorize and
Compose

Qiyao Liang Ziming Liu Mitchell Ostrow Ila Fiete
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{qiyao,zmliu,ostrow,fiete}@mit.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models are capable of generating photo-realistic images that combine
elements which likely do not appear together in the training set, demonstrating
the ability to compositionally generalize. Nonetheless, the precise mechanism of
compositionality and how it is acquired through training remains elusive. Inspired
by cognitive neuroscientific approaches, we consider a highly reduced setting
to examine whether and when diffusion models learn semantically meaningful
and factorized representations of composable features. We performed extensive
controlled experiments on conditional Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPMs) trained to generate various forms of 2D Gaussian bump images. We
found that the models learn factorized but not fully continuous manifold representations for encoding continuous features of variation underlying the data. With such
representations, models demonstrate superior feature compositionality but limited
ability to interpolate over unseen values of a given feature. Our experimental results
further demonstrate that by training with independent factors of variation, diffusion
models can attain compositionality with few compositional examples, suggesting
a more efficient way to train DDPMs. Finally, we connect manifold formation in
diffusion models to percolation theory in physics, offering insight into the sudden
onset of factorized representation learning. Our thorough toy experiments thus
contribute a deeper understanding of how diffusion models capture compositional
structure in data.

1

Introduction

Large-scale text-to-image generative models can produce photo-realistic synthetic images that combine elements in a novel fashion (compositional generalization). Nonetheless, the ability of models to
do so, as well as their failure modes, are not well-studied systematically in large diffusion models
due to the size of the model and the complex and high-dimensional nature of their training datasets.
Factorization and compositional generalization have been theoretically and empirically investigated in
many deep generative models before [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. However, these studies have not reached
a unanimous conclusion on whether factorized representations learned in the intermediate layers of
the model promote compositional generalization in the model performance. Specifically, several
studies [5, 4, 9] have found little correlation between factorization and compositionality, contrary to
others that suggest that factorization promotes compositionality [10, 2, 3, 11, 8]. As a result, there
is no consensus on the exact mechanism of compositionality and how models gain the ability to
compositionally generalize. However, these previous studies involve data with a complex mix of
discrete and continuously varying features, making it difficult to explicitly analyze the model’s learned
representations beyond the disentanglement score, and thereby hindering a deeper understanding of
factorization and compositionality.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

