Axioms for AI Alignment from Human Feedback

Luise Ge
Washington University in St. Louis

Daniel Halpern
Harvard University

Evi Micha
Harvard University

g.luise@wustl.edu

dhalpern@g.harvard.edu

emicha@seas.harvard.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University

Itai Shapira
Harvard University

arielpro@g.harvard.edu

itaishapira@g.harvard.edu

Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Washington University in St. Louis

Junlin Wu
Washington University in St. Louis

yvorobeychik@wustl.edu

junlin.wu@wustl.edu

Abstract
In the context of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), the reward
function is generally derived from maximum likelihood estimation of a random
utility model based on pairwise comparisons made by humans. The problem of
learning a reward function is one of preference aggregation that, we argue, largely
falls within the scope of social choice theory. From this perspective, we can evaluate different aggregation methods via established axioms, examining whether
these methods meet or fail well-known standards. We demonstrate that both the
Bradley-Terry-Luce Model and its broad generalizations fail to meet basic axioms.
In response, we develop novel rules for learning reward functions with strong axiomatic guarantees. A key innovation from the standpoint of social choice is that
our problem has a linear structure, which greatly restricts the space of feasible
rules and leads to a new paradigm that we call linear social choice.

1

Introduction

The alignment of AI models with human values is widely recognized as a crucial task. A prominent method for this task, reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF), has been used in
different applications, such as robotics [4, 17] and recommendations [28, 1]. Recently, RLHF has
attracted significant attention as a tool for fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) [22, 32, 26]. A
typical implementation of RLHF involves learning a reward model using a pre-trained LLM, which
is then utilized to fine-tune an existing LLM. During the learning step, human feedback is provided
in the form of ordinal comparisons, and a reward function is learned from these. The most common learning method assumes an underlying random utility model such as the Bradley-Terry-Luce
(BTL) model [5, 22, 8] and computes a reward function that corresponds to a maximum likelihood
estimator for the observed comparisons.
Is this the “right” way of aggregating individual preferences towards a socially desirable reward
function? To answer this question, we draw on social choice theory, a field that studies collective
decision making through a mathematical lens [6]. The maximum likelihood estimation approach
is in line with a well-established body of work that assumes that different human participants have
preferences stemming from noisy estimation of a common ground truth, and the goal is to learn this
ground truth as accurately as possible [29]. But this is not the case when it comes to questions of AI
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

