Why Warmup the Learning Rate?
Underlying Mechanisms and Improvements

Dayal Singh Kalra 2

Maissam Barkeshli 1

Abstract
It is common in deep learning to warm up the learning rate η, often by a linear
schedule between ηinit = 0 and a predetermined target ηtrgt . In this paper, we show
through systematic experiments using SGD and Adam that the overwhelming benefit of warmup arises from allowing the network to tolerate larger ηtrgt by forcing the
network to more well-conditioned areas of the loss landscape. The ability to handle
larger ηtrgt makes hyperparameter tuning more robust while improving the final
performance. We uncover different regimes of operation during the warmup period,
depending on whether training starts off in a progressive sharpening or sharpness
reduction phase, which in turn depends on the initialization and parameterization.
Using these insights, we show how ηinit can be properly chosen by utilizing the loss
catapult mechanism, which saves on the number of warmup steps, in some cases
completely eliminating the need for warmup. We also suggest an initialization
for the variance in Adam which provides benefits similar to warmup.

1

Introduction

One of the most important choices to make in gradient-based optimization is the learning rate (step
size) η. If η is too small, then learning may take place too slowly or the model might get stuck in
unfavorable regions of the loss landscape. If η is too large, training will typically diverge. In practice,
it is common to pick a dynamical learning rate schedule ηt [2, 4, 40, 26]. Modern learning rate
schedules for deep learning typically consist of a warmup period where ηt is increased linearly from
zero to a target value ηtrgt over a warmup time Twrm [13, 34]. After the warmup period, it is common
to eventually decay the learning rate, for example via a cosine decay schedule [34, 26, 40].
Given that warmup is standard in the practitioner’s toolkit, it is important to understand it deeply and
identify improvements. In modern settings, perhaps the earliest work to use warmup was [14], which
used a small constant learning rate for the first few epochs of training and then switched to a larger
learning rate. A linear warmup schedule was later introduced in [13]. The intuition given was that to
scale the minibatch size in SGD by a factor of k, it is natural to also scale the learning rate by a factor
of k, provided the model is not changing too rapidly and successive gradients are roughly aligned.
However at the beginning of training, the model is changing rapidly, so it is natural to start with a
lower learning rate and gradually increase it to the target value after the network has stabilized.
Other explanations suggest that since the network is initialized randomly, the gradient steps at the
beginning of training are not meaningful, and thus it would be harmful to take large steps in such
directions [40], so it makes sense to take smaller steps early in training. The analysis by [12] suggests
that warmup primarily limits the magnitude of weight updates in the deeper layers, preventing large
instabilities. It has also been suggested that the key benefit of warmup arises for adaptive optimizers,
such as Adam: [23] argues that the variance of the adaptive learning rate is large during early training
because the network has seen too few training samples; it is asserted that this large variance is harmful,
1
2

Department of Physics and Joint Quantum Institute, University of Maryland, College Park
Institute for Physical Science and Technology, University of Maryland, College Park

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

