Exploiting Activation Sparsity with Dense to
Dynamic-k Mixture-of-Experts Conversion

Filip Szatkowski∗
IDEAS NCBR
Warsaw University of Technology
Mikołaj Piórczyński∗
Warsaw University of Technology

Bartosz Wójcik∗†
IDEAS NCBR
Jagiellonian University ‡
Simone Scardapane
Sapienza University of Rome

Abstract
Transformer models can face practical limitations due to their high computational
requirements. At the same time, such models exhibit significant activation sparsity,
which can be leveraged to reduce the inference cost by converting parts of the
network into equivalent Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layers. Despite the crucial role
played by activation sparsity, its impact on this process remains unexplored. We
demonstrate that the efficiency of the conversion can be significantly enhanced
by a proper regularization of the activation sparsity of the base model. Moreover,
motivated by the high variance of the number of activated neurons for different
inputs, we introduce a more effective dynamic-k expert selection rule that adjusts
the number of executed experts on a per-token basis. To achieve further savings,
we extend this approach to multi-head attention projections. Finally, we develop an
efficient implementation that translates these computational savings into actual wallclock speedup. The proposed method, Dense to Dynamic-k Mixture-of-Experts
(D2DMoE), outperforms existing approaches on common NLP and vision tasks,
reducing inference cost by up to 60% without significantly impacting performance.

1

Introduction

Transformers have become a predominant model architecture in various domains of deep learning
such as machine translation [47], language modeling [6, 31], and computer vision [7, 21]. The
widespread effectiveness of Transformer models in various applications is closely related to their
ability to scale efficiently with the number of model parameters [20], prompting researchers to train
progressively larger and larger models [45, 19]. However, the considerable computational demands
of these models often restrict their deployment in practical settings with limited resources.
At the same time, Transformer models exhibit considerable activation sparsity in their intermediate
representations [24], which suggests that most of their computations are redundant. Conditional
computation methods can reduce these unnecessary costs by using only a subset of the model
parameters for any given input [14]. In particular, Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layers [38], consisting
of multiple experts that are sparsely executed for any input token, are an effective way to decouple
the number of parameters of the model from its computational cost [3]. As shown by [52], many
pre-trained dense Transformer models can be made more efficient by converting their FFN blocks
into MoE layers, a process they call MoEfication.
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: b.wojcik@doctoral.uj.edu.pl
‡
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Doctoral School of Exact and Natural Sciences
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

