Distribution Learning with Valid Outputs Beyond the
Worst-Case
Nick Rittler
University of California - San Diego
nrittler@ucsd.edu

Kamalika Chaudhuri
University of California - San Diego
kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Generative models at times produce “invalid” outputs, such as images with generation artifacts and unnatural sounds. Validity-constrained distribution learning
attempts to address this problem by requiring that the learned distribution have a
provably small fraction of its mass in invalid parts of space – something which standard loss minimization does not always ensure. To this end, a learner in this model
can guide the learning via “validity queries”, which allow it to ascertain the validity
of individual examples. Prior work on this problem takes a worst-case stance,
showing that proper learning requires an exponential number of validity queries,
and demonstrating an improper algorithm which – while generating guarantees
in a wide-range of settings – makes an atypical polynomial number of validity
queries. In this work, we take a first step towards characterizing regimes where
guaranteeing validity is easier than in the worst-case. We show that when the data
distribution lies in the model class and the log-loss is minimized, the number of
samples required to ensure validity has a weak dependence on the validity requirement. Additionally, we show that when the validity region belongs to a VC-class, a
limited number of validity queries are often sufficient.

1

Introduction

When sampling from a generative model, it is highly desirable that its outputs meet some basic
criteria of quality. In the case of text, this may mean that generated sentences respect grammar rules,
or avoid the use of biased or offensive language [1, 2]. When generating code, a criterion may be that
the generated code successfully compiles [3]. In image generation, we might wish to avoid blurry
outputs, or those possessing generation artifacts which clearly distinguish them from natural images
[4, 5].
In this paper, we examine the statistical cost of ensuring that learned distributions produce such
“valid” outputs. To do so, we consider an elegant formulation of the problem of learning such valid
models due to [3]. In their work, training data are generated according to a probability distribution P ,
and the binary “validity” of examples is determined by some unknown “validity function” v. Given
sample access to P and query access to v, a learner attempts to identify a probability distribution
which outputs invalid examples with probability at most 2 . At the same time, the distribution should
have a loss which is at most 1 worse than that of the minimum loss model in a class Q which outputs
valid examples with probability 1. Here, query access to v captures the idea that collecting samples is
often cheap, but verifying validity is often less so, possibly requiring a human-in-the-loop.
The initial work of [3] suggests that choosing such a low-loss, high-validity distribution q̂ may require
a large number of validity queries. Under the assumption that P is “fully-valid”, i.e. outputs a valid
example with probability 1, they show that in the worst case, 2Ω(1/1 ) validity queries are required to
choose such a model q̂ from the class Q. They follow this result with an improper learning algorithm
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

