ALPS: Improved Optimization for Highly Sparse
One-Shot Pruning for Large Language Models

Xiang Meng
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
mengx@mit.edu

Kayhan Behdin
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
behdink@mit.edu

Haoyue Wang
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
haoyuew@mit.edu

Rahul Mazumder
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
rahulmaz@mit.edu

Abstract
The impressive performance of Large Language Models (LLMs) across various
natural language processing tasks comes at the cost of vast computational resources
and storage requirements. One-shot pruning techniques offer a way to alleviate
these burdens by removing redundant weights without the need for retraining.
Yet, the massive scale of LLMs often forces current pruning approaches to rely
on heuristics instead of optimization-based techniques, potentially resulting in
suboptimal compression. In this paper, we introduce ALPS, an optimizationbased framework that tackles the pruning problem using the operator splitting
technique and a preconditioned conjugate gradient-based post-processing step. Our
approach incorporates novel techniques to accelerate and theoretically guarantee
convergence while leveraging vectorization and GPU parallelism for efficiency.
ALPS outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of the pruning objective and
perplexity reduction, particularly for highly sparse models. On the LLaMA3-8B
model with 70% sparsity, ALPS achieves a 29% reduction in test perplexity on
the WikiText dataset and a 8% improvement in zero-shot benchmark performance
compared to existing methods. Our code is available at https://github.com/
mazumder-lab/ALPS.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized the field of natural language processing, demonstrating remarkable performance across a wide spectrum of tasks, from question answering and text
generation to sentiment analysis and named entity recognition [Wei et al., 2022, Bubeck et al., 2023,
Achiam et al., 2023]. The success of LLMs can in part be attributed to their massive scale—state-ofthe-art models like OPT-175B [Zhang et al., 2022a] and LLaMA3 [Dubey et al., 2024] have hundreds
of billions of parameters. However, this enormous size comes at a steep cost in terms of storage and
computational resources. For instance, the OPT-175B model requires at least 320 GB of memory to
store its parameters in half-precision (FP16) format, necessitating the use of multiple high-end GPUs
for inference [Frantar and Alistarh, 2023]. To make LLMs more accessible and efficient, considerable
efforts have been made to compress these models, with a particular emphasis on model quantization
techniques [Lin et al., 2023, Behdin et al., 2023, Dettmers et al., 2023].
Network pruning [LeCun et al., 1989, Hassibi and Stork, 1992, Han et al., 2015], a complementary
approach to quantization, has received comparatively less attention in the realm of LLMs. Pruning
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

