Fast Channel Simulation via
Error-Correcting Codes

Sharang M. Sriramu
School of ECE
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
sms579@cornell.edu

Rochelle Barsz
School of ECE
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
rsb359@cornell.edu

Elizabeth Polito
School of ECE
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
emp234@cornell.edu

Aaron B. Wagner
School of ECE
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
wagner@cornell.edu

Abstract
We consider the design of practically-implementable schemes for the task of
channel simulation. Existing methods do not scale with the number of simultaneous
uses of the channel and are therefore unable to harness the amortization gains
associated with simulating many uses of the channel at once. We show how
techniques from the theory of error-correcting codes can be applied to achieve
scalability and hence improved performance. As an exemplar, we focus on how
polar codes can be used to efficiently simulate i.i.d. copies of a class of binaryoutput channels.

1

Introduction

Channel simulation refers to the task in which Alice observes a realization x of a random variable X
and sends a bit string to Bob. Bob, who shares common randomness with Alice, outputs a random
variable Y using both the message and the common randomness. The goal is to minimize the length
of the bit string subject to the constraint that Y should have a specified distribution PY |X (·|x).
This problem can be viewed as a “soft” or “stochastic” generalization of quantization. As with
quantization, Y has a digital representation (through Alice’s message), and it can be viewed as a
degraded version of X. The difference is that here the degrading process is stochastic in general. In
fact, the quantization problem is subsumed by taking the channel PY |X to be deterministic.
This stochastic generalization of quantization arises in lossy compression of various types of sources
including images [Flamich et al., 2020, Ballé et al., 2020], models [Havasi et al., 2018], and gradients [Shah et al., 2022]. In these applications, X often represents a vector of latent variables,
model weights, or even an image consisting of millions of pixels [Theis et al., 2022]. The channel
of interest is therefore high dimensional, and it is usually independent across the dimensions. For
conventional quantization, it has long been recognized that the optimum rate-distortion tradeoff
is more favorable in higher dimensions [Cover and Thomas, 2006], a trend that one expects to
generalize to channel simulation. Indeed, let n · Rn be the minimum number of bits required to
generate Y n = (Y1 , . . . , Yn ), when X n is i.i.d. and Y n is conditionally i.i.d. given X n . Thus Rn is
the minimum number of bits per dimension when simulating the channel n times. The sequence nRn
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

