Do causal predictors generalize better to new domains?

Vivian Y. Nastl
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany and Tübingen AI Center
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
vivian.nastl@tuebingen.mpg.de
Moritz Hardt
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany and Tübingen AI Center
hardt@is.mpg.de

Abstract
We study how well machine learning models trained on causal features generalize
across domains. We consider 16 prediction tasks on tabular datasets covering
applications in health, employment, education, social benefits, and politics. Each
dataset comes with multiple domains, allowing us to test how well a model trained
in one domain performs in another. For each prediction task, we select features
that have a causal influence on the target of prediction. Our goal is to test the
hypothesis that models trained on causal features generalize better across domains.
Without exception, we find that predictors using all available features, regardless of
causality, have better in-domain and out-of-domain accuracy than predictors using
causal features. Moreover, even the absolute drop in accuracy from one domain
to the other is no better for causal predictors than for models that use all features.
In addition, we show that recent causal machine learning methods for domain
generalization do not perform better in our evaluation than standard predictors
trained on the set of causal features. Likewise, causal discovery algorithms either
fail to run or select causal variables that perform no better than our selection.
Extensive robustness checks confirm that our findings are stable under variable
misclassification.

1

Introduction

The accuracy of machine learning models typically drops significantly when a model trained in one
domain is evaluated in another. This empirical fact is the fruit of numerous studies [Torralba and
Efros, 2011, Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz, 2020, Miller et al., 2021]. But it’s less clear what to do about
it. Many machine learning researchers see hope in causal modeling. Causal relationships, the story
goes, reflect stable mechanisms invariant to changes in an environment. Models that utilize these
invariant mechanisms should therefore generalize well to new domains [Peters et al., 2017]. The
idea may be sound in theory. Intriguing theoretical results carve out assumptions under which causal
machine learning methods generalize gracefully from one domain to the other [Heinze-Deml et al.,
2018, Meinshausen, 2018, Schölkopf et al., 2021, Pearl and Bareinboim, 2022, Subbaswamy et al.,
2022, Wang et al., 2022b].
These theoretical developments have fueled optimism about the out-of-domain generalization abilities
of causal machine learning. The general sentiment is that causal methods enjoy greater external
validity than kitchen-sink model fitting. In this work, we put the theorized external validity of causal
machine learning to an empirical test in a wide range of concrete datasets.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

