Bridging Model-Based Optimization
and Generative Modeling via
Conservative Fine-Tuning of Diffusion Models

Masatoshi Uehara 1∗ Yulai Zhao 2∗ Ehsan Hajiramezanali 1 Gabriele Scalia 1
Gokcen Eraslan 1 Avantika Lal 1 Sergey Levine3† Tommaso Biancalani 1 †
1
Genentech 2 Princeton University 3 UC Berkeley

Abstract
AI-driven design problems, such as DNA/protein sequence design, are commonly
tackled from two angles: generative modeling, which efficiently captures the
feasible design space (e.g., natural images or biological sequences), and modelbased optimization, which utilizes reward models for extrapolation. To combine the
strengths of both approaches, we adopt a hybrid method that fine-tunes cutting-edge
diffusion models by optimizing reward models through RL. Although prior work
has explored similar avenues, they primarily focus on scenarios where accurate
reward models are accessible. In contrast, we concentrate on an offline setting
where a reward model is unknown, and we must learn from static offline datasets, a
common scenario in scientific domains. In offline scenarios, existing approaches
tend to suffer from overoptimization, as they may be misled by the reward model
in out-of-distribution regions. To address this, we introduce a conservative finetuning approach, BRAID, by optimizing a conservative reward model, which
includes additional penalization outside of offline data distributions. Through
empirical and theoretical analysis, we demonstrate the capability of our approach to
outperform the best designs in offline data, leveraging the extrapolation capabilities
of reward models while avoiding the generation of invalid designs through pretrained diffusion models. The main code is available at https://github.
com/masa-ue/RLfinetuning_Diffusion_Bioseq.

1

Introduction

Computational design involves synthesizing designs that optimize a particular reward function.
This approach finds applications in various scientific domains, including DNA/RNA/protein design
(Sample et al., 2019; Gosai et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024). While physical simulations are often used in
design problems, lacking extensive knowledge of underlying physical processes necessitates solutions
that solely rely on experimental data. In these scenarios, we need an algorithm that synthesizes
an improved design by utilizing a dataset of past experiments (i.e., static offline dataset). Existing
research has addressed computational design from two primary angles. The first angle is generative
modeling such as diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), which aim to directly model the distribution of
valid designs by emulating the offline data. This approach allows us to model the space of “valid”
designs (e.g., natural images, natural DNA sequences, foldable protein sequences (Avdeyev et al.,
2023)). The second angle is offline model-based optimization (MBO), which entails learning the
reward model from static offline data and optimizing it with respect to design inputs (Brookes et al.,
2019; Trabucco et al., 2021; Angermueller et al., 2019; Linder and Seelig, 2021; Fannjiang and
∗
†

Equal contribution:
uehara.masatoshi@gene.com, yz6292@princeton.edu
Corresponding authors: svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu, biancalt@gene.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

