AmoebaLLM: Constructing Any-Shape Large
Language Models for Efficient and Instant Deployment

Yonggan Fu, Zhongzhi Yu∗, Junwei Li∗, Jiayi Qian∗, Yongan Zhang, Xiangchi Yuan,
Dachuan Shi, Roman Yakunin, Yingyan (Celine) Lin
Georgia Institute of Technology
{yonggan.fu, celine.lin}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the transformative capabilities of large language models (LLMs)
across various natural language tasks, there has been a growing demand to deploy these models effectively across diverse real-world applications and platforms.
However, the challenge of efficiently deploying LLMs has become increasingly
pronounced due to the varying application-specific performance requirements
and the rapid evolution of computational platforms, which feature diverse resource constraints and deployment flows. These varying requirements necessitate
LLMs that can adapt their structures (depth and width) for optimal efficiency
across different platforms and application specifications. To address this critical gap, we propose AmoebaLLM, a novel framework designed to enable the
instant derivation of LLM subnets of arbitrary shapes, which achieve the accuracyefficiency frontier and can be extracted immediately after a one-time fine-tuning.
In this way, AmoebaLLM significantly facilitates rapid deployment tailored to
various platforms and applications. Specifically, AmoebaLLM integrates three
innovative components: (1) a knowledge-preserving subnet selection strategy that
features a dynamic-programming approach for depth shrinking and an importancedriven method for width shrinking; (2) a shape-aware mixture of LoRAs to mitigate gradient conflicts among subnets during fine-tuning; and (3) an in-place
distillation scheme with loss-magnitude balancing as the fine-tuning objective.
Extensive experiments validate that AmoebaLLM not only sets new standards
in LLM adaptability but also successfully delivers subnets that achieve stateof-the-art trade-offs between accuracy and efficiency. Our code is available at
https://github.com/GATECH-EIC/AmoebaLLM.

1

Introduction

The remarkable abilities and transformative impacts of large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4]
have been paralleled by a growing interest in deploying them across a wide range of real-world
applications and diverse platforms. However, given the rapid evolution of computational platforms
and varying application-specific requirements, the challenge of deploying LLMs efficiently on
various platforms with differing specifications has become more pronounced. This is because
diverse platforms often feature different resource constraints and deployment flows, necessitating
LLMs with varying structures and shapes (i.e., depth and width) to achieve maximized execution
efficiency, as affirmed by our profiling in Sec. 2. Moreover, even the same platform may have varying
requirements for LLMs’ execution efficiency depending on factors such as on-device battery status.
These varying requirements demand a flexible framework capable of adapting to both the intrinsic
hardware constraints and the extrinsic demands of diverse application scenarios.
∗

Contributed equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

