The Map Equation Goes Neural:
Mapping Network Flows with Graph Neural Networks

Christopher Blöcker∗
Data Analytics Group
Department of Informatics
University of Zurich, Switzerland
christopher.bloecker@uzh.ch

Chester Tan
Chair of Machine Learning for Complex Networks
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Germany
chester.tan@uni-wuerzburg.de

Ingo Scholtes†
Chair of Machine Learning for Complex Networks
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Germany
ingo.scholtes@uni-wuerzburg.de

Abstract
Community detection is an essential tool for unsupervised data exploration and
revealing the organisational structure of networked systems. With a long history
in network science, community detection typically relies on objective functions,
optimised with custom-tailored search algorithms, but often without leveraging
recent advances in deep learning. Recently, first works have started incorporating
such objectives into loss functions for deep graph clustering and pooling. We
consider the map equation, a popular information-theoretic objective function
for unsupervised community detection, and express it in differentiable tensor
form for optimisation through gradient descent. Our formulation turns the map
equation compatible with any neural network architecture, enables end-to-end
learning, incorporates node features, and chooses the optimal number of clusters
automatically, all without requiring explicit regularisation. Applied to unsupervised
graph clustering tasks, we achieve competitive performance against state-of-the-art
deep graph clustering baselines in synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Many real-world networked systems are organised in communities: groups of nodes that are more
similar to each other than to the rest. Communities provide insights into network structure at
the mesoscale, revealing sub-systems by analysing link patterns. Motivated by different research
questions, several characterisations of what constitutes “good” communities have been proposed [1,
2], however, neither of them is fundamentally more correct than any other. Moreover, no single
community-detection method outperforms all others on any given network [3], motivating the ongoing
efforts of research on community detection. Typically, community-detection approaches formulate
an objective function that calculates a quality score for a given partition of the network’s nodes into
communities. Finding the best partition is an NP-hard search problem and often involves custom
heuristic algorithms that attempt to minimise their objective function [4, 5, 6].
∗
Also at Chair of Machine Learning for Complex Networks, Center for Artificial Intelligence and Data
Science, Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Germany
†
Also at Data Analytics Group, Department of Informatics, University of Zurich, Switzerland

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

