NeuralSolver: Learning Algorithms For Consistent
and Efficient Extrapolation Across General Tasks

Bernardo Esteves∗
INESC-ID,
Instituto Superior Técnico,
Universidade de Lisboa

Miguel Vasco
Department of Intelligent Systems
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden

Francisco S. Melo
INESC-ID,
Instituto Superior Técnico,
Universidade de Lisboa

Abstract
We contribute NeuralSolver, a novel recurrent solver that can efficiently and
consistently extrapolate, i.e., learn algorithms from smaller problems (in terms
of observation size) and execute those algorithms in large problems. Contrary
to previous recurrent solvers, NeuralSolver can be naturally applied in both
same-size problems, where the input and output sizes are the same, and in differentsize problems, where the size of the input and output differ. To allow for this
versatility, we design NeuralSolver with three main components: a recurrent
module, that iteratively processes input information at different scales, a processing
module, responsible for aggregating the previously processed information, and a
curriculum-based training scheme, that improves the extrapolation performance
of the method. To evaluate our method we introduce a set of novel different-size
tasks and we show that NeuralSolver consistently outperforms the prior state-ofthe-art recurrent solvers in extrapolating to larger problems, considering smaller
training problems and requiring less parameters than other approaches. Code
available at https://github.com/esteveste/NeuralSolver

1

Introduction

Humans can solve complex reasoning tasks by extrapolating: employing and combining elementary
logical components to build more elaborate strategies. Machine learning models excel at pattern
recognition, often outperforming humans in classification [1, 2], control [3] and prediction tasks [4].
However, these models still struggle at reasoning , which affects their ability to maintain their
performance for increasingly harder versions of the same task [5]. A particular type of difficulty
emerges from the increase in dimensionality of the input. Intuitively, learning algorithms to perform
tasks, e.g., finding the goal in a maze (Figure 1), becomes increasingly harder for larger problems.
We focus on designing learning algorithms that are able to efficiently extrapolate, i.e., are able to learn
algorithms to solve tasks over small problems (in terms of the dimensionality of the input) and execute
over arbitrarily large problems, without a significant loss in performance nor additional fine-tuning.
Recently, a novel class of methods, which we denote by recurrent solvers, have been proposed that
employ recurrent neural networks to extrapolate [5, 6]. Compared to feed-forward networks, which
have finite depth, recurrent networks can be iterated to an arbitrary depth at execution time. By doing
so, these models can extrapolate to significantly larger problems than the ones seen during training by
executing more recurrent steps. However, current recurrent solvers can only be applied to same-size
problems, such as the case of image generation, where the dimensionality of the input (e.g., image
size) is the same as the dimensionality of the output. This limitation inhibits the use of these methods
in a wide range of tasks, which we call different-size tasks, where the input and output dimensions
are different (e.g., classification and decision-making tasks).
∗

Correspondence to: bernardo.esteves@tecnico.ulisboa.pt

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

