Rethinking Misalignment in Vision-Language Model
Adaptation from a Causal Perspective

Yanan Zhang1,2,∗, Jiangmeng Li2,∗, Lixiang Liu1,2 , Wenwen Qiang2,†
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
zhangyanan110199@gmail.com, {jiangmeng2019, lixiang, qiangwenwen}@iscas.ac.cn

Abstract
Foundational Vision-Language models such as CLIP have exhibited impressive
generalization in downstream tasks. However, CLIP suffers from a two-level
misalignment issue, i.e., task misalignment and data misalignment, when adapting
to specific tasks. Soft prompt tuning has mitigated the task misalignment, yet
the data misalignment remains a challenge. To analyze the impacts of the data
misalignment, we revisit the pre-training and adaptation processes of CLIP and
develop a structural causal model. We discover that while we expect to capture taskrelevant information for downstream tasks accurately, the task-irrelevant knowledge
impacts the prediction results and hampers the modeling of the true relationships
between the images and the predicted classes. As task-irrelevant knowledge is
unobservable, we leverage the front-door adjustment and propose Causality-Guided
Semantic Decoupling and Classification (CDC) to mitigate the interference of taskirrelevant knowledge. Specifically, we decouple semantics contained in the data of
downstream tasks and perform classification based on each semantic. Furthermore,
we employ the Dempster-Shafer evidence theory to evaluate the uncertainty of each
prediction generated by diverse semantics. Experiments conducted in multiple
different settings have consistently demonstrated the effectiveness of CDC.

1

Introduction

Benefiting from large-scale training data, foundational Vision-Language models such as CLIP [1],
ALIGN [2], and Florence [3] have demonstrated remarkable zero-shot generalization capabilities
across a wide range of downstream tasks.
Despite the strong generalization of CLIP, there exists a two-level misalignment between CLIP and
downstream tasks, which hinders its adaptation to these tasks. Specifically, the first misalignment
is caused by the discrepancy between the pre-training objectives of CLIP and the objectives of
downstream tasks, i.e., the task misalignment. During pre-training, the texts associated with images
often contain rich semantic information, e.g., “a yellow Abyssinian is lying on a table”. Accordingly,
as shown in Figure 1(a), in the learned embedding space, the distance between the image and the
entire textual description can be close, indicating a strong semantic relationship, but the distance
between the image and the individual semantic elements such as “Abyssinian” or “table” is not
sufficiently close. When performing a downstream task that requires classifying an image as an
“Abyssinian”, the model encounters a challenge in capturing the specific semantics associated with
“Abyssinian” and may fail to complete the task. To address this issue, soft prompt tuning [4, 5, 6] is
proposed. By introducing learnable tokens into the model and tuning them with task-specific data,
CLIP can identify task-related semantics and adapt to the corresponding task.
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

