AV-GS: Learning Material and Geometry Aware
Priors for Novel View Acoustic Synthesis

Swapnil Bhosale
University of Surrey, UK

Haosen Yang
University of Surrey, UK

Jiankang Deng
Imperial College London, UK

Diptesh Kanojia
University of Surrey, UK

Xiatian Zhu
University of Surrey, UK

Abstract
Novel view acoustic synthesis (NVAS) aims to render binaural audio at any target
viewpoint, given a mono audio emitted by a sound source at a 3D scene. Existing
methods have proposed NeRF-based implicit models to exploit visual cues as a
condition for synthesizing binaural audio. However, in addition to low efficiency
originating from heavy NeRF rendering, these methods all have a limited ability
of characterizing the entire scene environment such as room geometry, material
properties, and the spatial relation between the listener and sound source. To
address these issues, we propose a novel Audio-Visual Gaussian Splatting (AVGS) model. To obtain an implicit material-aware and geometry-aware condition
for audio synthesis, we learn an explicit point-based scene representation with
an audio-guidance parameter on locally initialized Gaussian points, taking into
account the space relation from the listener and sound source. To make the visual
scene model audio adaptive, we propose a point densification and pruning strategy
to optimally distribute the Gaussian points, with the per-point contribution in
sound propagation (e.g., more points needed for texture-less wall surfaces as they
affect sound path diversion). Extensive experiments validate the superiority of
our AV-GS over existing alternatives on the real-world RWAS and simulationbased SoundSpaces datasets. Project page: https://surrey-uplab.github.
io/research/avgs/

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis [25, 1, 14] allows to generate images for any target viewpoints, which has
been extensively studied and advanced. For real-world applications in augmented reality (AR) and
virtual reality (VR), solely visual rendering of 3D scenes without spatial audio (i.e., deaf) fails to
fully immerse users in the virtual environment. This thus inspires a recent surge of investigating
novel view acoustic synthesis (NVAS) [4, 17, 5, 32]. By synthesizing binaural audio (two channels
corresponding to the left and right ear) taking into account the factors like directionality, distance and
relative elevation, this can create a spatial audio experience akin to real-life perception [23]. However,
realistic binaural audio synthesis is challenging, since the wavelengths of sound waves are much
longer, necessitating the modeling of wave diffraction and scattering. To illustrate, while blocking
the sun with your thumb is easy, blocking thunder sounds with your thumb is difficult because sound
waves wrap around obstacles. A sound wave propagating through a 3D space undergoes various
sophisticated acoustic phenomena, like direct sound, early reflections, and late reverberations.
Aiming to render binaural audio from the mono audio for target poses, Neural Acoustic Field (NAF)
[21] learns room acoustics in a synthetic environment with a 2D grid of implicit representations as a
condition. However, deriving a 2D representation grid for real-view scenes is extremely challenging in
the presence of unconstrained objects, materials, and occlusion in 3D scenes. Alternatively, AV-NeRF
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

