Continuously Learning, Adapting, and Improving:
A Dual-Process Approach to Autonomous Driving

Jianbiao Mei1,2,∗ Yukai Ma1,2,∗ Xuemeng Yang2 Licheng Wen2 Xinyu Cai2
Xin Li2,4 Daocheng Fu2 Bo Zhang2 Pinlong Cai2 Min Dou2
Botian Shi2,† Liang He3 Yong Liu1,† Yu Qiao2
1
Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
East China Normal University 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Autonomous driving has advanced significantly due to sensors, machine learning,
and artificial intelligence improvements. However, prevailing methods struggle
with intricate scenarios and causal relationships, hindering adaptability and interpretability in varied environments. To address the above problems, we introduce
LeapAD, a novel paradigm for autonomous driving inspired by the human cognitive process. Specifically, LeapAD emulates human attention by selecting critical
objects relevant to driving decisions, simplifying environmental interpretation,
and mitigating decision-making complexities. Additionally, LeapAD incorporates an innovative dual-process decision-making module, which consists of an
Analytic Process (System-II) for thorough analysis and reasoning, along with a
Heuristic Process (System-I) for swift and empirical processing. The Analytic
Process leverages its logical reasoning to accumulate linguistic driving experience, which is then transferred to the Heuristic Process by supervised fine-tuning.
Through reflection mechanisms and a growing memory bank, LeapAD continuously improves itself from past mistakes in a closed-loop environment. Closed-loop
testing in CARLA shows that LeapAD outperforms all methods relying solely on
camera input, requiring 1-2 orders of magnitude less labeled data. Experiments
also demonstrate that as the memory bank expands, the Heuristic Process with
only 1.8B parameters can inherit the knowledge from a GPT-4 powered Analytic Process and achieve continuous performance improvement. Project page:
https://pjlab-adg.github.io/LeapAD/.

1

Introduction

Since the early 21st century, starting with the DARPA Grand Challenge [1], humanity has explored replacing human drivers with computer algorithms. Over the past two decades, advancements in sensor
technology, machine learning, and artificial intelligence have propelled the evolution of self-driving
technology. Recent data-driven approaches achieved considerable success, as evidenced by new
vehicle models featuring intelligent driving assistance and the commercial operation of L4 robotaxis
in several cities [2–4]. However, these methods depend heavily on diverse training data distributions,
resulting in a superficial understanding of underlying semantics and potential misconceptions in
complex situations. This is because data-driven approaches primarily perform induction on observed
patterns without the capability for deduction, thus constraining their performance to the coverage of
the annotated data. Therefore, there is an urgent need for a system capable of reasoning about unseen
scenarios and utilizing knowledge in a human cognition manner.
* equal contribution, † corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

