AdjointDEIS: Efficient Gradients for Diffusion Models

Zander W. Blasingame
Clarkson University
blasinzw@clarkson.edu

Chen Liu
Clarkson University
cliu@clarkson.edu

Abstract
The optimization of the latents and parameters of diffusion models with respect to
some differentiable metric defined on the output of the model is a challenging and
complex problem. The sampling for diffusion models is done by solving either the
probability flow ODE or diffusion SDE wherein a neural network approximates
the score function allowing a numerical ODE/SDE solver to be used. However,
naïve backpropagation techniques are memory intensive, requiring the storage of
all intermediate states, and face additional complexity in handling the injected
noise from the diffusion term of the diffusion SDE. We propose a novel family
of bespoke ODE solvers to the continuous adjoint equations for diffusion models,
which we call AdjointDEIS. We exploit the unique construction of diffusion SDEs
to further simplify the formulation of the continuous adjoint equations using
exponential integrators. Moreover, we provide convergence order guarantees for
our bespoke solvers. Significantly, we show that the continuous adjoint equations
for diffusion SDEs actually simplify to a simple ODE. Lastly, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of AdjointDEIS for guided generation with an adversarial attack
in the form of the face morphing problem. Our code will be released at https:
//github.com/zblasingame/AdjointDEIS.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models are a large family of state-of-the-art generative models which learn to map samples
drawn from Gaussian white noise into the data distribution [1, 2]. These diffusion models have
achieved state-of-the-art performance on prominent tasks such as image generation [3–5], audio
generation [6, 7], or video generation [8]. Often, state-of-the-art models are quite large and training
them is prohibitively expensive [9]. As such, it is fairly common to adapt a pre-trained model to a
specific task for post-training. In this way, the generative model can learn new concepts, identities, or
tasks without having to train the entire model [10–12]. Additional work has also proposed algorithms
for guiding the generative process of diffusion models [13, 14].
One method of guiding or directing the generative process is to solve an optimization problem
w.r.t. some guidance function L defined in the image space Rd . This guidance function works on
the output of the diffusion model and assesses how “good” the output is. However, the diffusion
model works by iteratively removing noise until a clean sample is reached. As such, we need
to be able to efficiently backpropagate gradients through the entire generative process. As Song
et al. [15] showed, the diffusion SDE can be simplified to an associated ODE, and as such, many
efficient ODE/SDE solvers have been developed for diffusion models [16–18]. However, naïvely
applying backpropagation to the diffusion model is inflexible and memory intensive; moreover, such
an approach is not trivial to apply to the diffusion models that used an SDE solver instead of an ODE
solver.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

