Navigating the Effect of Parametrization
for Dimensionality Reduction

Haiyang Huang∗ Yingfan Wang∗ Cynthia Rudin
Duke University
{hyhuang, yw416, cynthia}@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Parametric dimensionality reduction methods have gained prominence for their
ability to generalize to unseen datasets, an advantage that traditional approaches
typically lack. Despite their growing popularity, there remains a prevalent misconception among practitioners about the equivalence in performance between
parametric and non-parametric methods. Here, we show that these methods are
not equivalent – parametric methods retain global structure but lose significant
local details. To explain this, we provide evidence that parameterized approaches
lack the ability to repulse negative pairs, and the choice of loss function also
has an impact. Addressing these issues, we developed a new parametric method,
ParamRepulsor, that incorporates Hard Negative Mining and a loss function that
applies a strong repulsive force. This new method achieves state-of-the-art performance on local structure preservation for parametric methods without sacrificing the fidelity of global structural representation. Our code is available at
https://github.com/hyhuang00/ParamRepulsor.

1

Introduction

Dimension reduction (DR) methods are incredibly useful for data analysis. They provide a bird’s
eye view of a dataset that shows clusters and their relationships. These algorithms have been used
for examining and processing images [1], text documents [2, 3], and biological datasets [4–8]. The
successes of modern DR methods can mostly be attributed to neighborhood embedding (NE), which
is the basis for modern DR methods [9] including t-SNE, LargeVis, UMAP, and PaCMAP [10–
13]. These algorithms aim to optimize the low-dimensional layout of the data, such that the high
dimensional local structure (i.e., neighborhoods) are preserved.
A major weakness of existing NE algorithms is that they struggle with adaptability to large, incrementally updated datasets. These algorithms depend on a K-Nearest Neighbor graph, encompassing
the entire dataset, to generate the embedding. Consequently, the introduction of new data necessitates
a complete re-computation of the embedding, leading to significant time and computational resource
demands for large datasets. Although recent adaptations have been developed to optimize only
the additional data [14, 13], these modifications potentially alter the original algorithm’s objective
function, thereby compromising the embedding’s quality.
Addressing these challenges, recent developments in combining neural networks with NE algorithms
have shown promise. These algorithms maintain the same objectives as traditional NE methods but
leverage neural networks to optimize the projection of high-dimensional data into lower-dimensional
spaces [16–18]. The integration of neural networks allows these NE algorithms to be effectively
trained on large datasets and generalize to unseen data. Throughout this paper, we refer to this class
of algorithms as parametric algorithms. However, as shown in Fig. 1, despite the similarity in loss
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

