On the Role of Information Structure in
Reinforcement Learning for Partially-Observable
Sequential Teams and Games

Awni Altabaa
Department of Statistics & Data Science
Yale University
awni.altabaa@yale.edu

Zhuoran Yang
Department of Statistics & Data Science
Yale University
zhuoran.yang@yale.edu

Abstract
In sequential decision-making problems, the information structure describes the
causal dependencies between system variables, encompassing the dynamics of the
environment and the agents’ actions. Classical models of reinforcement learning
(e.g., MDPs, POMDPs) assume a restricted and highly regular information structure, while more general models like predictive state representations do not explicitly model the information structure. By contrast, real-world sequential decisionmaking problems typically involve a complex and time-varying interdependence of
system variables, requiring a rich and flexible representation of information structure. In this paper, we formalize a novel reinforcement learning model which explicitly represents the information structure. We then use this model to carry out an
information-structural analysis of the statistical complexity of general sequential
decision-making problems, obtaining a characterization via a graph-theoretic quantity of the DAG representation of the information structure. We prove an upper
bound on the sample complexity of learning a general sequential decision-making
problem in terms of its information structure by exhibiting an algorithm achieving the upper bound. This recovers known tractability results and gives a novel
perspective on reinforcement learning in general sequential decision-making problems, providing a systematic way of identifying new tractable classes of problems.

1

Introduction

The information structure of a sequential decision-making problem is a description of the causal
dependencies between system variables. In particular, the information structure specifies the subset
of past events that causally influence the present state. This includes information affecting system
dynamics and information available to each agent when choosing an action. The control community
has long recognized the importance of information structure, leading to the development of the
celebrated Witsenhausen intrinsic model [1], and extensive study since the 1970s [e.g., 2–14].
In general, sequential decision-making problems with arbitrary causal dependencies between system
variables can be computationally and statistically intractable in both control and learning settings [3,
15]. In response, early research has identified classes of tractable information structures. For example,
Markov Decision Processes (MDP) and Markov teams/games assume an observable Markovian state,
which serves as a sufficient statistic for the system’s evolution. These structural assumptions enable
practical planning and learning algorithms, for example based on dynamic programming [16, 17].
Although such restricted model classes can enable more fruitful analysis, they lack the expressiveness
needed to naturally capture the causal structures of complex real-world sequential decision-making
problems, where each event in the system may depend arbitrarily on past events.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

