Adaptable Logical Control for Large Language Models

Honghua Zhang∗
UCLA
hzhang19@cs.ucla.edu

Po-Nien Kung∗
UCLA
ponienkung@cs.ucla.edu

Guy Van den Broeck
UCLA
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Masahiro Yoshida†
UCLA & Sony Group Corporation
masahiroyoshida@ucla.edu

Nanyun Peng
UCLA
violetpeng@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Despite the success of Large Language Models (LLMs) on various tasks following
human instructions, controlling model generation to follow strict constraints at
inference time poses a persistent challenge. In this paper, we introduce Ctrl-G, a
neuro-symbolic framework that enables tractable and adaptable control of LLM generation to follow logical constraints reliably. Ctrl-G combines any production-ready
LLM with a Hidden Markov Model (HMM), guiding LLM outputs to adhere to
logical constraints represented as deterministic finite automata. We show that CtrlG, when a TULU2-7B model is coupled with a 2B-parameter HMM, outperforms
GPT4 in text editing: on the task of generating text insertions/continuations following logical constraints, our approach achieves over 30% higher satisfaction rate in
human evaluation. When applied to medium-size language models (e.g., GPT2large), Ctrl-G also beats its counterparts on standard benchmarks by large margins.
Additionally, as a proof-of-concept study, we use Ctrl-G to assist LLM reasoning
on the GSM benchmark, foreshadowing the application of Ctrl-G, as well as other
constrained generation approaches, beyond traditional language generation tasks.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable
conditioning on logical constraints…
performance on a wide range of challenging language gen2. constraint specification
eration tasks including translation [4, 48, 41], summarization [49], and open-domain creative generation [45, 38].
1. distill
❄
❄
Nevertheless, many downstream applications benefit from
LLM
HMM
DFA
fine-grained control of LLMs to follow logical constraints,
e.g., avoid using bad words for detoxification [9, 1] or
3. inference-time guidance
inserting text that is coherent with contexts for document
outputs satisfying the constraints
revision [16]. Despite the recent advancement of LLM
finetuning techniques such as instruction-tuning [5, 42, 35]
and preference optimization [28, 33], LLMs still fail to Figure 1: Ctrl-G pipeline; both the LLM
and the HMM are frozen once trained.
reliably follow logical constraints [37, 20].
The major difficulty of achieving constrained generation from LLMs lies in the intractability of
conditioning LLMs on logical constraints [34]. One recently proposed framework called GeLaTo [47]
uses tractable generative models, which can be conditioned on logical constraints efficiently, to
guide autoregressive generation from LLMs. Though GeLaTo guarantees that the logical constraints
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Work done at UCLA as a visiting scholar.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

