RealMAN: A Real-Recorded and Annotated
Microphone Array Dataset for Dynamic Speech
Enhancement and Localization
Bing Yang1,3 , Changsheng Quan1 , Yabo Wang1 , Pengyu Wang1 , Yujie Yang1 ,
Ying Fang1 , Nian Shao1 , Hui Bu2 , Xin Xu2 , Xiaofei Li1,3∗
1

School of Engineering, Westlake University
2
Beijing AIShell Technology Co. Ltd
3
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study
{yangbing, quanchangsheng, wangyabo, wangpengyu, yangyujie,
fangying, shaonian, lixiaofei}@westlake.edu.cn
buhui@aishelldata.com, xuxinwbg@163.com

Abstract
The training of deep learning-based multichannel speech enhancement and source
localization systems relies heavily on the simulation of room impulse response and
multichannel diffuse noise, due to the lack of large-scale real-recorded datasets.
However, the acoustic mismatch between simulated and real-world data could
degrade the model performance when applying in real-world scenarios. To bridge
this simulation-to-real gap, this paper presents a new relatively large-scale Realrecorded and annotated Microphone Array speech&Noise (RealMAN) dataset2 .
The proposed dataset is valuable in two aspects: 1) benchmarking speech enhancement and localization algorithms in real scenarios; 2) offering a substantial amount
of real-world training data for potentially improving the performance of real-world
applications. Specifically, a 32-channel array with high-fidelity microphones is
used for recording. A loudspeaker is used for playing source speech signals (about
35 hours of Mandarin speech). A total of 83.7 hours of speech signals (about 48.3
hours for static speaker and 35.4 hours for moving speaker) are recorded in 32
different scenes, and 144.5 hours of background noise are recorded in 31 different
scenes. Both speech and noise recording scenes cover various common indoor, outdoor, semi-outdoor and transportation environments, which enables the training of
general-purpose speech enhancement and source localization networks. To obtain
the task-specific annotations, speaker location is annotated with an omni-directional
fisheye camera by automatically detecting the loudspeaker. The direct-path signal
is set as the target clean speech for speech enhancement, which is obtained by
filtering the source speech signal with an estimated direct-path propagation filter.
Baseline experiments demonstrate that i) compared to using simulated data, the
proposed dataset is indeed able to train better speech enhancement and source
localization networks; ii) using various sub-arrays of the proposed 32-channel microphone array can successfully train variable-array networks that can be directly
used to unseen arrays.

∗
2

Corresponding author.
The RealMAN dataset is publicly available at https://github.com/Audio-WestlakeU/RealMAN.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

