Unchosen Experts Can Contribute Too:
Unleashing MoE Models’ Power by Self-Contrast

Chufan Shi1∗ Cheng Yang1∗
Xinyu Zhu2∗
Jiahao Wang3∗
3
1
4
Taiqiang Wu
Siheng Li
Deng Cai
Yujiu Yang1† Yu Meng2†
1
Tsinghua University 2 University of Virginia
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 Tencent AI Lab
scf22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
yumeng5@virginia.edu

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) has emerged as a prominent architecture for scaling
model size while maintaining computational efficiency. In MoE, each token in
the input sequence activates a different subset of experts determined by a routing
mechanism. However, the unchosen experts in MoE models do not contribute to the
output, potentially leading to underutilization of the model’s capacity. In this work,
we first conduct exploratory studies to demonstrate that increasing the number of
activated experts does not necessarily improve and can even degrade the output
quality. Then, we show that output distributions from an MoE model using different
routing strategies substantially differ, indicating that different experts do not always
act synergistically. Motivated by these findings, we propose Self-Contrast Mixtureof-Experts (SCMoE), a training-free strategy that utilizes unchosen experts in a
self-contrast manner during inference. In SCMoE, the next-token probabilities
are determined by contrasting the outputs from strong and weak activation using
the same MoE model. Our method is conceptually simple and computationally
lightweight, as it incurs minimal latency compared to greedy decoding. Experiments on several benchmarks (GSM8K, StrategyQA, MBPP and HumanEval)
demonstrate that SCMoE can consistently enhance Mixtral 8x7B’s reasoning capability across various domains. For example, it improves the accuracy on GSM8K
from 61.79 to 66.94. Moreover, combining SCMoE with self-consistency yields
additional gains, increasing major@20 accuracy from 75.59 to 78.31.

1

Introduction

Scaling up model parameters, dataset size and training time has been considered the most direct and
effective approach to improving foundation models’ performance [1–3]. However, scaling dense
models substantially increases computational costs, which poses a significant practical challenge.
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) [4–9] has emerged as a compelling solution for optimizing the balance
between model capacity and computation overhead in the era of large foundation models.
MoE models achieve the goal by sparsely activating only a portion of the parameters for each specific
input. Specifically, in MoE models, parameters are grouped into a bunch of experts, MoE models
only activate some of them for processing a given input. This selective activation is achieved through
a routing mechanism that dispatches each input token to a fixed number of experts (e.g, top-k
routing [6, 8, 10, 11]). Therefore, compared to their dense counterparts, MoE models enjoy more
efficient training with significantly reduced computational costs [5–9, 11]. At the inference stage,
they typically adhere to the same routing strategy as the training stage, activating only a small fraction
∗
†

Equal Contribution. Source code is available at https://github.com/DavidFanzz/SCMoE.git
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

