No Free Lunch Theorem and Black-Box Complexity
Analysis for Adversarial Optimisation

Per Kristian Lehre
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, United Kingdom
p.k.lehre@bham.ac.uk

Shishen Lin∗
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, United Kingdom
sxl1242@student.bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Black-box optimisation is one of the important areas in optimisation. The original
No Free Lunch (NFL) theorems highlight the limitations of traditional black-box
optimisation and learning algorithms, serving as a theoretical foundation for traditional optimisation. No Free Lunch Analysis in adversarial (also called maximin)
optimisation is a long-standing problem [45, 46]. This paper first rigorously proves
a (NFL) Theorem for general black-box adversarial optimisation when considering
Pure Strategy Nash Equilibrium (NE) as the solution concept. We emphasise the
solution concept (i.e. define the optimality in adversarial optimisation) as the
key in our NFL theorem. In particular, if Nash Equilibrium is considered as the
solution concept and the cost of the algorithm is measured in terms of the number
of columns and rows queried in the payoff matrix, then the average performance of
all black-box adversarial optimisation algorithms is the same. Moreover, we first
introduce black-box complexity to analyse the black-box adversarial optimisation
algorithm. We employ Yao’s Principle and our new NFL Theorem to provide
general lower bounds for the query complexity of finding a Nash Equilibrium in
adversarial optimisation. Finally, we illustrate the practical ramifications of our
results on simple two-player zero-sum games. More specifically, no black-box optimisation algorithm for finding the unique Nash equilibrium in two-player zero-sum
games can exceed logarithmic complexity relative to search space size. Meanwhile,
no black-box algorithm can solve any bimatrix game with unique NE with fewer
than a linear number of queries in the size of the payoff matrix.

1

Introduction

1.1

Black-Box Optimisation and the No Free Lunch Theorem

Black-Box Optimisation (BBO) is crucial for optimising complex, unknown, or expensive-to-evaluate
functions in real-world scenarios, such as aerodynamic design and hyperparameter tuning, where only
input-output observations are available. Formally, BBO is the task of optimising objective functions
from some function class F where F consists of f : X → R, where the algorithm is limited to
making queries to f [11, 14, 36]. In this case, the algorithm is only able to sample and query the
function value f (x) of search points x ∈ X from a “black-box” or “oracle” without access to any
description of the objective functions f . A similar framework can be extended to game-theoretic
BBO, namely adversarial BBO. Specifically, adversarial BBO is the task that optimising payoff
functions from some payoff function class G where G consists of black-box functions g : X × Y → R,
with a limited budget of function evaluations. Additionally, two players x ∈ X and y ∈ Y form
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

