FasterDiT: Towards Faster Diffusion Transformers
Training without Architecture Modification

Jingfeng Yao, Cheng Wang, Wenyu Liu, Xinggang Wang∗
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Wuhan 430074, China
{jfyao, wangchust, wyliu, xgwang}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion Transformers (DiT) have attracted significant attention in research. However, they suffer from a slow convergence rate. In this paper, we aim to accelerate
DiT training without any architectural modification. We identify the following
issues in the training process: firstly, certain training strategies do not consistently
perform well across different data. Secondly, the effectiveness of supervision at
specific timesteps is limited. In response, we propose the following contributions:
(1) We introduce a new perspective for interpreting the failure of the strategies.
Specifically, we slightly extend the definition of Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) and
suggest observing the Probability Density Function (PDF) of SNR to understand
the essence of the data robustness of the strategy. (2) We conduct numerous experiments and report over one hundred experimental results to empirically summarize
a unified accelerating strategy from the perspective of PDF. (3) We develop a new
supervision method that further accelerates the training process of DiT. Based
on them, we propose FasterDiT, an exceedingly simple and practicable design
strategy. With few lines of code modifications, it achieves 2.30 FID on ImageNet at
256×256 resolution with 1000 iterations, which is comparable to DiT (2.27 FID)
but 7× faster in training.

1

Introduction

With the advent of Sora [36], its foundational model, Diffusion Transformers (DiT) [37], has
ignited extensive research interest. DiT is characterized by its remarkable flexibility and scalability,
demonstrating exceptional capabilities in both image[37, 32, 16, 9, 7, 8] and video generation [31, 33,
17]. However, similar to the challenges faced with Vision Transformers [15], DiT is associated with
high training costs. Its convergence rate remains slow, necessitating over 4700 GPU hours training
on ImageNet generation tasks at 256 resolution 2 . This significant computational demand highlights
the need for enhancing training efficiency for large-scale training.
One effective method for improving training is to modulate the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) distribution across different timesteps during training. Denoising generative models [22, 30] create a
conversion from noise to data and methodically transfer noise into data as the timestep, denoted t,
progresses. In this conversion process, the SNR gradually increases from zero to infinity. Given a
generative process xt = αt x⋆ + σt ϵ. Assuming that the input data x⋆ are ideally normally distributed
α2
with a variance of one, the SNR is typically defined as the ratio of variances σ2t [24, 14, 34, 40, 20].
t
During one training step, for a pair of input data and noise, we randomly select one t for training.
Modulating noise scheduling [35, 25, 10], loss weight [34, 20], and timestep sampling strategy [16]
∗
2

Corresponding author: xgwang@hust.edu.cn
Testing with H800 GPUs

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

