How many classifiers do we need?

Hyunsuk Kim
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
hyskim7@berkeley.edu

Liam Hodgkinson
School of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Melbourne, Australia
lhodgkinson@unimelb.edu.au

Ryan Theisen
Harmonic Discovery
ryan@harmonicdiscovery.com

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI, LBNL, and Dept. of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
As performance gains through scaling data and/or model size experience diminishing returns, it is becoming increasingly popular to turn to ensembling, where the
predictions of multiple models are combined to improve accuracy. In this paper, we
provide a detailed analysis of how the disagreement and the polarization (a notion
we introduce and define in this paper) among classifiers relate to the performance
gain achieved by aggregating individual classifiers, for majority vote strategies
in classification tasks. We address these questions in the following ways. (1) An
upper bound for polarization is derived, and we propose what we call a neural
polarization law: most interpolating neural network models are 4/3-polarized. Our
empirical results not only support this conjecture but also show that polarization
is nearly constant for a dataset, regardless of hyperparameters or architectures of
classifiers. (2) The error rate of the majority vote classifier is considered under
restricted entropy conditions, and we present a tight upper bound that indicates
that the disagreement is linearly correlated with the error rate, and that the slope
is linear in the polarization. (3) We prove results for the asymptotic behavior of
the disagreement in terms of the number of classifiers, which we show can help in
predicting the performance for a larger number of classifiers from that of a smaller
number. Our theoretical findings are supported by empirical results on several
image classification tasks with various types of neural networks.

1

Introduction

As performance gains through scaling data and/or model size experience diminishing returns, it
is becoming increasingly popular to turn to ensembling, where the predictions of multiple models
are combined, both to improve accuracy and to form more robust conclusions than any individual
model alone can provide. In some cases, ensembling can produce substantial benefits, particularly
when increasing model size becomes prohibitive. In particular, for large neural network models,
deep ensembles [LPB17] are especially popular. These ensembles consist of independently trained
models on the same dataset, often using the same hyperparameters, but starting from different
initializations.
The cost of producing new classifiers can be steep, and it is often unclear whether the additional
performance gains are worth the cost. Assuming that constructing two or three classifiers is relatively
cheap, procedures capable of deciding whether to continue producing more classifiers are needed.
To do so requires a precise understanding of how to predict ensemble performance. Of particular
interest are majority vote strategies in classification tasks, noting that regression tasks can also be
formulated in this way by clustering outputs. In this case, one of the most effective avenues for
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

