Multivariate Stochastic Dominance via Optimal
Transport and Applications to Models Benchmarking

Gabriel Rioux
Center for Applied Mathematics
Cornell University

Apoorva Nitsure
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research

Kristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research

Mattia Rigotti
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research

Youssef Mroueh
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research

Abstract
Stochastic dominance is an important concept in probability theory, econometrics
and social choice theory for robustly modeling agents’ preferences between random
outcomes. While many works have been dedicated to the univariate case, little has
been done in the multivariate scenario, wherein an agent has to decide between
different multivariate outcomes. By exploiting a characterization of multivariate
first stochastic dominance in terms of couplings, we introduce a statistic that
assesses multivariate almost stochastic dominance under the framework of Optimal
Transport with a smooth cost. Further, we introduce an entropic regularization of
this statistic, and establish a central limit theorem (CLT) and consistency of the
bootstrap procedure for the empirical statistic. Armed with this CLT, we propose
a hypothesis testing framework as well as an efficient implementation using the
Sinkhorn algorithm. We showcase our method in comparing and benchmarking
Large Language Models that are evaluated on multiple metrics. Our multivariate
stochastic dominance test allows us to capture the dependencies between the metrics
in order to make an informed and statistically significant decision on the relative
performance of the models.

1

Introduction

In choice theory, economics, finance, and models benchmarking, agents are faced with stochastic
prospects that are (eventually) multivariate random variables which they wish to order according to a
utility or risk measure of interest. To formalize such a notion of ordering of stochastic quantities, the
concept of stochastic dominance can be utilized.
In the univariate case, a standard notion of order is given by First order Stochastic Dominance (FSD)
which can be expressed in terms of the quantiles of the underlying random variables [Ogryczak
and Ruszczynski, 2002]. To wit, a random variable X dominates another random variable Y in
FSD, if it has larger quantiles than Y across all percentiles. A weaker notion of FSD, called almost
stochastic dominance was introduced in del Barrio et al. [2018]. Their approach is based on optimal
transport (OT) and consists of measuring a ratio which quantifies how close X is to dominating Y .
del Barrio et al. [2018] further lay the groundwork for principled statistical analysis of almost FSD
by establishing a central limit theorem for the empirical ratio as well as consistency of the bootstrap.
Dror et al. [2018], Ulmer et al. [2022], Nitsure et al. [2023] used the almost FSD testing framework
in benchmarking Large Language models to make statistically significant decisions regarding which
model to select when these models are evaluated with a metric of interest on test data.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

