OTTER: Effortless Label Distribution Adaptation of
Zero-shot Models
Changho Shin, Jitian Zhao, Sonia Cromp, Harit Vishwakarma, Frederic Sala
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{cshin23, jzhao326, cromp, hvishwakarma, fsala}@wisc.edu

Abstract
Popular zero-shot models suffer due to artifacts inherited from pretraining. One
particularly detrimental issue, caused by unbalanced web-scale pretraining data,
is mismatched label distribution. Existing approaches that seek to repair the label
distribution are not suitable in zero-shot settings, as they have mismatching requirements, such as needing access to labeled downstream task data or knowledge of
the true label balance in the pretraining distribution. We sidestep these challenges
and introduce a simple and lightweight approach to adjust pretrained model predictions via optimal transport. Our technique requires only an estimate of the label
distribution of a downstream task. Theoretically, we characterize the improvement
produced by our procedure under certain mild conditions and provide bounds on
the error caused by misspecification. Empirically, we validate our method in a
wide array of zero-shot image and text classification tasks, improving accuracy by
4.8% and 15.9% on average, and beating baselines like prior matching—often by
significant margins—in 17 out of 21 datasets.

1

Introduction

Zero-shot models are popular but struggle with biases inherited from their large pretraining datasets
[21; 59; 2]. In particular, zero-shot classification is
strongly biased by the label distribution of the pretraining task. When the label distribution of the downstream task differs from pretraining, the performance
of zero-shot classifiers suffers greatly. For example,
Figure 1 illustrates the effects of mismatched distributions on a pet image classification task. Two CLIP
models (RN50, and ViT-B/16) produce biased predictions on the Abyssinian and Persian classes.
Furthermore, datasets with a large number of classes,
such as ImageNet, may contain both extremely common and very rare classes, resulting in an outsized
probability that a zero-shot model will predict some
classes over others. As a result, even large models
intended for use in zero-shot settings, such as CLIP
[49], naturally have a label distribution mismatch
between pretraining data and downstream tasks.

Figure 1: Label distribution mismatch example in zero-shot classification. In the OxfordIIIT-Pet dataset, the ground-truth labels are
uniformly distributed, while zero-shot models exhibit biased predictions toward certain
classes. This bias is influenced by the distribution of labels in the pretraining task.

Existing methods that seek to address label distribution make strong assumptions or have expensive
requirements. For example, to fine-tune a model, we must obtain a labeled fine-tuning dataset of
adequate size, then obtain the time and compute to further train the model. To perform label shift adap38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

