Vision Transformer Neural Architecture Search for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization:
Benchmark and Insights

Sy-Tuyen Ho∗

Tuan Van Vo∗
Somayeh Ebrahimkhani ∗
Ngai-Man Cheung†
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
sytuyen_ho@mymail.sutd.edu.sg,
{vovan_tuan,somayeh_ebrahimkhani,ngaiman_cheung}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
While Vision Transformer (ViT) have achieved success across various machine
learning tasks, deploying them in real-world scenarios faces a critical challenge:
generalizing under Out-of-Distribution (OoD) shifts. A crucial research gap remains in understanding how to design ViT architectures – both manually and
automatically – to excel in OoD generalization. To address this gap, we introduce
OoD-ViT-NAS, the first systematic benchmark for ViT Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) focused on OoD generalization. This comprehensive benchmark includes
3, 000 ViT architectures of varying model computational budgets evaluated on 8
common large-scale OoD datasets. With this comprehensive benchmark at hand,
we analyze the factors that contribute to the OoD generalization of ViT architecture.
Our analysis uncovers several key insights. Firstly, we show that ViT architecture
designs have a considerable impact on OoD generalization. Secondly, we observe
that In-Distribution (ID) accuracy might not be a very good indicator of OoD accuracy. This underscores the risk that ViT architectures optimized for ID accuracy
might not perform well under OoD shifts. Thirdly, we conduct the first study to
explore NAS for ViT’s OoD robustness. Specifically, we study 9 Training-free NAS
for their OoD generalization performance on our benchmark. We observe that existing Training-free NAS are largely ineffective in predicting OoD accuracy despite
their effectiveness at predicting ID accuracy. Moreover, simple proxies like #Param
or #Flop surprisingly outperform more complex Training-free NAS in predicting
ViTs OoD accuracy. Finally, we study how ViT architectural attributes impact
OoD generalization. We discover that increasing embedding dimensions of a ViT
architecture generally can improve the OoD generalization. We show that ViT architectures in our benchmark exhibit a wide range of OoD accuracy, with up to 11.85%
for some OoD shift, prompting the importance to study ViT architecture design for
OoD. We firmly believe that our OoD-ViT-NAS benchmark and our analysis can
catalyze and streamline important research on understanding how ViT architecture
designs influence OoD generalization. Our OoD-NAS-ViT benchmark and code
are available at https://hosytuyen.github.io/projects/OoD-ViT-NAS

1

Introduction

Vision Transformers (ViT) [1] have recently achieved impressive results and become a major area
of research in computer vision, with significant efforts towards understanding how ViT works.
These efforts have led to the proposal of both manually designed architectures [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] or
automated-searched architectures [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] to advance ViT architectures.
∗

Equal Contribution

†

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

