FM-Delta: Lossless Compression for Storing Massive
Fine-tuned Foundation Models
Wanyi Ning1 Jingyu Wang12∗ Qi Qi1∗ Mengde Zhu1 Haifeng Sun1
Daixuan Cheng1 Jianxin Liao1 Ce Zhang3
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Pengcheng Laboratory 3 University of Chicago
{ningwanyi, wangjingyu, qiqi8266, arnoldzhu, hfsun}@bupt.edu.cn
daixuancheng6@gmail.com, liaojx@bupt.edu.cn, cez@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained foundation models, particularly large language models, have achieved
remarkable success and led to massive fine-tuned variants. These models are
commonly fine-tuned locally and then uploaded by users to cloud platforms such
as HuggingFace for secure storage. However, the huge model number and their
billion-level parameters impose heavy storage overhead for cloud with limited
resources. Our empirical and theoretical analysis reveals that most fine-tuned
models in cloud have a small difference (delta) from their pre-trained models. To
this end, we propose a novel lossless compression scheme FM-Delta specifically
for storing massive fine-tuned models in cloud. FM-Delta maps fine-tuned and
pre-trained model parameters into integers with the same bits, and entropy codes
their integer delta. In this way, cloud only needs to store one uncompressed pretrained model and other compressed fine-tuned models. Extensive experiments
have demonstrated that FM-Delta efficiently reduces cloud storage consumption
for massive fine-tuned models by an average of around 50% with only negligible
additional time in most end-to-end cases. For example, on up to 10 fine-tuned
models in the GPT-NeoX-20B family, FM-Delta reduces the original storage
requirement from 423GB to 205GB, significantly saving cloud storage costs.

1

Introduction

The widespread success of pre-trained foundational models, particularly large language models(LLM),
has led to the proliferation of fine-tuning(1; 2; 3; 4). An increasing number of end-users download
pre-trained models from cloud platforms such as HuggingFace(5), and fine-tune them using their
local relevant data. After fine-tuning, these fine-tuned models are usually uploaded to cloud storage
by users for future use. This trend imposes a heavy storage overhead in the cloud. From Figure 1, we
can see that the total number of models stored on HuggingFace has rapidly increased from 33,187 in
2022 to 574,270 in 2024, reflecting the prominent storage overhead on cloud providers. Among these
models, fine-tuned models account for a large proportion, which exist in two forms: full fine-tuned
models and parameter-efficient fine-tuned (PEFT) models(6; 7). PEFT model is generally a subset
network of the original model and has much fewer parameters, so they do not exert undue strain on
cloud storage. By contrast, the full fine-tuned models which have the original size place a substantial
storage burden on the cloud.
We collect the fine-tuning statistical information in HuggingFace for six popular model families
in Table 1, which shows the numbers of full fine-tuned and PEFT models for a certain pre-trained
model. We also present the proportion of "inactive" full fine-tuned models with less than 10 monthly
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

