Style Adaptation and Uncertainty Estimation for
Multi-Source Blended-Target Domain Adaptation

Yuwu Lu∗, Haoyu Huang, and Xue Hu
School of Artificial Intelligence, South China Normal University
{luyuwu2008, hyhuang99, hx1430940232}@163.com

Abstract
Blended-target domain adaptation (BTDA), which implicitly mixes multiple subtarget domains into a fine domain, has attracted more attention in recent years. Most
previously developed BTDA approaches focus on utilizing a single source domain,
which makes it difficult to obtain sufficient feature information for learning domaininvariant representations. Furthermore, different feature distributions derived from
different domains may increase the uncertainty of models. To overcome these issues, we propose a style adaptation and uncertainty estimation (SAUE) approach for
multi-source blended-target domain adaptation (MBDA). Specifically, we exploit
the extra knowledge acquired from the blended-target domain, where a similarity
factor is adopted to select more useful target style information for augmenting
the source features. Then, to mitigate the negative impact of the domain-specific
attributes, we devise a function to estimate and mitigate uncertainty in category prediction. Finally, we construct a simple and lightweight adversarial learning strategy
for MBDA, effectively aligning multi-source and blended-target domains without
the requirements of domain labels of the target domains. Extensive experiments
conducted on several challenging DA benchmarks, including the ImageCLEF-DA,
Office-Home, VisDA 2017, and DomainNet datasets, demonstrate the superiority
of our method over the state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches.

1

Introduction

Domain adaptation (DA), whose objective is to transfer knowledge from one or more well-labeled
source domains to a non-labeled target domain, has been studied in recent years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6],
including object classification [1, 2], semantic segmentation [3, 4], and object detection [5]. However,
most DA approaches are based on a setting that has single source domain and single target domain
[1, 2]. In the real world, unlabeled target domains are usually drawn from different distributions.
Therefore, most of the existing single target-based DA approaches may not be the best answer to
address domain shifts in reality.
Fortunately, an increasing number of researchers have focused on the above-mentioned issues, and
multi-target domain adaptation (MTDA) [7, 8, 9] has been studied. MTDA aims to learn a model
that can simultaneously utilize information from single source domain and multiple target domains
and then perform well in multiple target domains. For instance, HGAN [10] adopts a heterogeneous
graph attention network to explore the relations among multiple target domain features. In [11],
multiple expert models employed the corresponding source-target domain pair-groups and were then
aligned by a student model. Although the existing MTDA approaches have made certain progress,
the standard MTDA is still facing challenges because massive amounts of unlabeled data drawn from
different distributions are commonly used in real-world settings. It is time-consuming and expensive
to divide massive data into multiple corresponding distributions (target domains). For example, for
∗

corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

