Beyond Concept Bottleneck Models:
How to Make Black Boxes Intervenable?
Sonia Laguna∗, Ričards Marcinkevičs∗, Moritz Vandenhirtz, Julia E. Vogt
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Recently, interpretable machine learning has re-explored concept bottleneck
models (CBM). An advantage of this model class is the user’s ability to intervene on predicted concept values, affecting the downstream output. In this work,
we introduce a method to perform such concept-based interventions on pretrained
neural networks, which are not interpretable by design, only given a small validation set with concept labels. Furthermore, we formalise the notion of intervenability
as a measure of the effectiveness of concept-based interventions and leverage this
definition to fine-tune black boxes. Empirically, we explore the intervenability of
black-box classifiers on synthetic tabular and natural image benchmarks. We focus
on backbone architectures of varying complexity, from simple, fully connected
neural nets to Stable Diffusion. We demonstrate that the proposed fine-tuning improves intervention effectiveness and often yields better-calibrated predictions. To
showcase the practical utility of our techniques, we apply them to deep chest X-ray
classifiers and show that fine-tuned black boxes are more intervenable than CBMs.
Lastly, we establish that our methods are still effective under vision-languagemodel-based concept annotations, alleviating the need for a human-annotated
validation set.

1

Introduction

Interpretable and explainable machine learning (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017; Molnar, 2022) have
seen a renewed interest in concept-based predictive models and approaches to post hoc explanation,
such as concept bottlenecks (Lampert et al., 2009; Kumar et al., 2009; Koh et al., 2020), contextual
semantic interpretable bottlenecks (Marcos et al., 2020), concept whitening layers (Chen et al., 2020),
and concept activation vectors (B. Kim et al., 2018). Moving beyond interpretations defined in the
high-dimensional, unwieldy input space, these techniques relate the model’s inputs and outputs via
additional high-level human-understandable attributes, also referred to as concepts. Typically, neural
network models are supervised to predict these attributes in a dedicated bottleneck layer, or post hoc
explanations are derived to measure the model’s sensitivity to concept variables.
This work focuses specifically on the concept bottleneck models, as revisited by Koh et al. (2020).
In brief, a CBM is a neural network consisting of successive concept and target prediction modules,
where the final output depends on the input solely through the predicted concepts. Such models
are trained on labelled data, in addition, annotated by attributes. At inference time, a human user
may interact with the CBM by editing the predicted concept values, which, as a result, affects the
downstream target prediction. This act of model editing is known as an intervention. The user’s
ability to intervene is a compelling advantage of CBMs over other interpretable model classes, in that
the former allows for human-model interaction.

∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to sonia.lagunacillero@inf.ethz.ch

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

