DiffGS: Functional Gaussian Splatting Diffusion

Junsheng Zhou∗

Weiqi Zhang∗

Yu-Shen Liu†

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{zhou-js24,zwq23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has shown convincing performance in rendering
speed and fidelity, yet the generation of Gaussian Splatting remains a challenge
due to its discreteness and unstructured nature. In this work, we propose DiffGS,
a general Gaussian generator based on latent diffusion models. DiffGS is a powerful and efficient 3D generative model which is capable of generating Gaussian
primitives at arbitrary numbers for high-fidelity rendering with rasterization. The
key insight is to represent Gaussian Splatting in a disentangled manner via three
novel functions to model Gaussian probabilities, colors and transforms. Through
the novel disentanglement of 3DGS, we represent the discrete and unstructured
3DGS with continuous Gaussian Splatting functions, where we then train a latent
diffusion model with the target of generating these Gaussian Splatting functions
both unconditionally and conditionally. Meanwhile, we introduce a discretization
algorithm to extract Gaussians at arbitrary numbers from the generated functions
via octree-guided sampling and optimization. We explore DiffGS for various tasks,
including unconditional generation, conditional generation from text, image, and
partial 3DGS, as well as Point-to-Gaussian generation. We believe that DiffGS
provides a new direction for flexibly modeling and generating Gaussian Splatting.
Project page: https://junshengzhou.github.io/DiffGS.

1

Introduction

3D content creation is a vital task in computer graphics and 3D computer vision, which shows
great potential in real-world applications such as virtual reality, game design, film production, and
robotics. Previous 3D generative models usually take Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [41, 2, 62] as
the representation. However, the volumetric rendering for NeRF requires considerable computational
cost, leading to sluggish rendering speeds and significant memory burden. Recent advances of
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [28, 68, 23] have demonstrated its potential to serve as the nextgeneration 3D representation by enabling both real-time rendering and high-fidelity appearance
modeling. Designing 3D generative models for 3DGS provides a scheme for real-time interaction
with 3D creations.
The core challenge in generative 3DGS modeling lies in its discreteness and unstructured nature,
which prevents the well-studied frameworks in structural image/voxel/video generation from transferring to directly generate 3DGS. Concurrent works [72, 19] alternatively transport Gaussians into
structural voxel grids with volume generation models [11] for generating Gaussians. However, these
methods lead to 1) abundant computational cost for high-resolution voxels, and 2) limited number of
generated Gaussians constrained by the voxel resolutions. Certain voxelization schemes [19] also
introduce information loss, making it challenging to maintain high-quality Gaussian reconstructions.
∗

Equal contribution. † Yu-Shen Liu is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

