Private and Personalized Frequency Estimation
in a Federated Setting

Amrith Setlur∗
Carnegie Mellon University
asetlur@cs.cmu.edu

Vitaly Feldman
Apple
vitaly.edu@gmail.com

Kunal Talwar
Apple
ktalwar@apple.com

Abstract
Motivated by the problem of next word prediction on user devices we introduce and
study the problem of personalized frequency histogram estimation in a federated
setting. In this problem, over some domain, each user observes a number of
samples from a distribution which is specific to that user. The goal is to compute
for all users a personalized estimate of the user’s distribution with error measured
in KL divergence. We focus on addressing two central challenges: statistical
heterogeneity and protection of user privacy. Our approach to the problem relies on
discovering and exploiting similar subpopulations of users which are often present
and latent in real-world data, while minimizing user privacy leakage at the same
time. We first present a non-private clustering-based algorithm for the problem,
and give a provably joint differentially private version of it with a private datadependent initialization scheme. Next, we propose a simple data model which is
based on a mixture of Dirichlet distributions, to formally motivate our non-private
algorithm and demonstrate some properties of its components. Finally, we provide
an extensive empirical evaluation of our private and non-private algorithms under
varying levels of statistical and size heterogeneity on the Reddit, StackOverflow,
and Amazon Reviews datasets. Our results demonstrate significant improvements
over standard and clustering-based baselines, and in particular, they show that it is
possible to improve over direct personalization of a single global model.

1

Introduction

Federated learning algorithms jointly learn from decentralized user data, addressing statistical challenges in local learning [49, 58]. At the same time it presents two key challenges, among few
others [44, 52]. Firstly, data distributions can vary across users (often called statistical heterogeneity [27, 76]), which reduces the effectiveness of a single, shared model for all users. Secondly, the data
may be sensitive and mutually beneficial collaboration may compromise user privacy [31, 71]. An
important practical problem where user data distributions are diverse, and user-privacy is paramount
is next-word prediction for the keyboard input on user devices. Users often have diverse vocabulary,
writing styles, and topics that leads to varied data distributions [32, 36, 65]. Naturally, frequency
estimation is also one of the most basic statistical tasks with numerous other applications [14, 47].
Motivated by personalized next-word prediction, we introduce and study the problem of personalized frequency estimation in a federated setting. In this problem, each user has very few
(O(d)) samples from an unknown, user-specific distribution over a large, finite domain of size d.
The users interact with a server that needs to provide the user with a personalized estimate of their
distribution. We focus on error measured in KL divergence that is common in language modeling [3, 38], and is equivalent to minimizing the negative log-likelihood of samples from the user
distribution. For more general loss minimization problems, numerous personalized federated learning
∗

Part of the work was done during an internship at Apple.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

