A distributional simplicity bias
in the learning dynamics of transformers

Riccardo Rende, Federica Gerace, Alessandro Laio, and Sebastian Goldt
International School for Advanced Studies
Trieste, Italy
{rrende, fgerace, laio, sgoldt}@sissa.it

Abstract
The remarkable capability of over-parameterised neural networks to generalise
effectively has been explained by invoking a “simplicity bias”: neural networks
prevent overfitting by initially learning simple classifiers before progressing to
more complex, non-linear functions. While simplicity biases have been described
theoretically and experimentally in feed-forward networks for supervised learning,
the extent to which they also explain the remarkable success of transformers trained
with self-supervised techniques remains unclear. In our study, we demonstrate
that transformers, trained on natural language data, also display a simplicity bias.
Specifically, they sequentially learn many-body interactions among input tokens,
reaching a saturation point in the prediction error for low-degree interactions while
continuing to learn high-degree interactions. To conduct this analysis, we develop a
procedure to generate clones of a given natural language data set, which rigorously
capture the interactions between tokens up to a specified order. This approach
opens up the possibilities of studying how interactions of different orders in the
data affect learning, in natural language processing and beyond.

1

Introduction

The success of neural networks has been explained using various “simplicity biases”, which postulate
that neural networks trained using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) learn increasingly complex
functions of their data, going from generalised linear models to more complex, non-linear functions [1–5]. These simplicity biases have been analysed theoretically in linear networks [6–8], in
non-linear shallow neural networks [1, 9] and in the NTK regime [10–12]. The viability of such
a scenario has also been demonstrated experimentally, for example in image classification with
convolutional neural networks [4]. More recently, a complementary distributional simplicity bias
was demonstrated theoretically and experimentally [13, 14]: deep neural networks learn increasingly
complex approximations of the distribution of their training data. A natural question to ask is then:
Does this distributional simplicity bias extend to the realm of natural language processing (NLP),
where transformers are typically pre-trained via Masked Language Modeling (MLM) or Next-Token
Prediction? As a first step in this direction, Belrose et al. [15] recently showed that deep transformers
of the Pythia suite [16] first learn the token unigram and then the bigram distribution. However,
estimating the higher-order interactions is prohibitively expensive on large corpora with many tokens
due to the curse of dimensionality.
In this work, we design a novel framework based on MLM to build principled approximations of
a NLP data set that captures increasingly higher-order interactions between tokens. Using these
approximations or “clones”, we show that deep transformers trained on natural language also exhibit
a simplicity bias: they sequentially learn increasingly higher-order interactions among tokens.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

