Training-Free Adaptive Diffusion with Bounded
Difference Approximation Strategy

Hancheng Ye1,∗ , Jiakang Yuan2,∗ , Renqiu Xia3 , Xiangchao Yan1 ,
Tao Chen2 , Junchi Yan3 , Botian Shi1 , Bo Zhang1,‡
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
yehancheng@pjlab.org.cn, jkyuan22@m.fudan.edu.cn, zhangbo@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently achieved great success in the synthesis of highquality images and videos. However, the existing denoising techniques in diffusion
models are commonly based on step-by-step noise predictions, which suffers from
high computation cost, resulting in a prohibitive latency for interactive applications.
In this paper, we propose AdaptiveDiffusion to relieve this bottleneck by adaptively
reducing the noise prediction steps during the denoising process. Our method
considers the potential of skipping as many noise prediction steps as possible
while keeping the final denoised results identical to the original full-step ones.
Specifically, the skipping strategy is guided by the third-order latent difference
that indicates the stability between timesteps during the denoising process, which
benefits the reusing of previous noise prediction results. Extensive experiments on
image and video diffusion models demonstrate that our method can significantly
speed up the denoising process while generating identical results to the original
process, achieving up to an average 2 ∼ 5× speedup without quality degradation.
The code is available at https://github.com/UniModal4Reasoning/
AdaptiveDiffusion.

1

Introduction

Recently, Diffusion models [1, 11, 30, 33] have emerged as a powerful tool for synthesizing highquality images and videos. Their capability to generate realistic and detailed visual content has made
them a popular choice in various applications, ranging from artistic creation to data augmentation, e.g.,
Midjourney, Sora [4], etc. However, the conventional denoising techniques employed in these models
involve step-by-step noise predictions, which are computationally intensive and lead to significant
latency, e.g., taking tens seconds for SDXL [32] to generate a high-quality image of 1024x1024
resolutions. Diffusion acceleration as an effective technique has been deeply explored recently, which
mainly focuses on three paradigms: (1) reducing sampling steps [39, 13, 23, 35, 24], (2) optimizing
model architecture [15, 42, 9, 27] and (3) parallelizing inference [16, 38].
Currently, most strategies are designed based on a fixed acceleration mode for all prompt data.
However, in our experiments, it is observed that different prompts may require different steps of noise
prediction to achieve the same content as the original denoising process, as presented in Fig. 1. Here,
we compare the denoising paths using two different prompts for SDXL [32], both of which preserve
rich content against the original full-step generation results. The denoising path denotes a bool-type
sequence, where each element represents whether to infer the noise from the noise prediction model.
It can be observed that Prompt 2 needs more steps to generate an almost lossless image than Prompt
*Equal contribution, ‡ Corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

