Text-DiFuse: An Interactive Multi-Modal Image
Fusion Framework based on Text-modulated
Diffusion Model
Hao Zhang∗,
Lei Cao∗,
Jaiyi Ma†
Electronic Information School
Wuhan University
Wuhan, China
{zhpersonalbox, jyma2010}@gmail.com, whu.caolei@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing multi-modal image fusion methods fail to address the compound degradations presented in source images, resulting in fusion images plagued by noise,
color bias, improper exposure, etc. Additionally, these methods often overlook
the specificity of foreground objects, weakening the salience of the objects of
interest within the fused images. To address these challenges, this study proposes a
novel interactive multi-modal image fusion framework based on the text-modulated
diffusion model, called Text-DiFuse. First, this framework integrates feature-level
information integration into the diffusion process, allowing adaptive degradation
removal and multi-modal information fusion. This is the first attempt to deeply
and explicitly embed information fusion within the diffusion process, effectively
addressing compound degradation in image fusion. Second, by embedding the combination of the text and zero-shot location model into the diffusion fusion process,
a text-controlled fusion re-modulation strategy is developed. This enables usercustomized text control to improve fusion performance and highlight foreground
objects in the fused images. Extensive experiments on diverse public datasets show
that our Text-DiFuse achieves state-of-the-art fusion performance across various
scenarios with complex degradation. Moreover, the semantic segmentation experiment validates the significant enhancement in semantic performance achieved by
our text-controlled fusion re-modulation strategy. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Leiii-Cao/Text-DiFuse.

1

Introduction

Due to constraints in imaging principles and hardware technology, single-modal images fall short of
accurately and comprehensively describing scenes, thereby limiting their utility in subsequent tasks.
Hence, image fusion technology emerges as essential in this context [60, 28]. It aims to integrate
useful information from multi-modal images, producing high-quality visual results that enhance both
human and machine perception of scenes. Currently, image fusion technology has been integrated into
various tasks, significantly advancing performance in related fields such as autonomous driving [47],
intelligent security [57, 25], and disease diagnosis [14].
Over recent decades, rapid advancements in deep learning have propelled significant progress in image
fusion. Deep learning-based methods have surpassed traditional approaches in fusion performance by
a considerable margin. In the historical context, the evolution of image fusion closely aligns with the
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

