UniTox: Leveraging LLMs to Curate a Unified Dataset
of Drug-Induced Toxicity from FDA Labels

Jake Silberg
Stanford University
jsilberg@stanford.edu

Kyle Swanson
Stanford University
swansonk@stanford.edu

Angela Zhang
Stanford University
angelaz@stanford.edu

Zaniar Ghazizadeh
Stanford University
zaniar@stanford.edu

Hisham Hamadeh
Genmab
hha@genmab.com

Elana Simon
Stanford University
epsimon@stanford.edu
Scott Ogden
Genmab
scog@genmab.com

James Zou
Stanford University
jamesz@stanford.edu

Abstract
Drug-induced toxicity is one of the leading reasons new drugs fail clinical trials.
Machine learning models that predict drug toxicity from molecular structure could
help researchers prioritize less toxic drug candidates. However, current toxicity
datasets are typically small and limited to a single organ system (e.g., cardio, renal,
or liver). Creating these datasets often involved time-intensive expert curation
by parsing drug labelling documents that can exceed 100 pages per drug. Here,
we introduce UniTox1 , a unified dataset of 2,418 FDA-approved drugs with druginduced toxicity summaries and ratings created by using GPT-4o to process FDA
drug labels. UniTox spans eight types of toxicity: cardiotoxicity, liver toxicity,
renal toxicity, pulmonary toxicity, hematological toxicity, dermatological toxicity,
ototoxicity, and infertility. This is, to the best of our knowledge, the largest such
systematic human in vivo database by number of drugs and toxicities, and the first
covering nearly all non-combination FDA-approved medications for several of
these toxicities. We recruited clinicians to validate a random sample of our GPT-4o
annotated toxicities, and UniTox’s toxicity ratings concord with clinician labelers
85–96% of the time. Finally, we benchmark several machine learning models
trained on UniTox to demonstrate the utility of this dataset for building molecular
toxicity prediction models.

1

Introduction

An estimated 90% of drugs fail in clinical trials [1]. While the most common cause of failure is
efficacy, one study found that the second largest cause (24% of failures) was drug safety [2]. Further,
every year, previously approved drugs are taken off the market as unanticipated toxicities become
apparent in post-marketing data that can be difficult to screen pre-clinically [3]. These different
drug-induced toxicities span many different organ systems, including the heart, liver, kidneys, blood,
and lungs. As a result, there is a strong need for predictive models that can anticipate a broad range
1

UniTox data is available at https://zou-group.github.io/UniTox-website. Code available at:
https://github.com/jsilbergDS/UniTox

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

