What makes unlearning hard and what to do about it

Kairan Zhao∗
University of Warwick

Meghdad Kurmanji
University of Cambridge

Eleni Triantafillou†
Google DeepMind

George-Octavian Barbulescu
University of Warwick
Peter Triantafillou†
University of Warwick

Abstract
Machine unlearning is the problem of removing the effect of a subset of training
data (the “forget set”) from a trained model e.g. to comply with users’ requests to
delete their data, or remove mislabeled, poisoned or otherwise problematic data.
With unlearning research still being at its infancy, many fundamental open questions exist: Are there interpretable characteristics of forget sets that substantially
affect the difficulty of the problem? How do these characteristics affect different
state-of-the-art algorithms? We present the first investigation into these questions.
We identify two key factors affecting unlearning difficulty and the performance of
unlearning algorithms. Our evaluation on forget sets that isolate these identified
factors reveals previously-unknown behaviours of state-of-the-art algorithms that
don’t materialize on random forget sets. Based on our insights, we develop a
framework coined Refined-Unlearning Meta-algorithm (RUM) that encompasses:
(i) refining the forget set into homogenized subsets, according to different characteristics; and (ii) a meta-algorithm that employs existing algorithms to unlearn
each subset and finally delivers a model that has unlearned the overall forget set.
RUM substantially improves top-performing unlearning algorithms. Overall, we
view our work as an important step in deepening our scientific understanding of
unlearning and revealing new pathways to improving the state-of-the-art. ‡

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have generated impressive success stories recently by leveraging increasingly
large and data-hungry neural networks that are also increasingly expensive to train. This trend has
led to reusing previously-trained models for a wide range of tasks more than ever before. However,
the heavy reliance of deep models on training data, together with the difficulty of removing data
from trained models after-the-fact, has exacerbated concerns on perpetuating harmful or outdated
information, violating user privacy and other issues. Specifically, deep networks are highly nonconvex, making it difficult to trace (and thus attempt to remove) the effect of a given subset of training
data on the model weights. We are therefore faced with important technical challenges when it
comes to building machine learning pipelines that are performant while efficiently supporting deletion
requests. Machine unlearning [29] is a growing field that aims to address this important issue.
While unlearning is receiving increasing attention [34, 33], it is still a young area of research and
the factors affecting the success of different approaches remain poorly-understood. Understanding
∗

Correspondence to Kairan.Zhao@warwick.ac.uk
Equal senior contribution
‡
Code is available at: https://github.com/kairanzhao/RUM
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

