Large Language Model Unlearning via
Embedding-Corrupted Prompts

Chris Yuhao Liu∗ Yaxuan Wang

Jeffrey Flanigan† Yang Liu†

University of California, Santa Cruz
{yliu298,ywan1225,jmflanig,yangliu}@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have advanced to encompass extensive knowledge
across diverse domains. Yet controlling what a large language model should not
know is important for ensuring alignment and thus safe use. However, accurately
and efficiently unlearning knowledge from an LLM remains challenging due to the
potential collateral damage caused by the fuzzy boundary between retention and
forgetting, and the large computational requirements for optimization across stateof-the-art models with hundreds of billions of parameters. In this work, we present
Embedding-COrrupted (ECO) Prompts, a lightweight unlearning framework for
large language models to address both the challenges of knowledge entanglement
and unlearning efficiency. Instead of relying on the LLM itself to unlearn, we
enforce an unlearned state during inference by employing a prompt classifier to
identify and safeguard prompts to forget. We learn corruptions added to prompt
embeddings via zeroth order optimization toward the unlearning objective offline
and corrupt prompts flagged by the classifier during inference. We find that these
embedding-corrupted prompts not only lead to desirable outputs that satisfy the
unlearning objective but also closely approximate the output from a model that has
never been trained on the data intended for forgetting. Through extensive experiments on unlearning, we demonstrate the superiority of our method in achieving
promising unlearning at nearly zero side effects in general domains and domains
closely related to the unlearned ones. Additionally, we highlight the scalability of
our method to 100 LLMs, ranging from 0.5B to 236B parameters, incurring no additional cost as the number of parameters increases. We have made our code publicly
available at https://github.com/chrisliu298/llm-unlearn-eco.

1

Introduction

The use of large language models (LLMs), trained on extensive text corpora [2, 45, 6, 131, 64, 8,
144], has increasingly become standard in daily life since the arrival of ChatGPT [103]. Despite
the benefits LLMs offer, they pose potential risks across a range of domains, such as copyright
infringement [65, 49, 72], dissemination of hazardous knowledge [73, 53, 39, 115], and privacy
violations [126, 95, 100]. Adherence to the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [37], which
requires the removal of users’ data post-training, is essential. Machine unlearning has emerged as a
new paradigm [19, 101] and has been widely studied for classification models and tasks in recent
years [130, 79, 69, 38]. However, unlearning in the context of LLMs remains largely underexplored,
presenting unique challenges and risks that extend beyond privacy concerns due to the infeasibility of
∗
†

Corresponding author: yliu298@ucsc.edu.
Equal advising.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

