Latent Neural Operator for Solving Forward and
Inverse PDE Problems
Tian Wang
State Key Laboratory of
Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems
Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
wangtian2022@ia.ac.cn

Chuang Wang∗
State Key Laboratory of
Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems
Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
wangchuang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Neural operators effectively solve PDE problems from data without knowing the
explicit equations, which learn the map from the input sequences of observed
samples to the predicted values. Most existing works build the model in the
original geometric space, leading to high computational costs when the number of
sample points is large. We present the Latent Neural Operator (LNO) solving PDEs
in the latent space. In particular, we first propose Physics-Cross-Attention (PhCA)
transforming representation from the geometric space to the latent space, then learn
the operator in the latent space, and finally recover the real-world geometric space
via the inverse PhCA map. Our model retains flexibility that can decode values
in any position not limited to locations defined in the training set, and therefore
can naturally perform interpolation and extrapolation tasks particularly useful for
inverse problems. Moreover, the proposed LNO improves both prediction accuracy
and computational efficiency. Experiments show that LNO reduces the GPU
memory by 50%, speeds up training 1.8 times, and reaches state-of-the-art accuracy
on four out of six benchmarks for forward problems and a benchmark for inverse
problem. Code is available at https://github.com/L-I-M-I-T/LatentNeuralOperator.

1

Introduction

Neural network approaches for partial differential equations (PDEs) attract increasing attention in
diverse scientific fields, for instance, meteorological prediction[1], industrial design[2], geological
sensing[3] and environmental monitoring[4] to name a few. Compared with traditional numerical
methods, e.g., finite element method[5], which demands a large number of computational resources
and requires meticulous discretization involving a lot of specialized knowledge, neural networks
provide a new paradigm for solving PDE-driven problems with a better trade-off between accuracy
and flexibility.
Neural PDE solvers can be divided into two main categories, physics-informed and operator-learning
models. The physics-informed methods[6–11] enforce the inductive bias of explicit PDE instances
into loss function or model architecture, usually yielding solutions with high accuracy, but are less
flexible as they require fresh training to find the solution for each new instance. In contrast, the
operator learning methods[12–15] adopt a data-driven paradigm to learn the implicit PDE constraint
∗

Corresponding Author.This work is supported by Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Project (No.
Z231100010323005), the 2035 Innovation Mission (Grants No. E4J10102) and Pioneer Hundred Talents
Program of CAS under Grant Y9S9MS08 and E2S40101.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

