VideoLLM-MoD: Efficient Video-Language Streaming
with Mixture-of-Depths Vision Computation

Shiwei Wu1,2 , Joya Chen2 , Kevin Qinghong Lin2 , Qimeng Wang3 , Yan Gao3
Qianli Xu4 , Tong Xu1B , Yao Hu3 , Enhong Chen1B , Mike Zheng Shou2B
1
University of Science and Technology of China & State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
2
3
Show Lab, National University of Singapore
Xiaohongshu Inc.
4
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR

Abstract
A well-known dilemma in large vision-language models (e.g., GPT-4, LLaVA)
is that while increasing the number of vision tokens generally enhances visual
understanding, it also significantly raises memory and computational costs, especially in long-term, dense video frame streaming scenarios. Although learnable
approaches like Q-Former and Perceiver Resampler have been developed to reduce
the vision token burden, they overlook the context causally modeled by LLMs (i.e.,
key-value cache), potentially leading to missed visual cues when addressing user
queries. In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to reduce vision compute
by leveraging redundant vision tokens “skipping layers” rather than decreasing
the number of vision tokens. Our method, V IDEO LLM-M O D, is inspired by
mixture-of-depths LLMs and addresses the challenge of numerous vision tokens
in long-term or streaming video. Specifically, for certain transformer layer, we
learn to skip the computation for a high proportion (e.g., 80%) of vision tokens,
passing them directly to the next layer. This approach significantly enhances model
efficiency, achieving approximately ~42% time and ~30% memory savings for the
entire training. Moreover, our method reduces the computation in the context and
avoid decreasing the vision tokens, thus preserving or even improving performance
compared to the vanilla model. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate
the effectiveness of V IDEO LLM-M O D, showing its state-of-the-art results on
multiple benchmarks, including narration, forecasting, and summarization tasks in
COIN, Ego4D, and Ego-Exo4D datasets. The code and checkpoints will be made
available at github.com/showlab/VideoLLM-online.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in large language models [65, 66, 6, 63, 72, 73, 56, 2], particularly with GPT4o [62], have led many to believe that the development of a J.A.R.V.I.S.-like AI assistant is becoming
increasingly feasible. Such an assistant would operate in a streaming manner, remain always-on, and
be multimodal to facilitate interaction with users.
While existing video-based Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) [54, 40, 84, 88, 69, 38, 57, 89, 81,
36, 20, 47] have shown significant capabilities in general visual content understanding and reasoning,
these models primarily operate in an offline setting, provide response for a few sampled frames
within a video in the event-level, which falls short in online settings where there is a need for prompt,
concise, and frame-aligned answers for the continuous video frames, as shown in Figure 1. For
B

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

