ABCFair: an Adaptable Benchmark approach
for Comparing Fairness methods

MaryBeth Defrance
Ghent University
marybeth.defrance@ugent.be

Maarten Buyl
Ghent University
maarten.buyl@ugent.be

Tijl De Bie
Ghent University
tijl.debie@ugent.be

Abstract
Numerous methods have been implemented that pursue fairness with respect to sensitive features by mitigating biases in machine learning. Yet, the problem settings
that each method tackles vary significantly, including the stage of intervention,
the composition of sensitive features, the fairness notion, and the distribution of
the output. Even in binary classification, these subtle differences make it highly
complicated to benchmark fairness methods, as their performance can strongly
depend on exactly how the bias mitigation problem was originally framed.
Hence, we introduce ABCFair, a benchmark approach which allows adapting to
the desiderata of the real-world problem setting, enabling proper comparability
between methods for any use case. We apply ABCFair to a range of pre-, in-, and
postprocessing methods on both large-scale, traditional datasets and on a dual label
(biased and unbiased) dataset to sidestep the fairness-accuracy trade-off.

1

Introduction

Fairness has become a firmly established field in AI research as the study and mitigation of algorithmic
bias. Thus, the range of methods that pursue AI fairness is now broad and varied [10, 41]. Many have
been implemented in large toolkits such as AIF360 [4], Fairlearn [48], Aequitas [45], or in libraries
with a narrower focus like Fair Fairness Benchmark (FFB) [25], error-parity [13], and fairret [7].
So, which of these methods performs ‘best’? Benchmarks in the past [5, 13, 18, 25, 29, 30, 37] tend
to search for the best method per dataset. We argue such a benchmarking approach is of limited
value in practice, as the real-world context of bias in AI systems imposes many subtle, yet significant,
desiderata that a benchmark should align with before they can be properly compared.
Moreover, prior work commonly observes a trade-off: the more fair a model, the less accurate its
predictions. This is unsurprising as fairness is typically pursued in settings where the training data
and the evaluation data are both assumed to be biased [6]. Removing bias from predictions thus
leads to degradation of this biased accuracy measure [49]. However, theoretical work has shown that
this is not necessarily the case when evaluating on less biased data [16, 49].
Contributions. We formalize four types of desiderata that could arise in real-world classification
problems. These include 1) the stage where the method intervenes, 2) the composition of sensitive
groups, 3) the exact definition of fairness, and 4) the distribution that is expected from the model
output. Figure 1 shows where these desiderata pose comparability challenges in a fairness pipeline.
We introduce ABCFair: an adaptable benchmark approach for comparing fairness methods. Through
the use of three flexible components, the Data, FairnessMethod, and Evaluator, it can adapt to
a range of desiderata imposed by the task. The approach is validated by benchmarking it on 10
methods, 7 fairness notions, 3 formats of sensitive features, and 2 output distribution formats.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

