Rethinking No-reference Image Exposure Assessment
from Holism to Pixel: Models, Datasets and Benchmarks

Shuai He†,1 Shuntian Zheng†,2 Anlong Ming†,1,∗ Banyu Wu1 Huadong Ma1
1
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
University of Warwick
{hs19951021}@bupt.edu.cn
Shuntian.Zheng@warwick.ac.uk {mal, wubanyu, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
The past decade has witnessed an increasing demand for enhancing image quality
through exposure, and as a crucial prerequisite in this endeavor, Image Exposure
Assessment (IEA) is now being accorded serious attention. However, IEA encounters two persistent challenges that remain unresolved over the long term: the
accuracy and generalizability of No-reference IEA are inadequate for practical
applications; the scope of IEA is confined to qualitative and quantitative analysis
of the entire image or subimage, such as providing only a score to evaluate the
exposure level, thereby lacking intuitive and precise fine-grained evaluation for
complex exposure conditions. The objective of this paper is to address the persistent
bottleneck challenges from three perspectives: model, dataset, and benchmark. 1)
Model-level: we propose a Pixel-level IEA Network (P-IEANet) that utilizes Haar
discrete wavelet transform (DWT) to analyze, decompose, and assess exposure
from both lightness and structural perspectives, capable of generating pixel-level
assessment results under no-reference scenarios. 2) Dataset-level: we elaborately
build an exposure-oriented dataset, IEA40K, containing 40K images, covering 17
typical lighting scenarios, 27 devices, and 50+ scenes, with each image densely
annotated by more than 10 experts with pixel-level labels. 3) Benchmark-level:
we develop a comprehensive benchmark of 19 methods based on IEA40K. Our
P-IEANet not only achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on all metrics but
also seamlessly integrates with existing exposure correction and lighting enhancement methods. To our knowledge, this is the first work that explicitly emphasizes
assessing complex image exposure problems at a pixel level, providing a significant boost to the IEA and exposure-related community. The code and dataset are
available in here.

1

Introduction

Exposure, one of the 3A factors (Auto Exposure, Focus and White Balance) in camera technology,
plays a crucial role in controlling image quality. Image exposure assessment (IEA) is a prerequisite
for improving exposure [1–3]; however, even leading phone and camera manufacturers heavily rely
on manual evaluations due to the unavailability and high cost of human raters. Nevertheless, largescale adoption of manual assessments is impractical. Similar to mainstream AI applications, deep
learning and data-driven approaches hold promise as potential solutions to overcome this limitation.
Nevertheless, the traditional data-driven IEA paradigm encounters two major challenges:
1) A Dilemma between Applicability and Practicability: While full-reference IEA methods deliver
satisfactory results [4–9], their applicability in non-preset scenarios is limited due to the general
unavailability of reference images. Conversely, no-reference IEA methods, which do not rely on
reference information, struggle with natural images distorted by unknown factors. This difficulty
†

Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

