Contrastive losses as generalized models of global
epistasis

David H. Brookes ∗
Dyno Therapeutics

Jakub Otwinowski
Dyno Therapeutics

Sam Sinai
Dyno Therapeutics

Abstract
Fitness functions map large combinatorial spaces of biological sequences to properties of interest. Inferring these multimodal functions from experimental data is a
central task in modern protein engineering. Global epistasis models are an effective
and physically-grounded class of models for estimating fitness functions from
observed data. These models assume that a sparse latent function is transformed
by a monotonic nonlinearity to emit measurable fitness. Here we demonstrate that
minimizing supervised contrastive loss functions, such as the Bradley-Terry loss,
is a simple and flexible technique for extracting the sparse latent function implied
by global epistasis. We argue by way of a fitness-epistasis uncertainty principle
that the nonlinearities in global epistasis models can produce observed fitness
functions that do not admit sparse representations, and thus may be inefficient to
learn from observations when using a Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss (a common
practice). We show that contrastive losses are able to accurately estimate a ranking
function from limited data even in regimes where MSE is ineffective and validate
the practical utility of this insight by demonstrating that contrastive loss functions
result in consistently improved performance on empirical benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

A fitness function maps biological sequences to relevant scalar properties of the sequences, such as
binding affinity to a target molecule, or fluorescent brightness. Biological sequences span combinatorial spaces and fitness functions are typically multi-peaked, due to interactions between positions in
a sequence. Learning fitness functions from limited experimental data (often a minute fraction of
the possible space) can be a difficult task but allows one to predict properties of sequences. These
predictions can help identify promising new sequences for experimentation [42] or to guide the search
for optimal sequences [6, 8].
Even in the case of where experimental measurements are available for every possible sequence in a
sequence space, inferring a model of the fitness function can be valuable for understanding the factors
that impact sequences’ fitness [16] or how evolution might progress over the fitness landscape [41].
Numerous methods have been developed to estimate fitness functions from experimental data, including classical machine learning techniques [43], deep learning approaches [18], and semi-supervised
methods [21]. Additionally, there are many methods that incorporate biological assumptions into
the modeling process, such as parameterized biophysical models [29], non-parametric techniques
[44, 45], and methods for spectral regularization of neural networks [1]. These latter approaches
largely focus on accurately modeling the influence of “epistasis” on fitness functions, which refers to
statistical or physical interactions between genetic elements, typically either amino-acids in a protein
sequence or genes in a genome.
∗

david.brookes@dynotx.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

