Efficient Prompt Optimization Through the Lens of
Best Arm Identification
Chengshuai Shi∗
University of Virginia
cs7ync@virginia.edu
Jundong Li
University of Virginia
jundong@virginia.edu

Kun Yang∗
University of Virginia
ky9tc@virginia.edu

Zihan Chen
University of Virginia
brf3rx@virginia.edu

Jing Yang
The Pennsylvania State University
yangjing@psu.edu

Cong Shen
University of Virginia
cong@virginia.edu

Abstract
The remarkable instruction-following capability of large language models (LLMs)
has sparked a growing interest in automatically finding good prompts, i.e., prompt
optimization. Most existing works follow the scheme of selecting from a pregenerated pool of candidate prompts. However, these designs mainly focus on the
generation strategy, while limited attention has been paid to the selection method.
Especially, the cost incurred during the selection (e.g., accessing LLM and evaluating the responses) is rarely explicitly considered. To overcome this limitation,
this work provides a principled framework, TRIPLE, to efficiently perform prompt
selection under an explicit budget constraint. TRIPLE is built on a novel connection
established between prompt optimization and fixed-budget best arm identification
(BAI-FB) in multi-armed bandits (MAB); thus, it is capable of leveraging the rich
toolbox from BAI-FB systematically and also incorporating unique characteristics
of prompt optimization. Extensive experiments on multiple well-adopted tasks
using various LLMs demonstrate the remarkable performance improvement of
TRIPLE over baselines while satisfying the limited budget constraints. As an extension, variants of TRIPLE are proposed to efficiently select examples for few-shot
prompts, also achieving superior empirical performance.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have rapidly changed technology landscapes in our society [20,
72, 73, 11, 55]. Researchers continuously find effective ways to unlock their potential on various
downstream tasks. Among different research directions, the remarkable ability of LLMs to follow
instructions has motivated the study of searching for suitable prompts to interact with them [50]. This
approach is particularly attractive as it does not require updating the inside parameters of an LLM,
and is natural in the way of human conversations. Nevertheless, it has also been recognized that the
performance of an LLM is sensitive to the selected prompts [87, 52], and manually designing suitable
prompts can be a labor-intensive process [54]. Thus, there is a growing interest to perform automatic
prompt optimization [90, 79, 21, 19, 59, 84, 28, 58, 60, 81].
While these studies have proposed different prompt optimization designs, they commonly follow the
approach of generating a pool of candidate prompts and then selecting from them. With a deeper
look, it can be recognized that the focus in these existing works largely leans towards how to generate
the candidate pool, while limited attention has been paid towards how to select from the candidates.
∗

indicates equal contributions, random order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

