Data Distribution Valuation
Xinyi Xu
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
xinyi.xu@u.nus.edu

Shuaiqi Wang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University
shuaiqiw@andrew.cmu.edu

Chuan-Sheng Foo
Institute for Infocomm Research
Agency for Science, Technology and Research
foo_chuan_sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Bryan Kian Hsiang Low
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Giulia Fanti
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University
gfanti@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Data valuation is a class of techniques for quantitatively assessing the value of
data for applications like pricing in data marketplaces. Existing data valuation
methods define a value for a discrete dataset. However, in many use cases, users
are interested in not only the value of the dataset, but that of the distribution from
which the dataset was sampled. For example, consider a buyer trying to evaluate
whether to purchase data from different vendors. The buyer may observe (and
compare) only a small preview sample from each vendor, to decide which vendor’s
data distribution is most useful to the buyer and purchase. The core question is
how should we compare the values of data distributions from their samples? Under
a Huber characterization of the data heterogeneity across vendors, we propose
a maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)-based valuation method which enables
theoretically principled and actionable policies for comparing data distributions
from samples. We empirically demonstrate that our method is sample-efficient and
effective in identifying valuable data distributions against several existing baselines,
on multiple real-world datasets (e.g., network intrusion detection, credit card fraud
detection) and downstream applications (classification, regression).

1

Introduction

Data valuation is a widely-studied practice of quantifying the value of data [57]. Today, data valuation
methods define a value for a discrete dataset D, i.e., a fixed set of samples [24, 32]. However, many
emerging use cases require a data user to evaluate the quality of not just a dataset, but the distribution
from which the data was sampled. For example, data vendors in markets like Datarade and Snowflake,
financial data streams [46, 52], information security data [22]) offer a preview in the form of a sample
dataset to prospective buyers [4, 11]. Similarly, enterprises selling access to generative models may
offer a limited preview of the output distributions to prospective buyers [53]. Buyers use these
sample datasets to decide whether to pay for a full dataset or data stream—i.e., access to the data
distribution. Concretely, the buyers would compare between different data distributions (via their
respective sample datasets) to determine and select the more valuable one.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

