IRCAN: Mitigating Knowledge Conflicts in
LLM Generation via Identifying and Reweighting
Context-Aware Neurons
Dan Shi, Renren Jin, Tianhao Shen, Weilong Dong, Xinwei Wu, Deyi Xiong∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{shidan, rrjin, thshen, willowd, wuxw2021, dyxiong}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
It is widely acknowledged that large language models (LLMs) encode a vast
reservoir of knowledge after being trained on mass data. Recent studies disclose
knowledge conflicts in LLM generation, wherein outdated or incorrect parametric
knowledge (i.e., encoded knowledge) contradicts new knowledge provided in the
context. To mitigate such knowledge conflicts, we propose a novel framework,
IRCAN (Identifying and Reweighting Context-Aware Neurons) to capitalize on
neurons that are crucial in processing contextual cues. Specifically, IRCAN first
identifies neurons that significantly contribute to context processing, utilizing a
context-aware attribution score derived from integrated gradients. Subsequently,
the identified context-aware neurons are strengthened via reweighting. In doing
so, we steer LLMs to generate context-sensitive outputs with respect to the new
knowledge provided in the context. Extensive experiments conducted across a
variety of models and tasks demonstrate that IRCAN not only achieves remarkable
improvements in handling knowledge conflicts but also offers a scalable, plug-andplay solution that can be integrated seamlessly with existing models. Our codes
are released at https://github.com/danshi777/IRCAN.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs), trained on extensive data, are known for encapsulating a broad spectrum of knowledge [13, 40, 26, 35]. However, due to the rapid evolution of information/knowledge as
well as noise in training data, LLMs may possess incorrect or outdated knowledge. To mitigate this
issue, in real-world applications, methods like retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) are usually used
to integrate latest event knowledge or knowledge from external databases into the context of prompts
fed into LLMs. This enables online updates to knowledge and the incorporation of domain-specific
information, enhancing the accuracy and reliability of the outputs of LLMs.
Such generation formalism equips LLMs with two sources of knowledge: (1) parametric knowledge,
which is acquired during pre-training and encoded within model parameters; and (2) contextual
knowledge, which is supplied as the prefix context within the input [3]. However, previous studies
have shown that when LLMs encounter contradictions between these two types of knowledge (known
as knowledge conflicts [43, 44]), they may overly adhere to their inherent parametric knowledge and
fail to pay sufficient attention to new knowledge introduced in the context [28, 4, 43], leading to
hallucinations [48, 19, 18]. For example, although we present the latest information “As of 2023,
India has surpassed China as the most populous country.” in the context to LLaMA-2-7B, when it
is faced with the question “Which country is the most populous in the world?\nAnswer:”, it still
provides the outdated answer “China”.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

