Probabilistic Decomposed Linear Dynamical Systems
for Robust Discovery of Latent Neural Dynamics

Yenho Chen1,3 , Noga Mudrik4 , Kyle A. Johnsen3 ,
Sankaraleengam Alagapan2 , Adam S. Charles4 , and Christopher J. Rozell1,2
1
Machine Learning Center, Georgia Institute of Technology
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
3
Coulter Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Emory University and Georgia Institute of Technology
4
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Mathematical Institute for Data Science,
Center for Imaging Science, Kavli Neuroscience Discovery Institute, Johns Hopkins University
yenho@gatech.edu, nmudrik1@jhu.edu, kjohnsen@gatech.edu
sankar.alagapan@gatech.edu, adamsc@jhu.edu, crozell@gatech.edu

Abstract
Time-varying linear state-space models are powerful tools for obtaining mathematically interpretable representations of neural signals. For example, switching and
decomposed models describe complex systems using latent variables that evolve
according to simple locally linear dynamics. However, existing methods for latent
variable estimation are not robust to dynamical noise and system nonlinearity due to
noise-sensitive inference procedures and limited model formulations. This can lead
to inconsistent results on signals with similar dynamics, limiting the model’s ability
to provide scientific insight. In this work, we address these limitations and propose
a probabilistic approach to latent variable estimation in decomposed models that
improves robustness against dynamical noise. Additionally, we introduce an extended latent dynamics model to improve robustness against system nonlinearities.
We evaluate our approach on several synthetic dynamical systems, including an
empirically-derived brain-computer interface experiment, and demonstrate more
accurate latent variable inference in nonlinear systems with diverse noise conditions. Furthermore, we apply our method to a real-world clinical neurophysiology
dataset, illustrating the ability to identify interpretable and coherent structure where
previous models cannot. 1

1

Introduction

A central goal in computational neuroscience is to develop models capable of discovering latent
structure within noisy, high-dimensional neural signals. By identifying hidden relationships within
neural recordings, we can begin to understand, predict, and control the behaviors of the underlying
systems. Modeling neural time-series is challenging due to the range of temporal dynamics present.
For example, there may be gradual short-term fluctuations, abrupt shifts in response to external stimuli,
and long-term global drifts resulting from changes in baseline activity levels [36, 43, 39, 11, 7].
Although black-box approaches based on deep learning are available [34, 20, 38], their complexity
often obscures the relationships learned from the data, making it difficult to extract scientific insights
from these models. As a result, practitioners may favor time-varying linear state-space models which
offer mathematically interpretable representations by approximating complex dynamics with simple
1
Code is available at:
https://github.com/siplab-gt/probabilistic-decomposed-linear-dynamical-systems

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

