TransVIP: Speech to Speech Translation System with
Voice and Isochrony Preservation

Chenyang Le1,2∗
Midia Yousefi2
1

Yao Qian2 †

Dongmei Wang2

Yanmin Qian1

Long Zhou2

Jinyu Li2

Shujie Liu2

Sheng Zhao2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

2

Xiaofei Wang2
Michael Zeng2

Microsoft, USA

Abstract
There is a rising interest and trend in research towards directly translating speech
from one language to another, known as end-to-end speech-to-speech translation.
However, most end-to-end models struggle to outperform cascade models, i.e., a
pipeline framework by concatenating speech recognition, machine translation, and
text-to-speech models. The primary challenges stem from the inherent complexities
involved in direct translation tasks and the scarcity of data. In this study, we
introduce a novel model framework TransVIP that leverages diverse datasets in
a cascade fashion yet facilitates end-to-end inference through joint probability.
Furthermore, we propose two separate encoders to preserve the speaker’s voice
characteristics and isochrony from the source speech during the translation process,
making it highly suitable for scenarios such as video dubbing. Our experiments
on the French-English language pair demonstrate that our model outperforms the
current state-of-the-art speech-to-speech translation model.

Figure 1: Overview of our speech-to-speech translation framework: 1) Joint encoder-decoder model
for translating speech into the target text, and coarse-grained speech tokens, C0 ; 2) Non-autoregressive
acoustic model for acoustic details, C0:16 ; 3) Codec model to convert discrete speech tokens back
to the waveform. Abbreviation: S/A/I(Semantic/Acoustic/Isochrony Information), C0 /C0:16 (Codec
layer 0/0-15), S/A-Enc(Semantic/Acoustic Encoder), ICM(Isochrony Control Module).

∗
†

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Azure AI. nethermanpro@sjtu.edu.cn
Correspondence: yaoqian@microsoft.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

