SelectIT: Selective Instruction Tuning for LLMs
via Uncertainty-Aware Self-Reflection

Liangxin Liu1 Xuebo Liu1∗ Derek F. Wong2 Dongfang Li1
Ziyi Wang1 Baotian Hu1 Min Zhang1
1
Institute of Computing and Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
NLP2 CT Lab, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
lliangxin967@gmail.com, {liuxuebo,hubaotian,zhangmin2021}@hit.edu.cn
derekfw@um.edu.mo, {crazyofapple,ziyiwang676}@gmail.com

Abstract
Instruction tuning (IT) is crucial to tailoring large language models (LLMs) towards
human-centric interactions. Recent advancements have shown that the careful
selection of a small, high-quality subset of IT data can significantly enhance the
performance of LLMs. Despite this, common approaches often rely on additional
models or data, which increases costs and limits widespread adoption. In this work,
we propose a novel approach, termed SelectIT, that capitalizes on the foundational
capabilities of the LLM itself. Specifically, we exploit the intrinsic uncertainty
present in LLMs to more effectively select high-quality IT data, without the need
for extra resources. Furthermore, we introduce a curated IT dataset, the Selective
Alpaca, created by applying SelectIT to the Alpaca-GPT4 dataset. Empirical
results demonstrate that IT using Selective Alpaca leads to substantial model ability
enhancement. The robustness of SelectIT has also been corroborated in various
foundation models and domain-specific tasks. Our findings suggest that longer
and more computationally intensive IT data may serve as superior sources of IT,
offering valuable insights for future research in this area. Data, code, and scripts
are freely available at https://github.com/Blue-Raincoat/SelectIT.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have attracted much
attention due to their impressive capabilities in
following instructions and solving intricate problems (Touvron et al., 2023b,a; Achiam et al., 2023;
Penedo et al., 2023). A crucial aspect of enhancing LLMs’ performance is instruction tuning (IT),
which involves the supervised adjustment of LLMs
using pairs of instructional data, essential for refining the models’ ability to accurately respond
to human instructions. Recent groundbreaking research, such as the LIMA (Zhou et al., 2023), highlights the critical importance of instructional data
quality over quantity. Contrary to the approach
of merely increasing the dataset size, a carefully
selected, smaller dataset of higher quality can significantly improve LLMs’ performance.
∗

IT Models

Instruction
Datasets

External
Method
Model

Data

Vanilla IT
Foundation
Model
Selected
Datasets

LIMA
AlpaGasus
Instruction
Mining
SelectIT

Figure 1: Existing advanced data selection
strategies rely heavily on external models or
data; however, SelectIT effectively overcomes
this limitation.

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

