Mimicking To Dominate: Imitation Learning
Strategies for Success in Multiagent Games

The Viet Bui
Singapore Management University, Singapore
theviet.bui.2023@phdcs.smu.edu.sg
Tien Mai
Singapore Management University, Singapore
atmai@smu.edu.sg
Thanh Hong Nguyen
University of Oregon Eugene, Oregon, United States
thanhhng@cs.uoregon.edu

Abstract
Training agents in multi-agent games presents significant challenges due to their
intricate nature. These challenges are exacerbated by dynamics influenced not
only by the environment but also by strategies of opponents. Existing methods
often struggle with slow convergence and instability. To address these challenges,
we harness the potential of imitation learning (IL) to comprehend and anticipate
actions of the opponents, aiming to mitigate uncertainties with respect to the
game dynamics. Our key contributions include: (i) a new multi-agent IL model
for predicting next moves of the opponents — our model works with hidden
actions of opponents and local observations; (ii) a new multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) algorithm that combines our IL model and policy training into
one single training process; and (iii) extensive experiments in three challenging
game environments, including an advanced version of the Star-Craft multi-agent
challenge (i.e., SMACv2). Experimental results show that our approach achieves
superior performance compared to state-of-the-art MARL algorithms.

1

Introduction

Recent works in MARL have made a significant progress in developing new effective algorithms
that can perform well in complex multi-agent environments including SMAC [34, 25]. Among these
works, centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) [5] has attracted a great attention from
the RL community due to its advantage of leveraging global information to train a centralized critic
(i.e., actor-critic methods [18]) or a joint Q-function (i.e., value-decomposition methods [23, 29]).
This approach enables a more efficient and stable learning process while allowing agents to act in
a decentralized manner. Under this CTDE framework, off-policy methods such as MADDPG [18]
and QMIX [23] have become very popular due to their data efficiency and state-of-the-art (SOTA)
results on a wide range of benchmarks. On the other hand, on-policy gradient methods have been
under-explored in MARL due to their data consuming and difficulty in transferring knowledge from
single-agent to multi-agent settings. However, a recent work shows that on-policy methods (such
as MAPPO, a multi-agent version of proximal policy optimization) outperforms all other SOTA
methods including MADDPG and QMIX in various multi-agent benchmarks, and especially works
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

