Learning Action and Reasoning-Centric Image Editing
from Videos and Simulations
Dheeraj Vattikonda∗
Mila & McGill University

Luis Lara∗ Varun Jampani
Mila
Stability AI

Christopher Pal
Mila & Polytechnique Montréal
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
ServiceNow Research

Siva Reddy
Mila & McGill University
Facebook CIFAR AI Chair
ServiceNow Research

Benno Krojer
Mila & McGill University
benno.krojer@mila.quebec
Eva Portelance
Mila & HEC Montréal

Abstract
An image editing model should be able to perform diverse edits, ranging from
object replacement, changing attributes or style, to performing actions or movement,
which require many forms of reasoning. Current general instruction-guided editing
models have significant shortcomings with action and reasoning-centric edits.
Object, attribute or stylistic changes can be learned from visually static datasets.
On the other hand, high-quality data for action and reasoning-centric edits is
scarce and has to come from entirely different sources that cover e.g. physical
dynamics, temporality and spatial reasoning. To this end, we meticulously curate
the AURORA Dataset (Action-Reasoning-Object-Attribute), a collection of highquality training data, human-annotated and curated from videos and simulation
engines. We focus on a key aspect of quality training data: triplets (source image,
prompt, target image) contain a single meaningful visual change described by
the prompt, i.e., truly minimal changes between source and target images. To
demonstrate the value of our dataset, we evaluate an AURORA-finetuned model
on a new expert-curated benchmark (AURORA-B ENCH) covering 8 diverse
editing tasks. Our model significantly outperforms previous editing models as
judged by human raters. For automatic evaluations, we find important flaws in
previous metrics and caution their use for semantically hard editing tasks. Instead,
we propose a new automatic metric that focuses on discriminative understanding.
We hope that our efforts : (1) curating a quality training dataset and an evaluation
benchmark, (2) developing critical evaluations, and (3) releasing a state-of-the-art
model1 , will fuel further progress on general image editing.

1

Introduction

Image editing is a complex task, involving many different skills, from adding/removing objects,
changing colors/textures/styles, to “taking actions”: moving objects, changing actor positions or
even more complex interactions. Tackling all of these requires fine-grained understanding of how
visual scenes are composed as well as reasoning (e.g. spatial instructions or referring expressions).
No current model can successfully do all of these edits, and most only perform localized changes
involving object addition/removal or attribute edits, following the “inpainting paradigm” [Zhang
et al., 2024, Xie et al., 2023]. Others have tried to address this issue by introducing more specialized
1

All data and code: https://github.com/McGill-NLP/AURORA

* = equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

