Understanding Visual Feature Reliance through the
Lens of Complexity

Thomas Fel ∗ †
Louis Béthune ∗ ‡
Andrew Kyle Lampinen
Google DeepMind
Université de Toulouse
Google DeepMind
Brown University
Thomas Serre
Katherine Hermann
Brown University
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Recent studies suggest that deep learning models’ inductive bias towards favoring
simpler features may be one of the sources of shortcut learning. Yet, there has
been limited focus on understanding the complexity of the myriad features that
models learn. In this work, we introduce a new metric for quantifying feature
complexity, based on V-information and capturing whether a feature requires
complex computational transformations to be extracted. Using this V-information
metric, we analyze the complexities of 10,000 features—represented as directions
in the penultimate layer—that were extracted from a standard ImageNet-trained
vision model. Our study addresses four key questions: First, we ask what features
look like as a function of complexity and find a spectrum of simple-to-complex
features present within the model. Second, we ask when features are learned
during training. We find that simpler features dominate early in training, and
more complex features emerge gradually. Third, we investigate where within
the network simple and complex features “flow”, and find that simpler features
tend to bypass the visual hierarchy via residual connections. Fourth, we explore
the connection between features’ complexity and their importance in driving the
network’s decision. We find that complex features tend to be less important.
Surprisingly, important features become accessible at earlier layers during training,
like a “sedimentation process,” allowing the model to build upon these foundational
elements.
“It is necessary to have on hand a method of measuring the complexity of calculating
devices which in turn can be done if one has a theory of the complexity of functions, some
partial results on this problem have been obtained by Shannon.”
Darmouth Workshop proposal [70]

Measuring complexity is one of the core problems described by Shannon & McCarty in the famous
1956 proposal of the Dartmouth workshop. This problem—and the question, “How can a set of
(hypothetical) neurons be arranged to form concepts?”[70]—encapsulate what we investigate: how
do neural networks form features and concepts [53], and how can their complexity be quantified?
Recent studies [97, 48] reveal that models often favor simpler features, which may contribute to
shortcut learning [6, 71, 36, 100]. For example, CNNs privilege texture over object shape [10, 37,
46] and single diagnostic pixels over semantic content [69]. Moreover, models tend to prefer input
features that are linearly rather than nonlinearly related to task labels [47, 97]. However, there
*

These authors contributed equally to this work
Work done as Student Researcher at Google DeepMind
‡
Work completed prior to joining Apple
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

