DiffPano: Scalable and Consistent Text to Panorama
Generation with Spherical Epipolar-Aware Diffusion

Weicai Ye1,3,∗ Chenhao Ji2,∗ Zheng Chen4 Junyao Gao2 Xiaoshui Huang3
Song-Hai Zhang4 Wanli Ouyang3 Tong He3,B Cairong Zhao2,B Guofeng Zhang1,B
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Tongji University
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 Tsinghua Univerisity
maikeyeweicai@gmail.com

“A well-lit living space with wooden
floors and a white ceiling, featuring an
open doorway leading to a hallway. The
room is furnished with a dining table and
chairs. ”

jichenhao@tongji.edu.cn

“A kitchen with white cabinets and black
countertops. A well-lit room with white
walls, wood floors, and a couch in the
corner.”

zhangguofeng@zju.edu.cn

“A well-lit room with wooden floors, and
a door that leads to a dining area. The
room is decorated with a vase of flowers
and features a ceiling with a light fixture.”

“A well-maintained room with white
walls and wooden floors. The room
features a brown carpet, a bed, and a
wooden dresser. A bedroom with an open
door leading to the hallway.”

Figure 1: DiffPano allows scalable and consistent panorama generation (i.e. room switching)
with given unseen text descriptions and camera poses. Each column represents the generated
multi-view panoramas, switching from one room to another.

Abstract
Diffusion-based methods have achieved remarkable achievements in 2D image or
3D object generation, however, the generation of 3D scenes and even 360◦ images
remains constrained, due to the limited number of scene datasets, the complexity
of 3D scenes themselves, and the difficulty of generating consistent multi-view images. To address these issues, we first establish a large-scale panoramic video-text
dataset containing millions of consecutive panoramic keyframes with corresponding
panoramic depths, camera poses, and text descriptions. Then, we propose a novel
text-driven panoramic generation framework, termed DiffPano, to achieve scalable,
consistent, and diverse panoramic scene generation. Specifically, benefiting from
the powerful generative capabilities of stable diffusion, we fine-tune a single-view
text-to-panorama diffusion model with LoRA on the established panoramic videotext dataset. We further design a spherical epipolar-aware multi-view diffusion
model to ensure the multi-view consistency of the generated panoramic images.
∗

: Equal Contribution. B: Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

