Bayesian-guided Label Mapping for Visual
Reprogramming

1

Chengyi Cai1 Zesheng Ye1 Lei Feng2 Jianzhong Qi1 Feng Liu1∗
The University of Melbourne 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design
{chengyi.cai1,zesheng.ye,jianzhong.qi}@unimelb.edu.au
feng_lei@sutd.edu.sg fengliu.ml@gmail.com

Abstract
Visual reprogramming (VR) leverages the intrinsic capabilities of pretrained vision
models by adapting their input or output interfaces to solve downstream tasks whose
labels (i.e., downstream labels) might be totally different from the labels associated
with the pretrained models (i.e., pretrained labels). When adapting the output
interface, label mapping methods transform the pretrained labels to downstream
labels by establishing a gradient-free one-to-one correspondence between the two
sets of labels. However, in this paper, we reveal that one-to-one mappings may
overlook the complex relationship between pretrained and downstream labels.
Motivated by this observation, we propose a Bayesian-guided Label Mapping
(BLM) method. BLM constructs an iteratively-updated probabilistic label mapping
matrix, with each element quantifying a pairwise relationship between pretrained
and downstream labels. The assignment of values to the constructed matrix is
guided by Bayesian conditional probability, considering the joint distribution of the
downstream labels and the labels predicted by the pretrained model on downstream
samples. Experiments conducted on both pretrained vision models (e.g., ResNeXt)
and vision-language models (e.g., CLIP) demonstrate the superior performance
of BLM over existing label mapping methods. The success of BLM also offers a
probabilistic lens through which to understand and analyze the effectiveness of VR.
Our code is available at https://github.com/tmlr-group/BayesianLM.

1

Introduction

Repurposing pretrained models from data-rich domains [6, 28, 59] has emerged as an effective
strategy to address downstream tasks without re-training a task-specific model. For visual tasks,
visual reprogramming (VR) [3, 4, 49, 52]–also called adversarial reprogramming [12, 38, 48]–
repurposes a pretrained model for downstream tasks without changing the model. In particular, VR
(full task setup detailed in Appendix A) modifies the model’s input interface by adding trainable noise
patterns to the images of downstream tasks. Since pretrained and downstream tasks typically have
distinct label spaces, a label mapping (LM) function is needed to map outputs of the pretrained models
to downstream labels. Often, existing VR methods adopt a gradient-free one-to-one LM [4, 12, 48],
avoiding the computational cost of training fully-connected output layers through backpropagation.
However, we find that a one-to-one LM overlooks the complex many-to-many relationship between
pretrained and downstream labels, which may limit the performance of VR. In Figure 1, we repurpose
a model pretrained on ImageNet [46] for downstream classification tasks using a one-to-one LM
strategy [4], and present statistical results. The two subfigures Figure 1a and Figure 1b, illustrate
drawbacks from the perspectives of individual images and the entire dataset, respectively. Figure
1a shows the distribution of logits (i.e., model output before the softmax layer) for the most likely
∗

Correspondence to Feng Liu (fengliu.ml@gmail.com)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

