F-OAL: Forward-only Online Analytic Learning with
Fast Training and Low Memory Footprint in Class
Incremental Learning

Huiping Zhuang1∗, Yuchen Liu2∗, Run He1 , Kai Tong1 , Ziqian Zeng1 ,
Cen Chen1,4†, Yi Wang3 , Lap-Pui Chau3
1
South China University of Technology, China
2
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR
4
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
{hpzhuang,runhe,kaitong,zqzeng,cenchen}@scut.edu.cn,
liuyuchen@connect.hku.hk,
{yi-eie.wang, lap-pui.chau}@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Online Class Incremental Learning (OCIL) aims to train models incrementally,
where data arrive in mini-batches, and previous data are not accessible. A major
challenge in OCIL is Catastrophic Forgetting, i.e., the loss of previously learned
knowledge. Among existing baselines, replay-based methods show competitive
results but requires extra memory for storing exemplars, while exemplar-free
(i.e., data need not be stored for replay in production) methods are resourcefriendly but often lack accuracy. In this paper, we propose an exemplar-free
approach—Forward-only Online Analytic Learning (F-OAL). Unlike traditional
methods, F-OAL does not rely on back-propagation and is forward-only, significantly reducing memory usage and computational time. Cooperating with a
pre-trained frozen encoder with Feature Fusion, F-OAL only needs to update a
linear classifier by recursive least square. This approach simultaneously achieves
high accuracy and low resource consumption. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate F-OAL’s robust performance in OCIL scenarios. Code
is available at: https://github.com/liuyuchen-cz/F-OAL

1

Introduction

Class Incremental Learning (CIL) updates the model incrementally in a task-by-task manner with new
classes in the new task. Traditional CIL most plans for static offline datasets which historical data are
accessible. However, with the rapid increase of social media and mobile devices, massive amount of
image data have been produced online in a streaming fashion, and render training models on static
data less applicable. To address this, Online Class Incremental Learning (OCIL) is developed taking
an online constraint in addition to the existing CIL setting. OCIL is a more challenging CIL setting
in which data come in mini-batches, and the model is trained only in one epoch (i.e., learning from
one pass data stream) [14]. The model is required to achieve high accuracy, fast training time, and
low resource consumption [25].
However, CIL techniques (including OCIL) suffer from Catastrophic Forgetting (CF) [27], also
known as the erosion of previous knowledge when new data are introduced. The problem becomes
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

