Optimal Classification under Performative
Distribution Shift
Edwige Cyffers
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille,
UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille
edwige.cyffers@inria.fr

Muni Sreenivas Pydi
Université Paris Dauphine, Université PSL,
CNRS, LAMSADE, 75016 Paris

Jamal Atif
Université Paris Dauphine, Université PSL,
CNRS, LAMSADE, 75016 Paris

Oliver Cappé
École Normale Supérieure, Université PSL,
CNRS, Inria, DI ENS, 75005 Paris

Abstract
Performative learning addresses the increasingly pervasive situations in which
algorithmic decisions may induce changes in the data distribution as a consequence
of their public deployment. We propose a novel view in which these performative
effects are modelled as push-forward measures. This general framework encompasses existing models and enables novel performative gradient estimation methods,
leading to more efficient and scalable learning strategies. For distribution shifts,
unlike previous models which require full specification of the data distribution,
we only assume knowledge of the shift operator that represents the performative
changes. This approach can also be integrated into various change-of-variablebased models, such as VAEs or normalizing flows. Focusing on classification with
a linear-in-parameters performative effect, we prove the convexity of the performative risk under a new set of assumptions. Notably, we do not limit the strength
of performative effects but rather their direction, requiring only that classification
becomes harder when deploying more accurate models. In this case, we also
establish a connection with adversarially robust classification by reformulating the
minimization of the performative risk as a min-max variational problem. Finally,
we illustrate our approach on synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are increasingly deployed in real-world scenarios where their predictions can influence the users’ behaviors, thereby altering the underlying data distribution. This
phenomenon, though rooted in long-standing economic theory [Morgenstern, 1928, Muth, 1961],
has recently attracted interest in the machine learning community under the name of performative
prediction [Perdomo et al., 2020, Hardt and Mendler-Dünner, 2023]. Consider for instance a social
ranking system: if it consistently favors a particular subpopulation of individuals, user behavior might
shift towards mimicking the main characteristics of this subgroup or, conversely, some features of
this subpopulation can undergo modification as a consequence of the selection by the system, both
effects leading to subtle alterations of the original data distribution. More generally, performative
learning captures dynamics at stake in strategic classification, where individuals are confronted by
algorithmic decisions that impact their life – such as loan acceptance, college admission, probation –
and might thus try to overturn predictions by optimizing some of their features.
This feedback loop, where predictions influence future data, poses new challenges and necessitates
the development of novel approaches within statistical learning theory and practice [Perdomo et al.,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

