Weak-eval-Strong: Evaluating and Eliciting Lateral
Thinking of LLMs with Situation Puzzles

Qi Chen Bowen Zhang Gang Wang Qi Wu†
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
{qi.chen04, b.zhang, qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au, gang@theb.ai

Abstract
While advancements in NLP have significantly improved the performance of Large
Language Models (LLMs) on tasks requiring vertical thinking, their lateral thinking
capabilities remain under-explored and challenging to measure due to the complexity of assessing creative thought processes and the scarcity of relevant data.
To address these challenges, we introduce SPLAT, a benchmark leveraging Situation Puzzles to evaluate and elicit LAteral Thinking of LLMs. This benchmark,
containing 975 graded situation puzzles across three difficulty levels, employs
a new multi-turn player-judge framework instead of the traditional model-based
evaluation, which often necessitates a stronger evaluation model. This framework
simulates an interactive game where the model (player) asks the evaluation model
(judge) questions about an incomplete story to infer the full scenario. The judge
answers based on a detailed reference scenario or evaluates if the player’s predictions align with the reference one. This approach lessens dependence on more
robust evaluation models, enabling the assessment of state-of-the-art LLMs. The
experiments demonstrate that a robust evaluation model, such as WizardLM-2,
closely matches human judgements in both intermediate question-answering and
final scenario accuracy, achieving over 80% agreement–similar to the agreement
levels among humans. Furthermore, applying data and reasoning processes from
our benchmark to other lateral thinking-related benchmarks, e.g., RiddleSense and
BrainTeaser, leads to performance enhancements. This suggests that our benchmark effectively evaluates and elicits the lateral thinking abilities of LLMs. Code
is available at: https://github.com/chenqi008/LateralThinking.

1

Introduction

Vertical and lateral thinking are two essential styles that play critical roles in human cognition and
decision-making [42]. As noted in [20], vertical thinking, characterised by its logical and structured
nature, involves a systematic, step-by-step approach to problem-solving where each step logically
follows the previous one. In contrast, lateral thinking is about creativity and viewing problems from
multiple angles. It involves breaking away from traditional thought patterns to generate new ideas,
and embracing a more playful and imaginative problem-solving approach.
The evolution of natural language processing (NLP) models, particularly large language models
(LLMs) [10, 15, 40, 41], has seen significant advancements in tasks that require vertical thinking, such
as complex reasoning [5, 44] and commonsense inference [6, 38]. Despite these achievements, the
development and evaluation of these models have primarily focused on vertical thinking capabilities [7,
43], often neglecting lateral thinking, which is essential for creatively solving novel problems.
Current benchmarks [35, 36] frequently dismiss creative thinking as irrelevant, focusing only on
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

