GS-Hider: Hiding Messages into 3D Gaussian
Splatting

Xuanyu Zhang1,2† , Jiarui Meng1,2† , Runyi Li1,2 , Zhipei Xu1,2 , Yongbing Zhang3 , Jian Zhang1,2 B
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has already become the emerging research focus in
the fields of 3D scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis. Given that training
a 3DGS requires a significant amount of time and computational cost, it is crucial
to protect the copyright, integrity, and privacy of such 3D assets. Steganography, as
a crucial technique for encrypted transmission and copyright protection, has been
extensively studied. However, it still lacks profound exploration targeted at 3DGS.
Unlike its predecessor NeRF, 3DGS possesses two distinct features: 1) explicit 3D
representation; and 2) real-time rendering speeds. These characteristics result in
the 3DGS point cloud files being public and transparent, with each Gaussian point
having a clear physical significance. Therefore, ensuring the security and fidelity
of the original 3D scene while embedding information into the 3DGS point cloud
files is an extremely challenging task. To solve the above-mentioned issue, we first
propose a steganography framework for 3DGS, dubbed GS-Hider, which can embed
3D scenes and images into original GS point clouds in an invisible manner and
accurately extract the hidden messages. Specifically, we design a coupled secured
feature attribute to replace the original 3DGS’s spherical harmonics coefficients
and then use a scene decoder and a message decoder to disentangle the original
RGB scene and the hidden message. Extensive experiments demonstrated that
the proposed GS-Hider can effectively conceal multimodal messages without
compromising rendering quality and possesses exceptional security, robustness,
capacity, and flexibility. Our project is available at: https://xuanyuzhang21.
github.io/project/gshider/.

1

Introduction

As a frontier in computer vision and graphics, 3D scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis are
crucial in fields such as movie production, game engines, virtual reality, and autonomous driving.
Specifically, thanks to its high fidelity and fast rendering speeds, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [21]
has become a mainstream approach for 3D rendering. Considering that rendering a 3DGS is
extremely costly, protecting the copyright and privacy of 3D assets should be a priority. As a widely
studied technique in copyright protection, digital watermarking, and encrypted communication,
steganography aims to hide messages like audio, images, and bits into digital content in an invisible
manner. In its reveal process, it is only possible for the receivers with pre-defined revealing operations
to reconstruct secret information from the container. Therefore, a natural idea arises: Can we design
a steganography method tailored for 3DGS to protect the copyright and privacy of 3D scenes?
†

Equal contribution. B: Corresponding author, zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

