Implicit Multimodal Alignment: On the
Generalization of Frozen LLMs to Multimodal Inputs
Mustafa Shukor1 ∗
1

Matthieu Cord1,2

Sorbonne University, 2 Valeo.ai

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance on
multimodal tasks, without any multimodal finetuning. They are the de facto
building block for Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), yet, we still lack a proper
understanding of their success. In this work, we expose frozen LLMs to image,
video, audio and text inputs and analyse their internal representation aiming to
understand their generalization beyond textual inputs. Our work provides the following findings. Perceptual tokens (1) are easily distinguishable from textual ones
inside LLMs, with significantly different representations (e.g. live in different narrow cones), and complete translation to textual tokens does not exist. Yet, (2) both
perceptual and textual tokens activate similar LLM weights. Despite being different,
(3) perceptual tokens are implicitly aligned to textual tokens inside LLMs, we call
this the implicit multimodal alignment effect (IMA), and argue that this is linked to
architectural design, helping LLMs to generalize. This provide more evidence to
believe that the generalization of LLMs to multimodal inputs is mainly due to their
architecture. These findings lead to several implications. (1) We find a positive
correlation between the implicit alignment score and the task performance, suggesting that this could act as a proxy metric for model evaluation and selection. (2)
A negative correlation exists regarding hallucinations (e.g. describing non-existing
objects in images), revealing that this problem is mainly due to misalignment
between the internal perceptual and textual representations. (3) Perceptual tokens
change slightly throughout the model, thus, we propose different approaches to skip
computations (e.g. in FFN layers), and significantly reduce the inference cost. (4)
Due to the slowly changing embeddings across layers, and the high overlap between
textual and multimodal activated weights, we compress LLMs by keeping only 1
subnetwork (called α-SubNet) that works well across a wide range of multimodal
tasks. The code is available here: https://github.com/mshukor/ima-lmms.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] represent a noteworthy advancement in recent AI
developments. Building upon the success of LLMs, the next stride in this field involves extending
beyond the textual modality, giving rise to Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [6, 7, 8, 4]. A notable
line of research involves connecting LLMs to visual encoders, while keeping them frozen and only
training a connector with modest number of parameters [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. These
methods yield comparable performance [10] to large-scale multimodal models with significantly
reduced computational and data budget.
Keeping all pretrained unimodal models frozen and only training couple of millions of parameters
[9, 10, 12] is an interesting phenomenon to understand, with limited research trying to decipher it. To
∗

Contact: {firstname.lastname}@sorbonne-universite.fr

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

