Unveiling LoRA Intrinsic Ranks via Salience Analysis
Wenjun Ke1,2 , Jiahao Wang1 , Peng Wang1,2* , Jiajun Liu1 , Dong Nie3 , Guozheng Li1 , and Yining Li1
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education
3
Meta Inc.
{kewenjun, wang_jh, pwang, jiajliu, gzli, liyining}@seu.edu.cn, dongnie@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
The immense parameter scale of large language models underscores the necessity
for parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods. Methods based on Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) assume the low-rank characteristics of the incremental matrix and
optimize the matrix obtained from low-rank decomposition. Although effective,
these methods are constrained by a fixed and unalterable rank, neglecting the variable importance of matrices. Consequently, methods for adaptive rank allocation
are proposed, among which AdaLoRA demonstrates excellent fine-tuning performance. AdaLoRA conducts adaptation based on singular value decomposition
(SVD), dynamically allocating ranks according to importance. However, it still
struggles to achieve a balance between fine-tuning effectiveness and efficiency,
leading to limited rank allocation space. Additionally, the importance measurement focuses only on parameters with minimal impact on the loss, neglecting
the dominant role of singular values in SVD-based matrices and the fluctuations
during training. To address these issues, we propose SalientLoRA, which unveils
the intrinsic ranks of the weight matrix via salience measurement and adaptively
optimizes ranks of LoRA. This method measures the salience of rank within a
time-series by constructing inter-dependencies among the correlations of singular
values and prune ranks with low salience while retaining those with high significance. Additionally, an adaptive adjustment of the time-series window enhances
the speed of rank allocation while ensuring training stability. This mechanism
enables matrics to set a higher initial rank, thus expanding the allocation space
for ranks. To evaluate the generality of our method across various tasks, we
conduct experiments on natural language understanding (NLU), natural language
generation (NLG), and large model instruction tuning tasks. Experimental results
demonstrate the superiority of SalientLoRA, which outperforms state-of-the-art
methods by 0.96%-3.56% on multiple datasets. Furthermore, as the rank allocation space expands, our method ensures fine-tuning efficiency, achieving a speed
improvement of 94.5% compared to AdaLoRA. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Heyest/SalientLoRA.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [23, 28, 2, 4] exhibit robust generative and inferential capabilities,
excelling in various downstream tasks [26, 12, 14, 16]. However, the vast number of parameters
in LLMs makes fine-tuning computationally demanding and time-consuming. Notably, LLaMA
[23] encompasses parameters ranging from 7 billion to 65 billion, and fine-tuning LLaMA 65B
necessitates a substantial 780GB of GPU memory [5].
*Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

