Cell ontology guided transcriptome foundation model

Xinyu Yuan1,2 , Zhihao Zhan1,2 , Zuobai Zhang1,2 , Manqi Zhou4
Jianan Zhao1,2 , Boyu Han3 , Yue Li1,3,* , Jian Tang1,5,6,*
1
Mila - Québec AI Institute, 2 University of Montréal
3
McGill University, 4 Cornell University, 5 HEC Montréal, 6 CIFAR AI Chair
*
Correspondence: liyue@mila.quebec; tangjian@mila.quebec

Abstract
Transcriptome foundation models (TFMs) hold great promises of deciphering the
transcriptomic language that dictate diverse cell functions by self-supervised learning on large-scale single-cell gene expression data, and ultimately unraveling the
complex mechanisms of human diseases. However, current TFMs treat cells as
independent samples and ignore the taxonomic relationships between cell types,
which are available in cell ontology graphs. We argue that effectively leveraging
this ontology information during the TFM pre-training can improve learning biologically meaningful gene co-expression patterns while preserving TFM as a general
purpose foundation model for downstream zero-shot and fine-tuning tasks. To this
end, we present single cell, Cell-ontology guided TFM (scCello). We introduce
cell-type coherence loss and ontology alignment loss, which are minimized along
with the masked gene expression prediction loss during the pre-training. The novel
loss component guide scCello to learn the cell-type-specific representation and the
structural relation between cell types from the cell ontology graph, respectively.
We pre-trained scCello on 22 million cells from CellxGene database leveraging
their cell-type labels mapped to the cell ontology graph from Open Biological and
Biomedical Ontology Foundry. Our TFM demonstrates competitive generalization
and transferability performance over the existing TFMs on biologically important
tasks including identifying novel cell types of unseen cells, prediction of cell-typespecific marker genes, and cancer drug responses. Source code and model weights
are available at https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/scCello.

1

Introduction

Cells are basic units of all living organisms. Deciphering diverse cell functions through gene
expression is a long-standing challenge in life science and yet the essential path towards precision
and personalized medicine. In this context, single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has emerged as
a pivotal technique to measure the gene expression in individual cells. The vast amount of publicly
available scRNA-seq data offers a rich transcriptomic data source [48] for learning cell representations
towards various research applications, such as cancer therapy [62] and drug discovery [5].
Recently, several Transcriptome Foundation Models (TFMs) were developed to improve cell representation learning. They mainly utilize pre-training methods analogous to natural language processing
like masked token prediction, treating genes as “tokens” and cells as “sentences” [14, 61, 70, 55].
However, the existing TFMs treat cells as independent samples and ignore their cell-type lineages. On
the other hand, prior knowledge of the taxonomic relationships of cell types has been made available
through the cell ontology graph by Open Biological and Biomedical Ontology Foundry [4]. Effectively leveraging the ontology knowledge can improve the quality of the pre-training on large-scale
scRNA-seq atlases, which are heterogeneous and encompass hundreds of cell types. This can be
done by training the TFM to recognize the inherent ontology relationships among cell types, thereby
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

