Algebraic Positional Encodings
Konstantinos Kogkalidis1,2

Jean-Philippe Bernardy3,4

Vikas Garg1,5

kokos.kogkalidis@aalto.fi

jean-philippe.bernardy@gu.se

vgarg@csail.mit.edu

1

Aalto University
University of Bologna
3
University of Gothenburg
4
Chalmers University of Technology
5
YaiYai Ltd
2

Abstract
We introduce a novel positional encoding strategy for Transformer-style models,
addressing the shortcomings of existing, often ad hoc, approaches. Our framework
implements a flexible mapping from the algebraic specification of a domain to a
positional encoding scheme, where positions are interpreted as orthogonal operators.
This design preserves the structural properties of the source domain, thereby
ensuring that the end-model upholds them. The framework can accommodate
various structures, including sequences, grids and trees, but also their compositions.
We conduct a series of experiments demonstrating the practical applicability of our
method. Our results suggest performance on par with or surpassing the current
state of the art, without hyper-parameter optimizations or “task search” of any kind.
Code is available through https://aalto-quml.github.io/ape/.

1

Introduction

Attention-based models inheriting from the Transformer [Vaswani et al., 2017] have become ubiquitous in neural computation, supplanting the go-to models of the last decade and driving a continuous
stream of breakthroughs across diverse domains. Their success is perhaps at odds with the Transformer’s structural lenience. Its key building block, dot-product attention, is by default unable to
perceive and utilize the structure and arrangement of the input/output tokens being processed. To
address this limitation, a plethora of works have sought to endow Transformers with appropriate
inductive biases. The default strategy is to adjust token representations via so-called positional
encodings; vector operations that hint at the structure being modeled. Nonetheless, most positional
encoding schemes to date are either empirically motivated, or tailored to specific tasks. This renders
their theoretical evaluation challenging, and hinders any prospects of a unifying framework.
In this study, we seek to fill this gap with a theory-first approach. Through the lens of group theory,
we scrutinize some of the most commonly targeted data structures, and express them by means of
inductive definitions that reveal and explicate their structural properties. Leveraging this analysis,
our modeling strategy invokes a homomorphic interpretation that maps each domain into algebraic
positional encodings (APE): attention-compatible vector operations parameterizing (subgroups of)
the orthogonal group. In the sequential context, algebraic positional encodings streamline the widely
adopted rotary encodings of Su et al. [2023], while also offering clear theoretical insights on their
success. More importantly, algebraic positional encodings naturally extend to non-sequential domains,
such as κ-ary trees and multidimensional regular grids, paving the way for a simple and elegant
methodology for interpretable and domain-general structurally-refined Transformers. We carry out
an experimental evaluation in settings that allow for reproducible and statistically sound conclusions.
Across the tasks considered, algebraic positional encodings consistently and significantly outperform
strong baselines at an aggregate level, providing initial but compelling evidence that they constitute
not just a sensible meta-theory for positional encodings, but also an actionable alternative to the
current state of the art.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

