DiffusionPID: Interpreting Diffusion via Partial
Information Decomposition

Shaurya Dewan*
Yingshan Chang

Rushikesh Zawar*

Prakanshul Saxena*

Andrew Luo

Yonatan Bisk

Carnegie Mellon University
(srdewan, rzawar, prakanss, yingshac, afluo, ybisk)@andrew.cmu.edu
(* denotes equal contribution)

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models have made significant progress in generating
naturalistic images from textual inputs, and demonstrate the capacity to learn
and represent complex visual-semantic relationships. While these diffusion
models have achieved remarkable success, the underlying mechanisms driving
their performance are not yet fully accounted for, with many unanswered questions surrounding what they learn, how they represent visual-semantic relationships, and why they sometimes fail to generalize. Our work presents Diffusion
Partial Information Decomposition (DiffusionPID), a novel technique that applies
information-theoretic principles to decompose the input text prompt into its elementary components, enabling a detailed examination of how individual tokens
and their interactions shape the generated image. We introduce a formal approach
to analyze the uniqueness, redundancy, and synergy terms by applying PID to the
denoising model at both the image and pixel level. This approach enables us to
characterize how individual tokens and their interactions affect the model output.
We first present a fine-grained analysis of characteristics utilized by the model to
uniquely localize specific concepts, we then apply our approach in bias analysis and
show it can recover gender and ethnicity biases. Finally, we use our method to visually characterize word ambiguity and similarity from the model’s perspective and
illustrate the efficacy of our method for prompt intervention. Our results show that
PID is a potent tool for evaluating and diagnosing text-to-image diffusion models.
Link to project page: https://rbz-99.github.io/Diffusion-PID/.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Concept Figure. Left: Our "baseball" uniqueness map specifically highlights the seam
region of the tennis ball as it is visually very similar to that of a baseball, Center: We see a
high synergy for "bat" with "baseball" and "overhead" respectively which shows that it uses these
contextual cues to generate the images in the right settings, Right: Our redundancy map between
"queen" and "crown" correctly focuses on the crown and facial region.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

