RectifID: Personalizing Rectified Flow with
Anchored Classifier Guidance
Zhicheng Sun1 , Zhenhao Yang3 , Yang Jin1 , Haozhe Chi1 , Kun Xu2 , Kun Xu2 ,
Liwei Chen2 , Hao Jiang1 , Yang Song, Kun Gai2 , Yadong Mu1∗
1
Peking University, 2 Kuaishou Technology,
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{sunzc,myd}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Customizing diffusion models to generate identity-preserving images from userprovided reference images is an intriguing new problem. The prevalent approaches
typically require training on extensive domain-specific images to achieve identity
preservation, which lacks flexibility across different use cases. To address this issue,
we exploit classifier guidance, a training-free technique that steers diffusion models
using an existing classifier, for personalized image generation. Our study shows that
based on a recent rectified flow framework, the major limitation of vanilla classifier
guidance in requiring a special classifier can be resolved with a simple fixed-point
solution, allowing flexible personalization with off-the-shelf image discriminators.
Moreover, its solving procedure proves to be stable when anchored to a reference
flow trajectory, with a convergence guarantee. The derived method is implemented
on rectified flow with different off-the-shelf image discriminators, delivering advantageous personalization results for human faces, live subjects, and certain objects.
Code is available at https://github.com/feifeiobama/RectifID.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song and Ermon, 2019; Ho et al.,
2020) have ignited a surge of research into their customizability. A prominent example is personalized
image generation, which aims to integrate user-defined subjects into the generated image. This plays
a pivotal role in AI art creation, empowering users to produce identity-consistent images with greater
customizability beyond text prompts. Nevertheless, there remain significant challenges in accurately
preserving the subject’s identity and being flexible to a variety of personalization needs.
Existing personalization methods are limited in these two aspects, as they require an extra finetuning
or pre-training stage. For example, the pioneering works (Gal et al., 2023; Ruiz et al., 2023a) finetune
conditional embeddings or model parameters per subject, resulting in suboptimal efficiency and
identity consistency due to lack of domain knowledge. On the other hand, the recently prevailing
tuning-free methods (Wei et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b) pre-train a
conditioning adapter to encode subject features into the generation process. However, their models
must be pre-trained on extensive domain-specific data, e.g. LAION-Face 50M (Zheng et al., 2022),
which is costly in the first place, and cannot be transferred flexibly across different data domains, e.g.
from human faces to common live subjects and objects, and even to multiple subjects.
To address both challenges of identity consistency and flexibility, we advocate a training-free approach
that utilizes the guidance of a pre-trained discriminator without extra training of the generative model.
This methodology is well-known as classifier guidance (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021), which modifies
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

