Non-asymptotic Approximation Error Bounds of
Parameterized Quantum Circuits

Zhan Yu1, 2∗ Qiuhao Chen1∗ Yuling Jiao1, 3 Yinan Li1, 3† Xiliang Lu1, 3
Xin Wang4 Jerry Zhijian Yang1, 3‡
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, 117543, Singapore
3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Computational Science, Wuhan 430072, China
4
Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, Information Hub,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou 511453, China
2

Abstract
Parameterized quantum circuits (PQCs) have emerged as a promising approach for
quantum neural networks. However, understanding their expressive power in accomplishing machine learning tasks remains a crucial question. This paper investigates the expressivity of PQCs for approximating general multivariate function
classes. Unlike previous Universal Approximation Theorems for PQCs, which are
either nonconstructive or rely on parameterized classical data processing, we explicitly construct data re-uploading PQCs for approximating multivariate polynomials and smooth functions. We establish the first non-asymptotic approximation
error bounds for these functions in terms of the number of qubits, quantum circuit depth, and number of trainable parameters. Notably, we demonstrate that for
approximating functions that satisfy specific smoothness criteria, the quantum circuit size and number of trainable parameters of our proposed PQCs can be smaller
than those of deep ReLU neural networks. We further validate the approximation
capability of PQCs through numerical experiments. Our results provide a theoretical foundation for designing practical PQCs and quantum neural networks for
machine learning tasks that can be implemented on near-term quantum devices,
paving the way for the advancement of quantum machine learning.

1

Introduction

In quantum computing, one key area is to investigate if quantum computers could accelerate classical machine learning tasks in data analysis and artificial intelligence, giving rise to an interdisciplinary field known as quantum machine learning [1]. As the quantum analogs of classical neural
networks, parameterized quantum circuits (PQCs) [2] have gained significant attention as a prominent paradigm to yield quantum advantages. PQCs offer a concrete and practical way to implement
quantum machine learning algorithms in noisy and intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) devices [3],
rendering them well-suited for a diverse array of tasks [4–11].
To establish the practical significance of quantum machine learning, an ongoing pursuit is to demonstrate their superiority in solving real-world learning problems compared to classical learning models, including the most commonly used deep neural networks [12]. Typical supervised learning
tasks, such as image classification and price prediction, aim to construct a model to learn a mapping
∗

Z.Y. and Q.C. contributed equally to this work
Yinan.Li@whu.edu.cn
‡
zjyang.math@whu.edu.cn
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

