Memorize What Matters:
Emergent Scene Decomposition from Multitraverse

Yiming Li1,2 Zehong Wang1 Yue Wang2,3 Zhiding Yu2
Zan Gojcic2 Marco Pavone2,4 Chen Feng1 Jose M. Alvarez2
1
NYU 2 NVIDIA 3 USC 4 Stanford University
Project Page: https://nvlabs.github.io/3DGM/

Abstract
Humans naturally retain memories of permanent elements, while ephemeral moments often slip through the cracks of memory. This selective retention is crucial for
robotic perception, localization, and mapping. To endow robots with this capability,
we introduce 3D Gaussian Mapping (3DGM), a self-supervised, camera-only
offline mapping framework grounded in 3D Gaussian Splatting. 3DGM converts
multitraverse RGB videos from the same region into a Gaussian-based environmental map while concurrently performing 2D ephemeral object segmentation. Our
key observation is that the environment remains consistent across traversals, while
objects frequently change. This allows us to exploit self-supervision from repeated
traversals to achieve environment-object decomposition. More specifically, 3DGM
formulates multitraverse environmental mapping as a robust 3D representation
learning problem, treating pixels of the environment and objects as inliers and
outliers, respectively. Using robust feature distillation, feature residual mining,
and robust optimization, 3DGM simultaneously performs 2D segmentation and 3D
mapping without human intervention. We build the Mapverse benchmark, sourced
from the Ithaca365 and nuPlan datasets, to evaluate our method in unsupervised
2D segmentation, 3D reconstruction, and neural rendering. Extensive results verify
the effectiveness and potential of our method for self-driving and robotics.

1

Introduction

Vision-based 3D mapping is essential for autonomous driving but faces two key challenges: (1)
dynamic objects disrupting multi-view consistency and (2) accurately reconstructing 3D structures
from 2D images. Existing methods rely on pretrained segmentation models to filter out dynamic
objects and LiDARs to enhance geometry. However, these approaches are limited by the need for
human annotations during pretraining, along with the high costs and limited portability of LiDARs.
Motivated by the aforementioned challenges, we aim to develop a self-supervised and camera-only
3D mapping approach, reducing the reliance on human annotations and LiDARs. We consider a
practical multitraverse driving scenario, where autonomous vehicles repeatedly traverse the same
routes or regions at different times. During each traversal, the ego-vehicle encounters new pedestrians
and vehicles, much like how humans navigate the same 3D environment but encounter different
groups of passersby each day. Inspired by humans’ ability to memorize the permanent and ignore
the ephemeral1 during repeated spatial navigation, we pose the following question:
1

We will use ephemeral and transient interchangeably to refer to objects that temporarily appear or disappear
across various traversals of the same location, such as pedestrians, vehicles, or other temporary elements.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

