Breaking Long-Tailed Learning Bottlenecks: A
Controllable Paradigm with Hypernetwork-Generated
Diverse Experts

Zhe Zhao1,3 , Haibin Wen5 , Zikang Wang1 , Pengkun Wang1,2∗, Fanfu Wang6 ,
Song Lai3 , Qingfu Zhang3 , Yang Wang1,2∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China
2
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, Suzhou, China
3
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
5
MorongAI, Suzhou, China
6
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China
{zz4543@mail.ustc.edu.cn, haibin65535@gmail.com, 2021211940@stu.hit.edu.cn,
wangff21@lzu.edu.cn, songlai2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk,
pengkun.wang@ustc.edu.cn, angyan@ustc.edu.cn}

Abstract
Traditional long-tailed learning methods often perform poorly when dealing with
inconsistencies between training and test data distributions, and they cannot flexibly
adapt to different user preferences for trade-offs between head and tail classes. To
address this issue, we propose a novel long-tailed learning paradigm that aims
to tackle distribution shift in real-world scenarios and accommodate different
user preferences for the trade-off between head and tail classes. We generate a
set of diverse expert models via hypernetworks to cover all possible distribution
scenarios, and optimize the model ensemble to adapt to any test distribution.
Crucially, in any distribution scenario, we can flexibly output a dedicated model
solution that matches the user’s preference. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method not only achieves higher performance ceilings but also effectively
overcomes distribution shift while allowing controllable adjustments according
to user preferences. We provide new insights and a paradigm for the long-tailed
learning problem, greatly expanding its applicability in practical scenarios. The
code can be found here: https://github.com/DataLab-atom/PRL.

1

Introduction

In many real-world tasks such as object detection and image classification, we face the challenge of
long-tailed distributions. Since the samples of the head classes account for the vast majority in the
datasets while the tail class samples are extremely scarce [21, 16, 6, 17], this extreme imbalance in
the data makes the model prone to overfitting towards the head classes during training, resulting in
poor performance on the tail classes [34, 8, 30, 20, 39].
To address the long-tailed distribution problem, existing research has proposed a series of methods
such as re-sampling [25, 5, 24, 10] and modifying the loss function [17, 6], with the common idea of
focusing on improving the performance of the tail classes. However, these methods typically assume
that the distributions of the training and test data remain invariant, and thus cannot well handle the
∗

Pengkun Wang and Yang Wang are corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

