Class Distribution Shifts in Zero-Shot Learning:
Learning Robust Representations

Yuli Slavutsky
Department of Statistics and Data Science
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
yuli.slavutsky@mail.huji.ac.il

Yuval Benjamini
Department of Statistics and Data Science
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
yuval.benjamini@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Zero-shot learning methods typically assume that the new, unseen classes encountered during deployment come from the same distribution as the the classes in the
training set. However, real-world scenarios often involve class distribution shifts
(e.g., in age or gender for person identification), posing challenges for zero-shot
classifiers that rely on learned representations from training classes. In this work,
we propose and analyze a model that assumes that the attribute responsible for
the shift is unknown in advance. We show that in this setting, standard training
may lead to non-robust representations. To mitigate this, we develop an algorithm for learning robust representations in which (a) synthetic data environments
are constructed via hierarchical sampling, and (b) environment balancing penalization, inspired by out-of-distribution problems, is applied. We show that our
algorithm improves generalization to diverse class distributions in both simulations
and experiments on real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Zero-shot learning systems [14, 27] are designed to classify instances of new, previously unseen
classes at deployment, a scenario known as open-world classification. These systems are widely
applied in extreme multi-class applications, such as face or voice recognition [19] for matching
observations of the same individual, and more generally, for learning data representations [2].
Class distribution shifts typically refer to changes in the prevalence of a fixed set of classes between
training and testing. In zero-shot learning, however, a different challenge arises: the appearance
of entirely new classes at test time. This raises a critical question – are these new classes drawn
from the same distribution as the training classes? Most zero-shot methods assume that they are,
an assumption that not only shapes the design of test sets [57, 16] but also plays an explicit role in
assessing the generalization capabilities of zero-shot classifiers [59, 48].
In practice, training classes are often chosen based on convenience and accessibility during data
collection. Even when data is carefully collected, the distribution of classes may shift over time,
leading to a different distribution. For instance, this could occur when a face recognition system is
deployed in a building located in a neighborhood undergoing demographic changes.
Class distribution shifts pose significant challenges to zero-shot classifiers, since they rely on learning
data representations from the training classes to distinguish new, unseen ones. Typically, these
classifiers are trained by minimizing the loss on the training set to effectively separate the training
classes. However, this approach may result in poor performance when confronted with data from
distributions that differ significantly from the class distribution in the training data. Notably, in person
re-identification, this concern gained attention from a fairness perspective with respect to gender
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

