Can Large Language Models Explore In-Context?
Akshay Krishnamurthy1 Keegan Harris2 Dylan J. Foster1 Cyril Zhang1 Aleksandrs Slivkins1
1

Microsoft Research

2

Carnegie Mellon University

keeganh@cs.cmu.edu, {akshaykr,dylanfoster,cyrilzhang,slivkins}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We investigate the extent to which contemporary Large Language Models (LLMs)
can engage in exploration, a core capability in reinforcement learning and decision
making. We focus on native performance of existing LLMs, without training interventions. We deploy LLMs as agents in simple multi-armed bandit environments,
specifying the environment description and interaction history entirely in-context,
i.e., within the LLM prompt. We experiment with G PT-3.5, G PT-4, and L LAMA 2,
using a variety of prompt designs, and find that the models do not robustly engage
in exploration without substantial interventions: i) Only one configuration resulted
in satisfactory exploratory behavior: G PT-4 with chain-of-thought reasoning and an
externally summarized interaction history; ii) All other configurations did not result
in robust exploratory behavior, including those with chain-of-thought reasoning
but unsummarized history. While these findings can be interpreted positively, they
suggest that external summarization—which may not be possible in more complex
settings—is essential for desirable LLM behavior. We conclude that non-trivial
algorithmic interventions, such as fine-tuning or dataset curation, may be required
to empower LLM-based decision making agents in complex settings.

1

Introduction

In-context learning is an important emergent capability of Large Language Models (LLMs) whereby
one can use a pre-trained LLM to solve a problem by specifying the problem description and relevant
data entirely in-context, i.e., within the LLM prompt, with no updates to LLM parameters [16]. For example, one can prompt an LLM with numeric covariate vectors and scalar targets and subsequently obtain regression-style predictions from the model by including new covariate vectors in the prompt [28].
Perhaps surprisingly, LLMs are not explicitly trained for this behavior; instead the underlying algorithms employed for in-context learning are extracted from the training corpus and emerge at scale.
Since its discovery in the G PT-3 model [16], in-context learning has been actively studied, from theoretical investigations into the underlying mechanisms [e.g., 78, 7] to empirical probes [e.g., 28, 40]
to leveraging in-context learning in applications [e.g., 79, 67, 25]. This literature predominantly
concerns prediction or supervised learning tasks, and while theoretical progress is in its infancy, our
understanding of how to use in-context supervised learning (ICSL) in practice is rapidly taking shape.
While ICSL is an important capability, many applications demand the use of ML models for downstream decision making. Thus, in-context reinforcement learning (ICRL) is a natural next frontier.
LLMs are already being used as decision making agents in applications ranging from experimental
design in the natural sciences [45] to game playing [63, 72], but our understanding—theoretically
and operationally—of ICRL is far less developed than for ICSL. To date, we lack a systematic
understanding as to whether LLMs can be considered general-purpose decision-making agents.
Decision making agents must possess three core capabilities: generalization (required for supervised
learning), exploration (making decisions that may be suboptimal in the short term for the sake of gath38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

