Adaptive and Optimal Second-order Optimistic
Methods for Minimax Optimization

Ruichen Jiang
ECE department, UT Austin
rjiang@utexas.edu

Ali Kavis
ECE department, UT Austin
kavis@austin.utexas.edu

Sujay Sanghavi
ECE department, UT Austin
sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu

Qiujiang Jin
ECE department, UT Austin
qiujiangjin0@gmail.com

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE department, UT Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose adaptive, line search-free second-order methods with optimal rate
of convergence for solving convex-concave min-max problems. By means of
an adaptive step size, our algorithms feature a simple update rule that requires
solving only one linear system per iteration, eliminating the need for line search or
backtracking mechanisms. Specifically, we base our algorithms on the optimistic
method and appropriately combine it with second-order information. Moreover,
distinct from common adaptive schemes, we define the step size recursively as
a function of the gradient norm and the prediction error in the optimistic update.
We first analyze a variant where the step size requires knowledge of the Lipschitz
constant of the Hessian. Under the additional assumption of Lipschitz continuous
gradients, we further design a parameter-free version by tracking the Hessian
Lipschitz constant locally and ensuring the iterates remain bounded. We also
evaluate the practical performance of our algorithm by comparing it to existing
second-order algorithms for minimax optimization.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the min-max optimization problem, also known as the saddle point problem:
min max f (x, y),

x∈Rm y∈Rn

(1)

where the objective function f : Rm × Rn → R is twice differentiable and convex-concave, i.e.,
f (·, y) is convex for any fixed y ∈ Rn and f (x, ·) is concave for any fixed x ∈ Rm . The saddle point
problem (1) is a fundamental formulation in machine learning and optimization and naturally emerges
in several applications, including constrained and primal-dual optimization [1, 2], (multi-agent)
games [3], reinforcement learning [4], and generative adversarial networks [5, 6]. The saddle point
problem, which can be interpreted as a particular instance of variational inequalities and monotone
inclusion problems [2], has a rich history dating back to [7]. We often solve (1) using iterative,
first-order methods due to their simplicity and low per-iteration complexity. Over the past decades,
various first-order algorithms have been proposed and analyzed for different settings [1, 8–15]. Under
the assumption that the gradient of f is Lipschitz, the aforementioned methods converge at a rate of
O(1/T ), where T is the number of iterations. This rate is optimal for first-order methods [10, 16, 17].
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in higher-order methods for solving (1) [18–23], mirroring
the trend in convex minimization literature [24–28]. In general, these methods exploit higherorder derivatives of f to achieve faster convergence rates. From a practical viewpoint, any method
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

