SHDocs: A dataset, benchmark, and method to
efficiently generate high-quality, real-world specular
highlight data with near-perfect alignment

Jovin Leong
Home Team Science & Technology Agency
jovin_leong@htx.gov.sg

Ming Di Koa
Home Team Science & Technology Agency
koa_ming_di@htx.gov.sg

Benjamin Cham
Home Team Science & Technology Agency
benjamin_cham@htx.gov.sg

Shaun Heng
Home Team Science & Technology Agency
shaun_heng@htx.gov.sg

Abstract
A frequent problem in vision-based reasoning tasks such as object detection and
optical character recognition (OCR) is the persistence of specular highlights. Specular highlights appear as bright spots of glare that occur due to the concentrated
reflection of light; these spots manifest as image artifacts which occlude computer
vision models and are challenging to reconstruct. Despite this, specular highlight
removal receives relatively little attention due to the difficulty of acquiring highquality, real-world data. We introduce a method to generate specular highlight data
with near-perfect alignment and present SHDocs—a dataset of specular highlights
on document images created using our method. Through our benchmark, we
demonstrate that our dataset enables us to surpass the performance of state-of-theart specular highlight removal models and downstream OCR tasks. We release
our dataset, code, and methods publicly to motivate further exploration of image
enhancement for practical computer vision challenges.1

1

Introduction

Specular highlights are bright, localized reflections of light that appear as white spots or glare on
reflective surfaces. These highlights naturally occur when the angle of reflection of light on a surface
equals the angle of incidence, resulting in organized reflections of light that manifest as bright visual
artifacts. These specular highlight artifacts result in image occlusion and are persistent problems in
real-world computer vision tasks.
This occlusion is especially problematic in vision-based reasoning tasks such as optical character
recognition (OCR) [29, 3, 22], object detection and recognition [32, 21], and unmanned vision-based
systems [1, 39, 14] which necessitate a high degree of accuracy yet involve environments with high
light intensity. As such, efforts have been made to develop image enhancement approaches to remove
specular highlights before these images are used in downstream computer vision tasks [25, 13, 16, 3].
Existing works have highlighted the difficulty in developing specular highlight removal image
enhancement models owing to the limited datasets available [20, 38, 22]. Due to the physical
processes underlying specular highlights, it is challenging to generate aligned counterfactual images
without complex experimental setups that allow researchers to vary the source and intensity of light.
Meanwhile, the use of synthetic data has been explored to address this data scarcity with some success
1

https://github.com/JovinLeong/SHDocs

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

