Adaptive Important Region Selection with Reinforced
Hierarchical Search for Dense Object Detection

Dingrong Wang
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623
dw7445@rit.edu

Hitesh Sapkota †
Amazon Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
sapkoh@amazon.com

Qi Yu∗
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623
qi.yu@rit.edu

Abstract
Existing state-of-the-art dense object detection techniques tend to produce a large
number of false positive detections on difficult images with complex scenes because they focus on ensuring a high recall. To improve the detection accuracy,
we propose an Adaptive Important Region Selection (AIRS) framework guided
by Evidential Q-learning coupled with a uniquely designed reward function. Inspired by human visual attention, our detection model conducts object search in
a top-down, hierarchical fashion. It starts from the top of the hierarchy with the
coarsest granularity and then identifies the potential patches likely to contain objects of interest. It then discards non-informative patches and progressively moves
downward on the selected ones for a fine-grained search. The proposed evidential Q-learning systematically encodes epistemic uncertainty in its evidential-Q
value to encourage the exploration of unknown patches, especially in the early
phase of model training. In this way, the proposed model dynamically balances
exploration-exploitation to cover both highly valuable and informative patches.
Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate
that our proposed framework outperforms the SOTA models.

1

Introduction

Dense object detection enjoys a wide range of applications in diverse domains [21, 40]. Representative use cases include surveillance video tracking by the police and merchandise recognition for
online shopping [42, 6]. Despite its importance, dense object detection is an inherently challenging
task as it requires predicting the bounding boxes for all objects present in a given image irrespective of their shape, size, and number. The inborn complexity of images, such as shadow/occlusion,
image size, shape, color, and texture could also pose a significant hindrance in the detection process
resulting in a lower accuracy [15].
Existing efforts have contributed different techniques to address the key challenges in dense object
detection. For instance, two-stage approaches have been popularized where the first stage extracts
candidate objects and the second stage classifies the extracted object while providing the bounding
boxes through a regression network [15]. Representative two-stage detectors include R-CNN [15]
and Faster R-CNN [33]. Two-stage detectors are limited in the number of candidate object found
in first stage through the regional proposal network (RPN) and suffer from a low recall, especially
in dense scenarios. To tackle this, one-stage approaches have been explored that achieve a higher
recall along with faster training and inference [26, 38]. There are mainly two types of one-stage
approaches: Anchor-based (e.g., RetinaNet [26]) and Anchor-free (e.g., FCOS [38]). The former
computes the bounding box of an object by regressing the offsets from a predefined anchor box
whereas the latter directly outputs the position and size of an object. However, existing one-stage
∗
Corresponding author, † Work was completed during the PhD study at RIT, which is not related to the
position at Amazon.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

