Predicting Label Distribution from Ternary Labels

Yunan Lu, Xiuyi Jia∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China
{luyn, jiaxy}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Label distribution learning is a powerful learning paradigm to deal with label
polysemy and has been widely applied in many practical tasks. A significant
obstacle to the effective utilization of label distribution is the substantial expenses
of accurate quantifying the label distributions. To tackle this challenge, label
enhancement methods automatically infer label distributions from more easily
accessible multi-label data based on binary annotations. However, the binary
annotation of multi-label data requires experts to accurately assess whether each
label can describe the instance, which may diminish the annotating efficiency and
heighten the risk of erroneous annotation since the relationship between the label
and the instance is unclear in many practical scenarios. Therefore, we propose to
predict label distribution from ternary labels, allowing experts to annotate labels
in a three-way annotation scheme. They can annotate the label as “0” indicating
“uncertain relevant” if it is difficult to definitively determine whether the label
can describe the instance, in addition to the binary annotation of “1” indicating
“definitely relevant” and “−1” indicating “definitely irrelevant”. Both the theoretical
and methodological studies are conducted for the proposed learning paradigm. In
the theoretical part, we conduct a quantitative comparison of approximation error
between ternary and binary labels to elucidate the superiority of ternary labels over
binary labels. In the methodological part, we propose a Categorical distribution
with monotonicity and orderliness to model the mapping from label description
degrees to ternary labels, which can serve as a loss function or as a probability
distribution, allowing most existing label enhancement methods to be adapted to
our task. Finally, we experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposal.

1

Introduction

LDL (Label Distribution Learning) [2] is an effective learning paradigm for addressing label polysemy
(i.e., the cases where an instance can be described by multiple labels). Distinct from multi-label
learning [22], which assign a binary-valued vector to each instance, LDL assigns each instance a
real-valued vector, akin to descrete probability distributions, to represent the description degree of
each label to the instance. Label distributions provide fine-grained information about label polysemy,
and thus have been applied to many practical tasks, such as sentiment analysis [8, 30, 35], facial age
estimation [1, 4, 24] and movie rating prediction [3].
A fundamental bottleneck hindering LDL is the difficulty in acquiring ground-truth label distributions,
as the accurate quantification of these distributions can be prohibitively expensive. Therefore, LE
(Label Enhancement) [29] is proposed to automatically infer label distributions from the more easily
accessible multi-label data. Multi-label data is based on binary annotations (i.e., utilizing binary
values ±1 to annotate each label) which demand that experts accurately identify whether each label
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

