Decomposing and Interpreting Image Representations
via Text in ViTs Beyond CLIP

Sriram Balasubramanian
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
sriramb@cs.umd.edu

Samyadeep Basu
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
sbasu12@umd.edu

Soheil Feizi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Recent work has explored how individual components of the CLIP-ViT model
contribute to the final representation by leveraging the shared image-text representation space of CLIP. These components, such as attention heads and MLPs, have
been shown to capture distinct image features like shape, color or texture. However,
understanding the role of these components in arbitrary vision transformers (ViTs)
is challenging. To this end, we introduce a general framework which can identify
the roles of various components in ViTs beyond CLIP. Specifically, we (a) automate the decomposition of the final representation into contributions from different
model components, and (b) linearly map these contributions to CLIP space to
interpret them via text. Additionally, we introduce a novel scoring function to rank
components by their importance with respect to specific features. Applying our
framework to various ViT variants (e.g. DeiT, DINO, DINOv2, Swin, MaxViT),
we gain insights into the roles of different components concerning particular image
features. These insights facilitate applications such as image retrieval using text
descriptions or reference images, visualizing token importance heatmaps, and
mitigating spurious correlations. We release our code to reproduce the experiments
at https://github.com/SriramB-98/vit-decompose

1

Introduction

Vision transformers and their variants [10, 22, 7, 33, 17, 32] have emerged as powerful image
encoders, becoming the preferred architecture for modern image foundation models. However, the
mechanisms by which these models transform images into representation vectors remain poorly
understood. Recently, Gandelsman et al. [11] made significant progress on this question for CLIP-ViT
models with two key insights: (i) They demonstrated that the residual connections and attention
mechanisms of CLIP-ViT enable the model output to be mathematically represented as a sum of
vectors over layers, attention heads, and tokens, along with contributions from MLPs and the CLS
token. Each vector corresponds to the contribution of a specific token attended to by a particular
attention head in a specific layer. (ii) These contribution vectors exist within the same shared imagetext representation space, allowing the CLIP text encoder to interpret each vector individually via
text.
Extending this approach to other transformer-based image encoders presents several challenges.
Popular models like DeiT [32], DINO-ViT [7, 22], and Swin [17] lack a corresponding text encoder to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

