Federated Online Prediction from Experts
with Differential Privacy: Separations
and Regret Speed-ups

Fengyu Gao, Ruiquan Huang, Jing Yang
School of EECS, The Pennsylvania State University, USA
{fengyugao, rzh5514, yangjing}@psu.edu

Abstract
We study the problems of differentially private federated online prediction from
experts against both stochastic adversaries and oblivious adversaries. We aim to
minimize the average regret on m clients working in parallel over time horizon T
with explicit differential privacy (DP) guarantees. With stochastic
adversaries, we
√
propose a Fed-DP-OPE-Stoch algorithm that achieves m-fold speed-up of the
per-client regret compared to the single-player counterparts under both pure DP and
approximate DP constraints, while maintaining logarithmic communication costs.
With oblivious adversaries, we establish non-trivial lower bounds indicating that
collaboration among clients does not lead to regret speed-up with general oblivious
adversaries. We then consider a special case of the oblivious adversaries setting,
where there exists a low-loss expert. We design a new algorithm Fed-SVT and show
that it achieves an m-fold regret speed-up under both pure DP and approximate
DP constraints over the single-player counterparts. Our lower bound indicates that
Fed-SVT is nearly optimal up to logarithmic factors. Experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work examining the differentially private online prediction from experts in the
federated setting.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a distributed machine learning framework, where
numerous clients collaboratively train a model by exchanging model update through a server. Owing
to its advantage in protecting the privacy of local data and reducing communication overheads,
FL is gaining increased attention in the research community, particularly in the online learning
framework (Mitra et al., 2021; Park et al., 2022; Kwon et al., 2023; Gauthier et al., 2023). Noticeable
advancements include various algorithms in federated multi-armed bandits (Shi et al., 2021; Huang
et al., 2021; Li and Wang, 2022; Yi and Vojnovic, 2022, 2023), federated online convex optimization
(Patel et al., 2023; Kwon et al., 2023; Gauthier et al., 2023), etc.
Meanwhile, differential privacy (DP) has been integrated into online learning, pioneered by Dwork
et al. (2010). Recently, Asi et al. (2022b) studied different types of adversaries, developing some of
the best existing algorithms and establishing lower bounds. Within the federated framework, although
differentially private algorithms have been proposed for stochastic bandits (Li et al., 2020b; Zhu et al.,
2021; Dubey and Pentland, 2022) and linear contextual bandits (Dubey and Pentland, 2020; Li et al.,
2022a; Zhou and Chowdhury, 2023; Huang et al., 2023), to the best of our knowledge, federated
online learning in the adversarial setting with DP considerations remain largely unexplored.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

