VeLoRA: Memory Efficient Training using
Rank-1 Sub-Token Projections

Roy Miles†

Pradyumna Reddy Ismail Elezi†
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Jiankang Deng

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have recently emerged as powerful tools for
tackling many language-processing tasks. Despite their success, training and finetuning these models is still far too computationally and memory intensive. In this
paper, we identify and characterise the important components needed for effective
model convergence using gradient descent. In doing so we find that the intermediate
activations used to implement backpropagation can be excessively compressed
without incurring any degradation in performance. This result leads us to a cheap
and memory-efficient algorithm for both fine-tuning and pre-training LLMs. The
proposed algorithm simply divides the tokens up into smaller sub-tokens before
projecting them onto a fixed 1-dimensional subspace during the forward pass. These
features are then coarsely reconstructed during the backward pass to implement the
update rules. We confirm the effectiveness of our algorithm as being complimentary
to many state-of-the-art PEFT methods on the VTAB-1k fine-tuning benchmark.
Furthermore, we outperform QLoRA for fine-tuning LLaMA and show competitive
performance against other memory-efficient pre-training methods on the large-scale
C4 dataset. Code: https://github.com/roymiles/VeLoRA

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success on a wide range of natural
language processing tasks [31, 47, 2]. However, training these massive deep learning models remains
computationally expensive, requiring vast amounts of data, compute, and memory resources. A
key bottleneck for training or adapting these models is the large memory needed to store all the
intermediate features required to compute the gradients for optimization. This makes it challenging to
fully leverage the scalability and performance gains promised by larger models on currently available
hardware.
Several techniques have been proposed to reduce the memory requirements, such as GaLore [54],
gradient checkpointing [8], reversible backpropagation [14], parameter-efficient finetuning [18, 7],
quantization [11] and activation offloading [30]. GaLore uses a low-rank projection of the gradients
during training to reduce the memory footprint. Gradient checkpointing reduces the activation
memory demands by recomputing the activations in the backward pass instead of storing them. While
these methods are promising and lower the memory cost, they also might introduce a substantial
computational overhead, are limited in their memory savings, or require specialized hardware [11].
Knowing that compute is the primary mover for the advancements in machine learning [46], it is to
be expected that the LLM sizes will continue growing exponentially. Thus, it is imperative to develop
more efficient and scalable methods that allow better utilization of compute power and training data.
In this work, we present a novel approach for efficient training and finetuning, which we name
Vector projected LoRA (VeLoRA). Our approach is based on a key observation that the intermediate
† Corresponding authors: roy.miles@huawei.com, ismail.elezi@huawei.com
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

