Truthful High Dimensional Sparse Linear Regression

Liyang Zhu1 , Amina Manseur1 , Meng Ding2 , Jinyan Liu3 , Jinhui Xu2 , Di Wang1
1
PRADA Lab, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
2
State University of New York at Buffalo
3
Beijing Institute of Technology
{liyang.zhu, amina.manseur, di.wang}@kaust.edu.sa
{mengding, jinhu}@buffalo.edu
jyliu@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the problem of fitting the high dimensional sparse linear regression
model with sub-Gaussian covariates and responses, where the data are provided by
strategic or self-interested agents (individuals) who prioritize their privacy of data
disclosure. In contrast to the classical setting, our focus is on designing mechanisms
that can effectively incentivize most agents to truthfully report their data while
preserving the privacy of individual reports. Simultaneously, we seek an estimator
which should be close to the underlying parameter. We attempt to solve the problem
by deriving a novel private estimator that has a closed-form expression. Based on
the estimator, we propose a mechanism which has the following properties via some
appropriate design of the computation and payment scheme: (1) the mechanism is
(o(1), O(n−Ω(1) ))-jointly differentially private, where n is the number of agents;
(2) it is an o( n1 )-approximate Bayes Nash equilibrium for a (1 − o(1))-fraction of
agents to truthfully report their data; (3) the output could achieve an error of o(1)
to the underlying parameter; (4) it is individually rational for a (1 − o(1)) fraction
of agents in the mechanism; (5) the payment budget required from the analyst to
run the mechanism is o(1). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study
on designing truthful (and privacy-preserving) mechanisms for high dimensional
sparse linear regression.

1

Introduction

One fundamental learning task is estimating the linear regression model, with a wide array of
applications ranging from statistics to experimental sciences like medicine [7, 23] and sociology
[36]. These studies typically assume that analysts have high-quality data, which is essential to the
success of the model. However, real-world data, such as medical records and census surveys, often
contain sensitive information sourced from strategic, privacy-concerned individuals. In this case, data
providers (agents)1 may be disinclined to reveal their data truthfully, potentially jeopardizing the
accuracy of model estimation. Therefore, in contrast to conventional statistical settings, it becomes
imperative to model the utility functions of individuals and engineer mechanisms that can concurrently
yield precise estimators, safeguard the privacy of individual reports, and encourage the majority of
individuals to candidly disclose their data to the analyst.
The problem involves two intertwined components: data acquisition and privacy-preserving data analysis. The analyst must strategically compensate agents for potential privacy violations, considering
the alignment of their reported data with both the statistical model and their peers’ contributions,
while minimizing the payment budget. Additionally, the analyst must perform privacy-preserving
computations to accurately learn the underlying model. As agents cannot refine their reports after
seeing their payment, the interaction is designed to be completed in one round, creating a trade-off
between estimator accuracy and the total payment budget needed for participant cooperation.
1

In this paper, individuals, data providers, and participants are the same and all represent agents.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

