MeMo: Meaningful, Modular Controllers via Noise
Injection

Megan Tjandrasuwita
MIT
megantj@mit.edu

Jie Xu
NVIDIA
jiex@nvidia.com

Armando Solar-Lezama
MIT
asolar@csail.mit.edu

Wojciech Matusik
MIT
wojciech@mit.edu

Abstract
Robots are often built from standardized assemblies, (e.g. arms, legs, or fingers),
but each robot must be trained from scratch to control all the actuators of all the
parts together. In this paper we demonstrate a new approach that takes a single
robot and its controller as input and produces a set of modular controllers for each
of these assemblies such that when a new robot is built from the same parts, its
control can be quickly learned by reusing the modular controllers. We achieve this
with a framework called MeMo which learns (Me)aningful, (Mo)dular controllers.
Specifically, we propose a novel modularity objective to learn an appropriate
division of labor among the modules. We demonstrate that this objective can be
optimized simultaneously with standard behavior cloning loss via noise injection.
We benchmark our framework in locomotion and grasping environments on simple
to complex robot morphology transfer. We also show that the modules help in task
transfer. On both structure and task transfer, MeMo achieves improved training
efficiency to graph neural network and Transformer baselines.1

1

Introduction

Consider the following scenario: A roboticist is designing a robot with 6 legs, such as the one
seen in the left image of Fig. 1, and has trained a standard neural network controller with deep
reinforcement learning (RL) to control the actuators circled in green. However, after more testing,
they realize that the design of the robot needs to be extended with another pair of legs to support the
desired amount of weight. Even though the new 8 leg robot is still composed of the same standard
assemblies, the roboticist is unable to reuse any part of the 6 leg robot’s controller. While many works
[1, 2, 3] have studied structure transfer, or transferring neural network controllers to different robot
morphologies, these works take a purely data-driven approach of training a universal controller on a
dataset representative of the diversity and complexity of robots seen in testing. In contrast, we desire
to learn transferable controllers from only a single robot and environment, obviating the requirement
for a substantial training dataset and resources to perform multi-task RL. Our experiments demonstrate
that state-of-the-art approaches for transferring control to environments with incompatible state-action
spaces struggle to generalize in this highly data-scarce setting.
Motivated by the above scenario, we propose a framework, MeMo, for pretraining (Me)aningful
(Mo)dular controllers that enable transfer from a single robot to variants with different dimensionalities. Learning transferable modules from a single robot trained on a single task is challenging, even
1

Correspondence to megantj@mit.edu. Code can be found at https://github.com/MeganTj/MeMo.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

