Latent Representation Matters: Human-like Sketches
in One-shot Drawing Tasks

Victor Boutin1,2,3 , Rishav Mukherji3 , Aditya Agrawal3 , Sabine Muzellec2,3 , Thomas Fel1,3 ,
Thomas Serre1,3 , Rufin VanRullen1,2
1
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute, Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
2
Centre de Recherche Cerveau & Cognition CNRS, Universite de Toulouse, France
3
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University
victor_boutin@brown.edu

Abstract
Humans can effortlessly draw new categories from a single exemplar, a feat that
has long posed a challenge for generative models. However, this gap has started
to close with recent advances in diffusion models. This one-shot drawing task
requires powerful inductive biases that have not been systematically investigated.
Here, we study how different inductive biases shape the latent space of Latent
Diffusion Models (LDMs). Along with standard LDM regularizers (KL and vector
quantization), we explore supervised regularizations (including classification and
prototype-based representation) and contrastive inductive biases (using SimCLR
and redundancy reduction objectives). We demonstrate that LDMs with redundancy
reduction and prototype-based regularizations produce near-human-like drawings
(regarding both samples’ recognizability and originality) – better mimicking human
perception (as evaluated psychophysically). Overall, our results suggest that the
gap between humans and machines in one-shot drawings is almost closed.

1

Introduction

For cognitive scientists, human drawings offer a window into the brain, providing tangible insights
into its visual and motor internal processes [1]. For instance, drawings have been used in clinical
settings to screen for perceptual impairments following brain trauma or Alzheimer’s disease [2, 3], to
assess perceptual disorders in autistic individuals [4–6] or to investigate perceptual changes during
child development [7, 8] (see [1] for a recent review). Drawing tasks have also proven instrumental
for exploring how the brain generalizes to novel visual categories [9–11]. Cognitive psychologists
routinely use the one-shot drawing task to understand how human observers can reliably form new
object categories from just one exemplar [12, 13]. From a computational viewpoint, this task is
ill-defined because of the infinite number of possible sets of samples that could be associated with that
exemplar. Yet, humans can effortlessly produce drawings that are not only easily recognizable but
also original (i.e., sufficiently distinct from the reference exemplar) [12]. This remarkable capability
suggests that the brain leverages powerful representational inductive biases – yet to be discovered –
to form novel categories.
Computer scientists have started to make progress in identifying some of the inductive biases for
machine learning algorithms to learn from limited data. For one-shot classification tasks, a particularly
effective representational inductive bias is to design an embedding space where samples of the same
category, whether seen during training or not, cluster closely. This approach spans a wide range of
models ranging from representations learned via contrastive objective functions [14–16], prototypebased representations [17, 18] or metric matching losses [19, 20]. Conversely, for one-shot generation
tasks, researchers have preferred architectural over representational inductive biases. For instance,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

