AutoGuide: Automated Generation and
Selection of Context-Aware Guidelines for
Large Language Model Agents

Yao Fu 1∗
Dong-Ki Kim 2∗
Jaekyeom Kim 2
Sungryull Sohn 2
2
2
Lajanugen Logeswaran
Kyunghoon Bae
Honglak Lee 1,2
1
2
University of Michigan
LG AI Research

Abstract
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have empowered AI agents
capable of performing various sequential decision-making tasks. However, effectively guiding LLMs to perform well in unfamiliar domains like web navigation, where they lack sufficient knowledge, has proven to be difficult with the
demonstration-based in-context learning paradigm. In this paper, we introduce a
novel framework, called AUTO G UIDE, which addresses this limitation by automatically generating context-aware guidelines from offline experiences. Importantly,
each context-aware guideline is expressed in concise natural language and follows
a conditional structure, clearly describing the context where it is applicable. As a
result, our guidelines facilitate the provision of relevant knowledge for the agent’s
current decision-making process, overcoming the limitations of the conventional
demonstration-based learning paradigm. Our evaluation demonstrates that AU TO G UIDE significantly outperforms competitive baselines in complex benchmark
domains, including real-world web navigation.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have empowered AI agents to address various
sequential decision-making tasks and applications [1, 2]. The foundation of these successes involves
the planning and reasoning capabilities of pre-trained LLMs, enabling agents to execute effective
policies [3, 4]. The predominant approach to leveraging these (typically closed source) models for
sequential decision making tasks is to provide demonstrations in the form of in-context examples.
However, direct application of this learning paradigm can be limited, especially in target domains
where the LLM has insufficient prior knowledge such as in web navigation, where LLM agents
generally achieve low success rates due to diverse and dynamic contents [5–8]. Providing all available
experiences as demonstrations to an agent can further be unsuccessful due to context length limitations,
prompt sensitivity, and difficulty with complex reasoning [9–12].
On the other hand, LLMs excel in interpreting concise instructions provided as natural language, an
ability that is also reinforced in the instruction-tuning phase of LLMs. Inpired by this, we explore
data-driven strategies that leverage offline experiences to extract actionable knowledge to help guide
LLM agents. As offline experiences implicitly convey valuable knowledge about desirable and
undesirable policies in domains, they promise to serve as a useful resource for improving an LLM
agent’s decision-making in situations where the pre-trained LLM lacks understanding. Despite this
potential benefit, a critical challenge lies in effectively extracting the implicit information embedded
in offline data.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

