One-to-Normal: Anomaly Personalization for
Few-shot Anomaly Detection

Yiyue Li1

Shaoting Zhang4

Kang Li134 ∗

Qicheng Lao24 ∗

1

2

West China Biomedical Big Data Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Sichuan University Pittsburgh Institute, Sichuan University
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
kang.li.research@gmail.com, qicheng.lao@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional Anomaly Detection (AD) methods have predominantly relied on unsupervised learning from extensive normal data. Recent AD methods have evolved
with the advent of large pre-trained vision-language models, enhancing few-shot
anomaly detection capabilities. However, these latest AD methods still exhibit
limitations in accuracy improvement. One contributing factor is their direct comparison of a query image’s features with those of few-shot normal images. This
direct comparison often leads to a loss of precision and complicates the extension
of these techniques to more complex domains—an area that remains underexplored
in a more refined and comprehensive manner. To address these limitations, we
introduce the anomaly personalization method, which performs a personalized
one-to-normal transformation of query images using an anomaly-free customized
generation model, ensuring close alignment with the normal manifold. Moreover,
to further enhance the stability and robustness of prediction results, we propose a
triplet contrastive anomaly inference strategy, which incorporates a comprehensive
comparison between the query and generated anomaly-free data pool and prompt
information. Extensive evaluations across eleven datasets in three domains demonstrate our model’s effectiveness compared to the latest AD methods. Additionally,
our method has been proven to transfer flexibly to other AD methods, with the
generated image data effectively improving the performance of other AD methods.

1

Introduction

Anomaly Detection (AD) has garnered considerable attention due to its wide applicability across
various domains, such as industrial defect detection [20, 30, 2, 14, 27], medical diagnostics [37,
21, 43], video surveillance [22, 33], manufacturing inspection [39, 9]. This heightened interest is
primarily attributed to its only reliance on normal samples and its adoption of an unsupervised learning
paradigm, where it typically learns from the distribution of normal samples to identify anomalies
by detecting outliers [46, 39]. Traditional AD methods, including auto-encoder based [43, 40],
GAN-based, and knowledge-based approaches [3, 8, 35], and others. Moreover, some diffusionbased methods [24, 11] have also emerged recently. Although most of these methods do not require
annotated data, they do necessitate a substantial number of normal samples during the training phase
to capture the distribution of normal samples effectively. However, this requirement has also severely
constrained its advancement in various fields.
* Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

