SpeAr: A Spectral Approach for Zero-Shot Node
Classification
Ting Guo1 , Da Wang2 , Jiye Liang2∗, Kaihan Zhang1 , Jianchao Zeng1
1. Data Science and Technology, North University of China, Taiyuan, China.
2. School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China.

Abstract
Zero-shot node classification is a vital task in the field of graph data processing,
aiming to identify nodes of classes unseen during the training process. Prediction
bias is one of the primary challenges in zero-shot node classification, referring to the
model’s propensity to misclassify nodes of unseen classes as seen classes. However,
most methods introduce external knowledge to mitigate the bias, inadequately
leveraging the inherent cluster information within the unlabeled nodes. To address
this issue, we employ spectral analysis coupled with learnable class prototypes
to discover the implicit cluster structures within the graph, providing a more
comprehensive understanding of classes. In this paper, we propose a Spectral
Approach for zero-shot node classification (SpeAr). Specifically, we establish an
approximate relationship between minimizing the spectral contrastive loss and
performing spectral decomposition on the graph, thereby enabling effective node
characterization through loss minimization. Subsequently, the class prototypes are
iteratively refined based on the learned node representations, initialized with the
semantic vectors. Finally, extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of the
SpeAr, which can further alleviate the bias problem.

1

Introduction

Graph data is widely used to reveal interactions between various entities, such as citation networks
[1], social networks [2], recommendation systems [3], etc. In graph data structures, various entities
are abstractly represented through the form of nodes, while their complex relationships are precisely
depicted through the connections of edges. Node classification [4, 5], an essential task in graph data
analysis, focuses on predicting labels for unlabeled nodes by harnessing the relational structure of the
graph and a select subset of labeled nodes. The advent of graph neural network (GNN) technology,
as delineated in [6, 7, 8], represents a monumental stride in the domain of node classification. This
development has accelerated advancements in the analysis of graph-structured data.
Nevertheless, the ongoing dynamics of real-world networks, characterized by the continual emergence
of new nodes and edges, facilitate the discovery of new classes, thereby introducing a series of
innovative challenges for node classification tasks [9]. Traditional GNN-based node classification
models struggle to handle the identification of new classes in dynamic and open environments. For
instance, as citation networks continue to grow, the emergence of new research papers promotes
the rise of new academic fields. A key challenge is the effective integration of newly emerging
nodes into the pre-existing foundational classes or nascent ones currently in development. Therefore,
∗
Corresponding author. Email: ljy@sxu.edu.cn. This work is supported by the National Science and
Technology Major Project (2020AAA0106102), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62376141),
and the Natural Science Foundation of Shanxi Province, China (202203021222075).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

