R E XT IME: A Benchmark Suite for
Reasoning-Across-Time in Videos

Jr-Jen Chen1 Yu-Chien Liao1 Hsi-Che Lin1 Yu-Chu Yu1
Yen-Chun Chen2 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1
1
2
National Taiwan University
Microsoft
rextime.github.io

Abstract
We introduce R E XT IME, a benchmark designed to rigorously test AI models’ ability to perform temporal reasoning within video events. Speciﬁcally, R E XT IME focuses on reasoning across time, i.e. human-like understanding when the question
and its corresponding answer occur in different video segments. This form of reasoning, requiring advanced understanding of cause-and-effect relationships across
video segments, poses signiﬁcant challenges to even the frontier multimodal large
language models. To facilitate this evaluation, we develop an automated pipeline
for generating temporal reasoning question-answer pairs, signiﬁcantly reducing
the need for labor-intensive manual annotations. Our benchmark includes 921
carefully vetted validation samples and 2,143 test samples, each manually curated
for accuracy and relevance. Evaluation results show that while frontier large language models outperform academic models, they still lag behind human performance by a signiﬁcant 14.3% accuracy gap. Additionally, our pipeline creates a
training dataset of 9,695 machine generated samples without manual effort, which
empirical studies suggest can enhance the across-time reasoning via ﬁne-tuning.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) and Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have nearly
matched human performance in various language and vision-language tasks [1, 4, 35]. Notably,
frontier MLLMs trained on web-scale proprietary datasets show impressive video understanding [2].
However, unlike LLMs which excel in text reasoning over long sequences, the cause-effect reasoning
in MLLMs, especially in understanding long video events, remains under-explored. This capability
is crucial in robotics and embodied agents [5, 29, 34], healthcare and medicine [19, 49], and law and
policy making [19]. Despite the importance, current video-language tasks like moment retrieval [13,
20], highlights detection [20, 33], dense video captioning [7, 40], and video question answering [22,
37] mainly address text-visual alignment, overlooking deeper temporal reasoning challenges.
In an initial study, we identiﬁed a common shortcoming in the most advanced MLLMs – they struggle with video question answering when the question and answer correspond to different time segments. As shown in Fig. 1, the question “How can we cut up the tomato efﬁciently?” and the answer
“Hold up a plate and sharpen the knife on the plate.” each refer to separate segments. Surprisingly,
a simple question like this can challenge leading MLLMs. Therefore, there is a pressing need for a
benchmark to quantitatively assess video temporal reasoning. To address this, we introduce R E XT IME, a benchmark to evaluate Reasoning-Across-Time capabilities for video events.
To develop R E XT IME, we propose an LLM-assisted data generation pipeline that minimizes human
effort and cuts costs from $300 to $135 per 1,000 QA pairs. The benchmark includes 921 validation
and 2143 test samples, each rigorously curated by human annotators. Empirical evidence indicates
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

