MambaAD: Exploring State Space Models for
Multi-class Unsupervised Anomaly Detection

Haoyang He1∗ Yuhu Bai1∗ Jiangning Zhang2† Qingdong He2 Hongxu Chen1
Zhenye Gan2 Chengjie Wang2 Xiangtai Li3 Guanzhong Tian1 Lei Xie1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 Nanyang Technological University
{haoyanghe,yhbai,186368,chenhongxu,gztian}@zju.edu.cn,
{yingcaihe,wingzygan,jasoncjwang}@tencent.com,
xiangtai94@gmail.com, leix@iipc.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advancements in anomaly detection have seen the efficacy of CNN- and
transformer-based approaches. However, CNNs struggle with long-range dependencies, while transformers are burdened by quadratic computational complexity. Mamba-based models, with their superior long-range modeling and linear
efficiency, have garnered substantial attention. This study pioneers the application of Mamba to multi-class unsupervised anomaly detection, presenting MambaAD, which consists of a pre-trained encoder and a Mamba decoder featuring
(Locality-Enhanced State Space) LSS modules at multi-scales. The proposed
LSS module, integrating parallel cascaded (Hybrid State Space) HSS blocks and
multi-kernel convolutions operations, effectively captures both long-range and
local information. The HSS block, utilizing (Hybrid Scanning) HS encoders,
encodes feature maps into five scanning methods and eight directions, thereby
strengthening global connections through the (State Space Model) SSM. The
use of Hilbert scanning and eight directions significantly improves feature sequence modeling. Comprehensive experiments on six diverse anomaly detection datasets and seven metrics demonstrate state-of-the-art performance, substantiating the method’s effectiveness. The code and models are available at
https://lewandofskee.github.io/projects/MambaAD.

1

Introduction

The advent of smart manufacturing has markedly increased the importance of industrial visual
Anomaly Detection (AD) in production processes. This technology promises to enhance efficiency,
diminish the costs of manual inspections, and elevate product quality along with the stability of
production lines. Presently, most methods predominantly utilize a single-class setting [12, 30, 55],
where a separate model is trained and tested for each class, leading to considerable increases in training
and memory usage. Despite recent progress in introducing multi-class AD techniques [47, 18], there
is still significant potential for advancement in terms of both accuracy and efficiency trade-off.
The current unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms can be broadly categorized into three approaches [50, 9, 51]: Embedding-based [36, 11, 4, 12, 8], Synthesizing-based [48, 24, 55, 30], and
Reconstruction-based [27, 18, 6]. Despite the promising results of both Synthesizing and Embeddingbased methods in AD, these approaches often require extensive design and inflexible frameworks.
Reconstruction-based methods, such as RD4AD [12] and UniAD [47], exhibit superior performance
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

