Generalizing CNNs to Graphs with Learnable
Neighborhood Quantization

Isaac Osafo Nkansah1

Neil Gallagher1 Ruchi Sandilya1 Conor Liston1
Logan Grosenick1∗
1
Department of Psychiatry and BMRI, Weill Cornell Medicine,
Cornell University, New York, NY, USA

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have led to a revolution in analyzing array
data. However, many important sources of data, such as biological and social
networks, are naturally structured as graphs rather than arrays, making the design
of graph neural network (GNN) architectures that retain the strengths of CNNs
an active and exciting area of research. Here, we introduce Quantized Graph
Convolution Networks (QGCNs), the first framework for GNNs that formally and
directly extends CNNs to graphs. QGCNs do this by decomposing the convolution
operation into non-overlapping sub-kernels, allowing them to fit graph data while
reducing to a 2D CNN layer on array data. We generalize this approach to graphs of
arbitrary size and dimension by approaching sub-kernel assignment as a learnable
multinomial assignment problem. Integrating this approach into a residual network
architecture, we demonstrate performance that matches or exceeds other stateof-the-art GNNs on benchmark graph datasets and for predicting properties of
nonlinear dynamics on a new finite element graph dataset. In summary, QGCNs
are a novel GNN framework that generalizes CNNs and their strengths to graph
data, allowing for more accurate and expressive models.

1

Introduction

Many important real-world scenarios involve data structured as graphs. For example, neural networks
(both biological and artificial) are typically represented as directed graphs where individual neurons
propagate information to other neurons along edges. Digital networks (e.g. social networks, the
internet) are graphs made up of links between digital objects, and chemical structures can be modeled
as graphs made up of bonds between atoms. It can be challenging to accurately model such graph
data, creating a barrier to studying these problems. Indeed, this work was motivated by our own
experiments in modeling brain networks from neural data, where we have found that existing methods
are often not expressive enough to effectively capture the types of phenomena we are interested in.
In recent years, the prevailing approach for learning from graph data has shifted towards methods
inspired by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20, 21, 8, 17, 25, 4, 5]. The focus on extending
the convolutional layer of CNNs to graph data is motivated by the strong and successful inductive
bias of CNNs, which use trainable filters that efficiently model local structure in array-structured
data (e.g., images). CNNs have been effectively employed in numerous domains, including natural
language processing [26, 43] and image recognition [7]. Because graph data often exhibit strong
patterns of local correlation like those seen in language and image data, it is reasonable to expect they
might similarly benefit from shared local filters.
∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed: log4002@med.cornell.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

