Curvature Clues: Decoding Deep Learning Privacy
with Input Loss Curvature

Deepak Ravikumar Efstathia Soufleri Kaushik Roy
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
{dravikum, esoufler, kaushik}@purdue.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the properties of loss curvature with respect to input data
in deep neural networks. Curvature of loss with respect to input (termed input
loss curvature) is the trace of the Hessian of the loss with respect to the input.
We investigate how input loss curvature varies between train and test sets, and its
implications for train-test distinguishability. We develop a theoretical framework
that derives an upper bound on the train-test distinguishability based on privacy
and the size of the training set. This novel insight fuels the development of a
new black box membership inference attack utilizing input loss curvature. We
validate our theoretical findings through experiments in computer vision classification tasks, demonstrating that input loss curvature surpasses existing methods in
membership inference effectiveness. Our analysis highlights how the performance
of membership inference attack (MIA) methods varies with the size of the training
set, showing that curvature-based MIA outperforms other methods on sufficiently
large datasets. This condition is often met by real datasets, as demonstrated by our
results on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and ImageNet. These findings not only advance
our understanding of deep neural network behavior but also improve the ability to
test privacy-preserving techniques in machine learning.1 2

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are being increasingly trained on sensitive datasets; thus ensuring the privacy of
these models is paramount. Membership inference attacks (MIA) have become the standard approach
to test a model’s privacy [Murakonda and Shokri, 2020]. These attacks take a trained model and aim
to identify if a given example was used in its training. Recent work has linked curvature of loss with
respect to input with memorization [Garg et al., 2024] and differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006,
Ravikumar et al., 2024]. Inspired by this line of research, we investigate the properties of input loss
curvature and leverage our insights to develop a new membership inference attack.
Curvature of loss with respect to input (termed input loss curvature) is defined as the trace of the
Hessian of loss with respect to the input [Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2019, Garg and Roy, 2023]. Prior
works that study loss curvature have focused on two lines of research. The first line of research has
focused on studying the loss curvature with respect to the weights of the deep neural net [Keskar
et al., 2017, Wu et al., 2020, Jiang et al., 2020, Foret et al., 2021, Kwon et al., 2021, Andriushchenko
and Flammarion, 2022] to better understand generalization. The second line of research studied the
loss curvature with respect to the input (i.e. data) for gaining insight into adversarial robustness
1

Code available at https://github.com/DeepakTatachar/Curvature-Clues
Project website with models and other assets is available at https://engineering.purdue.edu/NRL/
projects/curvature-clues
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

