Image-aware Evaluation of Generated Medical
Reports

Gefen Dawidowicz∗ Elad Hirsch∗ Ayellet Tal
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract
The paper proposes a novel evaluation metric for automatic medical report generation from X-ray images, V LScore. It aims to overcome the limitations of existing
evaluation methods, which either focus solely on textual similarities, ignoring clinical aspects, or concentrate only on a single clinical aspect, the pathology, neglecting
all other factors. The key idea of our metric is to measure the similarity between
radiology reports while considering the corresponding image. We demonstrate the
benefit of our metric through evaluation on a dataset where radiologists marked
errors in pairs of reports, showing notable alignment with radiologists’ judgments.
In addition, we provide a new dataset for evaluating metrics. This dataset includes
well-designed perturbations that distinguish between significant modifications (e.g.,
removal of a diagnosis) and insignificant ones. It highlights the weaknesses in
current evaluation metrics and provides a clear framework for analysis.

1

Introduction

Medical reports are crucial for summarizing diagnoses seen in X-ray images. These reports facilitate
communication among healthcare professionals, ensuring continuity of care and informed decisionmaking. The process of generating these reports requires expertise and time, typically involving
a trained radiologist who writes them from scratch. Automatic generation of medical reports
therefore has the potential to enhance patient care and streamline administrative processes, ultimately
improving healthcare delivery. Consequently, numerous research efforts have been directed toward
this goal [3, 4, 15, 17, 27, 30]. These medical report generation models aim to produce coherent and
accurate reports based on input images, with a current focus on chest radiology reports.
However, evaluating the generated reports is a challenge in its own right [34]. This evaluation is
essential to determine whether a new technique truly advances the state of the art. Currently, two
families of metrics are being used, language metrics and clinical metrics. Derived from language
generation tasks, such as neural machine translation or image captioning, generated medical reports
are evaluated with natural language generation (NLG) metrics. In our context, the similarity between
the generated report (candidate) to the ground-truth report (reference) associated with the input image
is measured. To evaluate some of the medical entities that are expressed in the report, clinical efficacy
(CE) is measured by applying a pre-trained classification network on the ground-truth and output
reports to assess their agreement on pre-defined pathologies [13, 26]. These metrics suffer from
drawbacks, which the current paper attempts to solve, as described hereafter.
The traditional NLG metrics, namely BLEU [25], METEOR [1], ROUGE [20], and CIDEr [28], are
n-gram-based and measure the token (or sequence of tokens) overlap between the candidate and
reference texts. More recent metrics, such as BERTScore [35], rely on deep textual feature similarity,
making them more robust to variations in exact tokens and instead utilizing contextual embeddings.
However, these metrics fail to capture several critical nuances in the context of medical reports.
In particular, while the reports are typically lengthy and structured, following a systematic review
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

