Preferential Normalizing Flows

Petrus Mikkola, Luigi Acerbi∗, Arto Klami∗
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki
first.last@helsinki.fi

Abstract
Eliciting a high-dimensional probability distribution from an expert via noisy
judgments is notoriously challenging, yet useful for many applications, such as prior
elicitation and reward modeling. We introduce a method for eliciting the expert’s
belief density as a normalizing flow based solely on preferential questions such
as comparing or ranking alternatives. This allows eliciting in principle arbitrarily
flexible densities, but flow estimation is susceptible to the challenge of collapsing
or diverging probability mass that makes it difficult in practice. We tackle this
problem by introducing a novel functional prior for the flow, motivated by a
decision-theoretic argument, and show empirically that the belief density can be
inferred as the function-space maximum a posteriori estimate. We demonstrate our
method by eliciting multivariate belief densities of simulated experts, including the
prior belief of a general-purpose large language model over a real-world dataset.

1

Introduction

Representing beliefs as probability distributions can be useful, particularly as prior probability
distributions in Bayesian inference – especially in high-dimensional, non-asymptotic settings where
the prior strongly influences the posterior [Gelman et al., 2017] – or as probabilistic alternatives to
reward models [Leike et al., 2018, Ouyang et al., 2022]. Our goal is to elicit a complex multivariate
probability density from an expert, as a representation of their beliefs. By expert, we mean an
information source with a belief over a problem of interest, termed belief density, which does not
permit direct evaluation or sampling. The problem is an instance of expert knowledge elicitation,
where the belief is elicited by asking elicitation queries such as quantiles of the distribution [O’Hagan,
2019]. The current elicitation literature (see Mikkola et al. 2023 for a recent overview) focuses almost
exclusively on extremely simple distributions, mostly products of univariate distributions of known
parametric form. Some isolated works have considered more flexible distributions, for instance
quantile-parameterized distributions [Perepolkin et al., 2024] for univariate cases, or Gaussian
processes [Oakley and O’Hagan, 2007] and copulas for modelling low-dimensional dependencies
[Clemen et al., 2000], but we want to move considerably beyond that and elicit flexible beliefs
using modern neural network representations [Bishop and Bishop, 2023]. The main challenges are
identifying elicitation queries that are sufficiently informative to infer the belief density while being
feasible for the expert to answer reliably, and selecting a model class for the belief density that can
represent flexible beliefs without simplifying assumptions but that can still be efficiently estimated.
Normalizing flows are a natural family for representing flexible distributions [Papamakarios et al.,
2021]. When using flows for modelling a density p(x), learning is usually based on either a set
of samples x ∼ p(x) drawn from the distribution (density estimation; Dinh et al., 2014) or on the
log density log p(x) evaluated at flow samples, x ∼ q(x), in the variational inference formulation
[Rezende and Mohamed, 2015]. Neither strategy applies to our setup, since we do not have the
luxury of sampling from the belief density and obviously cannot evaluate it either. In addition to
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

