DPIC: Decoupling Prompt and Intrinsic
Characteristics for LLM Generated Text Detection
Xiao Yu1,2† , Yuang Qi1,2† , Kejiang Chen1,2∗ , Guoqiang Chen1
Xi Yang1 , Pengyuan Zhu3 , Xiuwei Shang1 , Weiming Zhang1 , Nenghai Yu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education, China
3
Hefei High-dimensional Data Technology, China
yuxiao1217@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {chenkj, zhangwm, ynh}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have the potential to generate texts that pose risks
of misuse, such as plagiarism, planting fake reviews on e-commerce platforms,
or creating inflammatory false tweets. Consequently, detecting whether a text is
generated by LLMs has become increasingly important. Existing high-quality
detection methods usually require access to the interior of the model to extract the
intrinsic characteristics. However, since we do not have access to the interior of
the black-box model, we must resort to surrogate models, which impacts detection quality. In order to achieve high-quality detection of black-box models, we
would like to extract deep intrinsic characteristics of the black-box model generated
texts. We view the generation process as a coupled process of prompt and intrinsic
characteristics of the generative model. Based on this insight, we propose to decouple prompt and intrinsic characteristics (DPIC) for LLM-generated text detection
method. Specifically, given a candidate text, DPIC employs an auxiliary LLM to
reconstruct the prompt corresponding to the candidate text, then uses the prompt
to regenerate text by the auxiliary LLM, which makes the candidate text and the
regenerated text align with their prompts, respectively. Then, the similarity between the candidate text and the regenerated text is used as a detection feature, thus
eliminating the prompt in the detection process, which allows the detector to focus
on the intrinsic characteristics of the generative model. Compared to the baselines,
DPIC has achieved an average improvement of 6.76% and 2.91% in detecting texts
from different domains generated by GPT-4 and Claude3, respectively.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) such as PaLM [6], ChatGPT [29], LLaMA [38], and GPT-4 [1]
exhibit advanced language capabilities for understanding natural language and solving complex tasks
via text generation. The outstanding performance of LLMs has led to the belief that they can be the
artificial general intelligence (AGI) of this era [5]. However, if placed in the wrong hands, LLMs
such as ChatGPT can undoubtedly serve as a “weapon of mass deception” [35]. For example, the
formidable writing capabilities of ChatGPT pose a significant threat to democracy, as they enable the
creation of automated bots on online social networks that can manipulate people’s political choices
during election campaigns [36, 13]. Furthermore, the adoption of ChatGPT by students in educational
institutions has led to instances of academic dishonesty, with essays and assignments being generated
∗
†

Corresponding author.
Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

