Ensemble sampling for linear bandits:
small ensembles suffice
David Janz
University of Oxford∗
david.janz@stats.ox.ac.uk

Alexander E. Litvak
University of Alberta
alitvak@ualberta.ca

Csaba Szepesvári
University of Alberta
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract
We provide the first useful and rigorous analysis of ensemble sampling for the
stochastic linear bandit setting. In particular, we show that, under standard assumptions, for a d-dimensional stochastic linear bandit with an interaction horizon T ,
ensemble sampling with an
√ ensemble of size of order d log T incurs regret at most
of the order (d log T )5/2 T . Ours is the first result in any structured setting not
to require the size of the ensemble to scale linearly with
√ T —which defeats the
purpose of ensemble sampling—while obtaining near T order regret. Our result
is also the first to allow for infinite action sets.

1

Introduction

Ensemble sampling (Lu and Van Roy, 2017) is a family of randomised algorithms for balancing
exploration and exploitation within sequential decision-making tasks. These algorithms maintain an
ensemble of perturbed models of the value of the available actions and, in each step, select an action
that has the highest value according to a model chosen uniformly at random from the ensemble. The
ensemble is then incrementally updated the new observations.
Ensemble sampling was introduced as an alternative to Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933) that is
tractable whenever incremental model updates are cheap (Osband et al., 2016; Lu and Van Roy, 2017).
It is thus particularly popular in deep reinforcement learning, where the models (neural networks)
are trained via gradient descent in an incremental fashion. Therein, ensemble sampling features
directly in algorithms such as bootstrapped DQN and ensemble+ (Osband et al., 2016, 2018), as part
of other methods (Dimakopoulou and Van Roy, 2018; Curi et al., 2020), and as the motivation for
methods, including random network distillation (Burda et al., 2018) and hypermodels for exploration
(Dwaracherla et al., 2020). Ensemble sampling has also been applied to online recommendation
systems (Lu et al., 2018; Hao et al., 2020; Zhu and Van Roy, 2021), the behavioural sciences (Eckles
and Kaptein, 2019) and to marketing (Yang et al., 2020).
Despite its practicality and simple nature, ensemble
√ sampling has thus far resisted analysis. Indeed,
Qin et al. (2022), who showed a bound of order T on its Bayesian regret under the impractical
condition that the size of the ensemble scales at least linearly with the horizon T , summarise the
state-of-the-art in this regard as follows:
‘A lot of work has attempted to analyze ensemble sampling, but none of them has
been successful.’
Readers familiar with the literature know that the analysis of randomised exploration methods, such
as Thompson sampling, or perturbed history exploration (Kveton et al., 2020; Janz et al., 2024), relies
on showing that at each step there is a constant probability of choosing a model that overestimates
the true value (Agrawal and Goyal, 2013; Abeille and Lazaric, 2017). For these methods, the analysis
∗

Work carried out while David Janz was a postdoc with Csaba Szepesvári at the University of Alberta.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

