GL-NeRF: Gauss-Laguerre Quadrature Enables
Training-Free NeRF Acceleration

Silong Yong

Yaqi Xie
Simon Stepputtis
Katia Sycara
Carnegie Mellon University
{silongy, yaqix, sstepput, sycara}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Volume rendering in neural radiance fields is inherently time-consuming due to
the large number of MLP calls on the points sampled per ray. Previous works
would address this issue by introducing new neural networks or data structures.
In this work, we propose GL-NeRF, a new perspective of computing volume
rendering with the Gauss-Laguerre quadrature. GL-NeRF significantly reduces
the number of MLP calls needed for volume rendering, introducing no additional
data structures or neural networks. The simple formulation makes adopting GLNeRF in any NeRF model possible. In the paper, we first justify the use of the
Gauss-Laguerre quadrature and then demonstrate this plug-and-play attribute by
implementing it in two different NeRF models. We show that with a minimal
drop in performance, GL-NeRF can significantly reduce the number of MLP calls,
showing the potential to speed up any NeRF model. Code can be found in project
page https://silongyong.github.io/GL-NeRF_project_page/.

1

Introduction

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [27] have shown promising results for synthesizing images from
novel views. Plenty of works extend NeRF towards different aspects applicable in the real world
(see related works for details). The core component for NeRF’s success is volume rendering, which
requires approximating an integral by densely sampling points along the ray and evaluating volume
density and radiance using neural networks for them. In practice, a dense set of points is evaluated
by expensive operations like neural network inferences for a single pixel, which could be redundant.
Works have been done to reduce the time needed for rendering images, aiming at providing NeRF
with a real-time rendering ability [9, 44, 24, 29, 8]. Despite the promising results shown by these
works, they propose different approaches for achieving real-time rendering by introducing new
networks, new data structures, etc. Therefore, each individual work requires training from scratch
with a specific optimization goal. In this work, we propose a novel lightweight method that could
be implemented in any existing NeRF-based models that require volume rendering without further
training. In contrast to existing works, our approach introduces no additional representation or neural
network and is training-free. We make minimal modifications to the computation of the volume
rendering integral, making it rely on much fewer samples.
Our approach arises from revisiting the volume rendering integral, the key discovery is that with
a simple change of variable, we can turn the integral into a pure exponentially weighted integral
of color. This specific form has a Gauss quadrature (i.e. the Gauss-Laguerre quadrature) which
best approximates it mathematically. Naturally, we propose to use the Gauss-Laguerre quadrature
to directly compute the volume rendering integral, which we call GL-NeRF (Gauss Laguerre-NeRF),
leading to much lower computational cost for approximating the integral and therefore lower time
and memory usage. Computing the points needed for the integral requires a dense evaluation of
per-point density. However, the efficiency for this step can be improved using modern techniques
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

