OmniJARVIS
Unified Vision-Language-Action Tokenization Enables
Open-World Instruction Following Agents

Zihao Wang1 , Shaofei Cai1 , Zhancun Mu2 , Haowei Lin1 , Ceyao Zhang3 , Xuejie Liu1
Qing Li3 , Anji Liu4 , Xiaojian Ma3 , Yitao Liang1∗

Team CraftJarvis
1

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
Yuanpei College, Peking University
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
4
University of California, Los Angeles
{zhwang,caishaofei}@stu.pku.edu.cn
xiaojian.ma@ucla.edu,liuanji@cs.ucla.edu,yitaol@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents OmniJARVIS, a novel Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model
for open-world instruction-following agents in Minecraft. Compared to prior
works that either emit textual goals to separate controllers or produce the control
command directly, OmniJARVIS seeks a different path to ensure both strong
reasoning and efficient decision-making capabilities via unified tokenization of
multimodal interaction data. First, we introduce a self-supervised approach to
learn a behavior encoder that produces discretized tokens for behavior trajectories τ = {o0 , a0 , . . . } and an imitation learning policy decoder conditioned on
these tokens. These additional behavior tokens will be augmented to the vocabulary of pretrained Multimodal Language Models. With this encoder, we then
pack long-term multimodal interactions involving task instructions, memories,
thoughts, observations, textual responses, behavior trajectories, etc. into unified
token sequences and model them with autoregressive transformers. Thanks to the semantically meaningful behavior tokens, the resulting VLA model, OmniJARVIS,
can reason (by producing chain-of-thoughts), plan, answer questions, and act (by
producing behavior tokens for the IL policy decoder). OmniJARVIS demonstrates excellent performances on a comprehensive collection of atomic, programmatic, and open-ended tasks in open-world Minecraft. Our analysis further unveils
the crucial design principles in interaction data formation, unified tokenization,
and its scaling potentials. The dataset, models, and code will be released at
https://craftjarvis.org/OmniJARVIS/.

1

Introduction

Upon the success of pretrained Large Language Models (LLMs) [7, 35, 40, 17, 13] and Multimodal
Langauge Models (MLMs) [31, 20, 1, 53, 33], some recent works have been venturing into developing
Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [6, 22, 47, 38], a promising pathway towards the ultimate
goal of building autonomous agents that can follow and even self-generated instructions to fulfill
various reasoning and acting tasks in open world environments. Among them, two most prominent
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

