M ED C ALC -B ENCH: Evaluating Large Language
Models for Medical Calculations
Nikhil Khandekar∗1, 4 , Qiao Jin∗1 , Guangzhi Xiong∗2 , Soren Dunn3, 4 , Serina S Applebaum5 ,
Zain Anwar7 , Maame Sarfo-Gyamfi8 , Conrad W Safranek5 , Abid A Anwar6 , Andrew Zhang9 ,
Aidan Gilson5 , Maxwell B Singer5 , Amisha Dave5 , Andrew Taylor5 ,
Aidong Zhang2 , Qingyu Chen5 , and Zhiyong Lu†1
1

National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, 2 University of Virginia, 3 University of
Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 4 Lapis Labs, 5 Yale University School of Medicine, 6 University of
Illinois College of Medicine at Chicago, 7 Rosalind Franklin University Chicago Medical School,
8
Howard University College of Medicine, 9 University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine

Abstract
Current benchmarks for evaluating large language models (LLMs) in medicine
are primarily focused on question-answering involving domain knowledge and
descriptive reasoning. While such qualitative capabilities are vital to medical
diagnosis, in real-world scenarios, doctors frequently use clinical calculators that
follow quantitative equations and rule-based reasoning paradigms for evidencebased decision support. To this end, we propose M ED C ALC -B ENCH, a first-ofits-kind dataset focused on evaluating the medical calculation capability of LLMs.
M ED C ALC -B ENCH contains an evaluation set of over 1000 manually reviewed
instances from 55 different medical calculation tasks. Each instance in M ED C ALC B ENCH consists of a patient note, a question requesting to compute a specific
medical value, a ground truth answer, and a step-by-step explanation showing how
the answer is obtained. While our evaluation results show the potential of LLMs in
this area, none of them are effective enough for clinical settings. Common issues
include extracting the incorrect entities, not using the correct equation or rules for a
calculation task, or incorrectly performing the arithmetic for the computation. We
hope our study highlights the quantitative knowledge and reasoning gaps in LLMs
within medical settings, encouraging future improvements of LLMs for various
clinical calculation tasks. 1

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT [2, 31], Gemini/PaLM [1, 47], and Llama [50, 51]
have been successfully applied to a variety of biomedical tasks [29, 38, 48, 49], including, but not
limited to question answering [27, 30, 42], clinical trial matching [23, 57, 58, 62], and medical
document summarization [40, 46, 52]. However, most of these tasks have a limited evaluation of
domain knowledge and qualitative reasoning ability of LLMs, as demonstrated by the commonly
used medical benchmarks such as MedQA [21], PubMedQA [22], and MedMCQA [33]. While
∗
1

Equal contribution. † Correspondence: zhiyong.lu@nih.gov.
M ED C ALC -B ENCH is publicly available at: https://github.com/ncbi-nlp/MedCalc-Bench.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

