The Ladder in Chaos: Improving Policy Learning
by Harnessing the Parameter Evolving Path
in A Low-dimensional Space

Hongyao Tang1,2∗, Min Zhang1 , Chen Chen3 , Jianye Hao1
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Mila, Université de Montréal
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Knowing the learning dynamics of policy is significant to unveiling the mysteries of
Reinforcement Learning (RL). It is especially crucial yet challenging to Deep RL,
from which the remedies to notorious issues like sample inefficiency and learning
instability could be obtained. In this paper, we study how the policy networks of
typical DRL agents evolve during the learning process by empirically investigating
several kinds of temporal change for each policy parameter. In popular MuJoCo
and DeepMind Control Suite (DMC) environments, we find common phenomena
for TD3 and RAD agents: (1) the activity of policy network parameters is highly
asymmetric and policy networks advance monotonically along a very limited
number of major parameter directions; (2) severe detours occur in parameter update
and harmonic-like changes are observed for all minor parameter directions. By
performing a novel temporal SVD along the policy learning path, the major and
minor parameter directions are identified as the columns of the right unitary matrix
associated with dominant and insignificant singular values respectively. Driven by
the discoveries above, we propose a simple and effective method, called Policy
Path Trimming and Boosting (PPTB), as a general plug-in improvement to DRL
algorithms. The key idea of PPTB is to trim the policy learning path by canceling
the policy updates in minor parameter directions, and boost the learning path by
encouraging the advance in major directions. In experiments, we demonstrate that
our method improves the learning performance of TD3, RAD, and DoubleDQN
regarding scores and efficiency in MuJoCo, DMC, and MinAtar tasks respectively.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is far from well understood, although its great potential has
been demonstrated with a lot of achievements in different practical problems [Badia et al., 2020,
Shah et al., 2022, Fawzi et al., 2022, Degrave et al., 2022, OpenAI, 2022]. Consistent efforts are
made to gain a better understanding of the learning dynamics of RL agents. Different from the
studies with tabular [Sutton and Barto, 1988] and linear approximation [Ghosh and Bellemare, 2020],
understanding the learning dynamics of DRL agents is challenging. The difficulty comes from the
complex interplay between Deep Learning models and RL algorithms, and further escalates when
only limited online interactions or offline logged data are considered.
Recently, there have been a few works that study the learning dynamics of DRL agents from different
perspectives. A major stream of works among them studies the co-learning dynamics between
representation and DRL functions (usually the value network) [Dabney et al., 2021, Kumar et al.,
∗

Corresponding author: Hongyao Tang (tang.hongyao@quebec.mila).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

