Preference Alignment with Flow Matching

Minu Kim1∗ Yongsik Lee1∗ Sehyeok Kang1 Jihwan Oh1
Song Chong1† Se-Young Yun1†
1
KAIST AI
{minu.kim, dldydtlr93, kangsehyeok0329, ericoh929,
songchong, yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We present Preference Flow Matching (PFM), a new framework for preference
alignment that streamlines the integration of preferences into an arbitrary class of
pre-trained models. Existing alignment methods require fine-tuning pre-trained
models, which presents challenges such as scalability, inefficiency, and the need
for model modifications, especially with black-box APIs like GPT-4. In contrast,
PFM utilizes flow matching techniques to directly learn from preference data,
thereby reducing the dependency on extensive fine-tuning of pre-trained models.
By leveraging flow-based models, PFM transforms less preferred data into preferred
outcomes, and effectively aligns model outputs with human preferences without
relying on explicit or implicit reward function estimation, thus avoiding common
issues like overfitting in reward models. We provide theoretical insights that
support our method’s alignment with standard preference alignment objectives.
Experimental results indicate the practical effectiveness of our method, offering a
new direction in aligning a pre-trained model to preference. Our code is available
at https://github.com/jadehaus/preference-flow-matching.

1

Introduction

Preference-based reinforcement learning (PbRL) has emerged as a groundbreaking approach with
significant contributions to performance improvement [Akrour et al., 2011, Wilson et al., 2012],
particularly in the realm of artificial intelligence where understanding and incorporating human
preferences are crucial. Unlike traditional reinforcement learning, which struggles due to the absence
of explicit reward functions or the infeasibility of defining comprehensive environmental rewards,
PbRL leverages a variety of feedback forms from humans to guide the learning process. This class of
PbRL method is often referred to as reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [Ziegler
et al., 2019, Levine et al., 2018, Ouyang et al., 2022].
Despite their effectiveness, these methods necessitate fine-tuning pre-trained models to align with
user preferences, introducing several challenges such as scalability, accessibility, inefficiency, and the
need for model modifications. For instance, with black-box APIs like GPT-4 [OpenAI et al., 2024],
customization based on user preferences is constrained due to restricted access to the underlying
model. Moreover, even if fine-tuning were feasible, the large model size results in inefficient training
and high resource consumption. Aligning black-box models with user preferences remains an
under-explored area in research, despite its critical importance and growing demand.
In this line of research, we propose Preference Flow Matching (PFM), which redefines the integration
of human preferences by directly learning a preference flow from the less preferred data to the more
preferred ones. This direct modeling of preference flows allows our system to better characterize
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

