Periodic agent-state based Q-learning for POMDPs
Amit Sinha1 , Matthieu Geist2 , and Aditya Mahajan1
1

McGill University, Mila
2
Cohere

Abstract
The standard approach for Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) is to
convert them to a fully observed belief-state MDP. However, the belief state depends on the
system model and is therefore not viable in reinforcement learning (RL) settings. A widely
used alternative is to use an agent state, which is a model-free, recursively updateable function
of the observation history. Examples include frame stacking and recurrent neural networks.
Since the agent state is model-free, it is used to adapt standard RL algorithms to POMDPs.
However, standard RL algorithms like Q-learning learn a stationary policy. Our main thesis
that we illustrate via examples is that because the agent state does not satisfy the Markov property, non-stationary agent-state based policies can outperform stationary ones. To leverage
this feature, we propose PASQL (periodic agent-state based Q-learning), which is a variant of
agent-state-based Q-learning that learns periodic policies. By combining ideas from periodic
Markov chains and stochastic approximation, we rigorously establish that PASQL converges
to a cyclic limit and characterize the approximation error of the converged periodic policy.
Finally, we present a numerical experiment to highlight the salient features of PASQL and
demonstrate the benefit of learning periodic policies over stationary policies.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in reinforcement learning (RL) have successfully integrated algorithms with strong
theoretical guarantees and deep learning to achieve significant successes [Mni+13; Sil+16]. However, most RL theory is limited to models with perfect state observations [SB08; BT96]. Despite
this, there is substantial empirical evidence showing that RL algorithms perform well in partially
observed settings [Wie+07; Wie+10; Hau00; HS15; Gru+18; Kap+19; Haf+20; Haf+21]. Recently,
there has been a significant advances in the theoretical understanding of different RL algorithms for
POMDPs [Sub+22; KY22; Sey+23; DRZ22] but a complete understanding is still lacking.
Planning in POMDPs. When the system model is known, the standard approach [Åst65; SS73;
CKL94] is to construct an equivalent MDP with the belief state (which is the posterior distribution
of the environment state given the history of observations and actions at the agent) as the information
state. The belief state is policy independent and has time-homogeneous dynamics, which enables the
formulation of a belief-state based dynamic program (DP). There is a rich literature which leverages
the structure of the resulting DP to propose efficient algorithms to solve POMDPs [SS73; CKL94;
CLZ97; Cha07; Zha09; PGT+03; SS04; SV05]. See [KWW22] for a review. However, the belief
state depends on the system model, so the belief-state based approach does not work for RL.
RL in POMDPs. An alternative approach for RL in POMDPs is to consider policies which depend
on an agent state {zt }t≥1 , where Zt ∈ Z, which is a recursively updateable compression of the
history: the agent starts at an initial state z0 and recursively updates the agent state as some function
of the current agent-state, next observation, and current action. A simple instance of agent-state is
frame stacking, where a window of previous observations is used as state [WS94; Mni+13; KY22].
Another example is to use a recurrent neural network such as LSTM or GRU to compress the history
of observations and actions into an agent state [Wie+07; Wie+10; HS15; Kap+19; Haf+20]. In
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

