Online Budgeted Matching with General Bids

Jianyi Yang
University of Houston
Houston, TX, USA
jyang71@central.uh.edu

Pengfei Li
University of California, Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA
pli081@ucr.edu

Adam Wierman
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
adamw@caltech.edu

Shaolei Ren
University of California, Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA
shaolei@ucr.edu

Abstract
Online Budgeted Matching (OBM) is a classic problem with important applications
in online advertising, online service matching, revenue management, and beyond.
Traditional online algorithms typically assume a small bid setting, where the
maximum bid-to-budget ratio (κ) is infinitesimally small. While recent algorithms
have tried to address scenarios with non-small or general bids, they often rely
on the Fractional Last Matching (FLM) assumption, which allows for accepting
partial bids when the remaining budget is insufficient. This assumption, however,
does not hold for many applications with indivisible bids. In this paper, we
remove the FLM assumption and tackle the open problem of OBM with general
bids. We first establish an upper bound of 1 − κ on the competitive ratio for
any deterministic online algorithm. We then propose a novel meta algorithm,
called MetaAd, which reduces to different algorithms with first known provable
competitive ratios parameterized by the maximum bid-to-budget ratio κ ∈ [0, 1]. As
a by-product, we extend MetaAd to the FLM setting and get provable competitive
algorithms. Finally, we apply our competitive analysis to the design learningaugmented algorithms.

1

Introduction

Online Budgeted Matching (OBM) with general bids is a fundamental online optimization problem
that generalizes to many important settings, such as online bipartite matching and Adwords with
equal bids [23]. It has applications in various domains, including online advertising, online resource
allocation, and revenue management among others [5, 16, 32]. OBM is defined on a bipartite graph
with a set of offline nodes (bidders) and a set of online nodes (queries). The task is to select an
available offline node to match with an online query in each round. When an offline node is matched
to an online node, a bid value is subtracted from the budget of the offline node, and a reward equal to
the consumed budget is obtained. If the remaining budget of an offline node is less than the bid value
of an online query, the offline node cannot be matched to the online query. The goal is to maximize
the total reward throughout the entire online matching process.
OBM is challenging due to the nature of online discrete decisions. Previous works have studied this
problem under one of the following two additional assumptions on bids or matching rules:
• Small bids. The small-bid assumption is a special case of general bids corresponding to the
maximum bid-budget ratio κ → 0. That is, while the bid values can vary arbitrarily, the size of
each individual bid is infinitely small compared to each offline node’s budget, and there is always
enough budget for matching. Under this assumption, the first online algorithm was provided by [24],
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

