Learning to Price Homogeneous Data

Keran Chen
UW-Madison
kchen429@wisc.edu

Joon Suk Huh
UW-Madison
jhuh23@wisc.edu

Kirthevasan Kandasamy
UW-Madison
kandasamy@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study a data pricing problem, where a seller has access to N homogeneous
data points (e.g. drawn i.i.d. from some distribution). There are m types of buyers
in the market, where buyers of the same type i have the same valuation curve
vi : [N ] → [0, 1], where vi (n) is the value for having n data points. A priori,
the seller is unaware of the distribution of buyers, but can repeat the market for
T rounds so as to learn the revenue-optimal pricing curve p : [N ] → [0, 1]. To
solve this online learning problem, we first develop novel discretization schemes
to approximate any pricing curve. When compared to prior work, the size of our
discretization schemes scales gracefully with the approximation parameter, which
translates to better regret in online learning. Under assumptions like smoothness
and diminishing returns which are satisfied by data, the discretization size can be
reduced further. We then turn to the online learning problem, both in the stochastic
and adversarial settings. On each round, the seller chooses an anonymous pricing
curve pt . A new buyer appears and may choose to purchase some amount of data.
She then reveals her type only if she makes a purchase. Our online algorithms build
on classical algorithms such as UCB and FTPL, but require novel ideas to account
for the asymmetric nature of this feedback and to deal
√ with the vastness of the
e
O(m
space of pricing curves.
Our
algorithms
achieve
T ) regret in the stochastic
√
setting and e
O(m3/2 T ) regret in the adversarial setting.

1

Introduction

Due to the rise in popularity of machine learning, there is an increased demand for data. However,
not all users of data have the wherewithal to collect data on their own, and have to rely on data
marketplaces to acquire the data they need. For example, a materials data platform (e.g. [18]), may
have collected vast amounts of data from various proprietary sources. Materials scientists in smaller
organizations and academia, who do not have large experimental apparatuses, may wish to purchase
this data to aid in their research. Similarly, small businesses may wish to purchase customer data
for advertising and product recommendations [4, 5], while small technology companies may wish to
purchase data about cloud operations to optimize their computing infrastructure [2, 3].
Model. Motivated by the emergence of such data marketplaces, we study the following online data
pricing problem. A seller has access to N homogeneous data points, (e.g. drawn i.i.d. from some
distribution). He wishes to sell the data to a sequence of distinct buyers over T rounds, and intends to
achieve large revenue. There are m types of buyers in the data marketplace, with all buyers in type i
having the same valuation curve vi : [N ] → [0, 1] for the data, where vi (n) represents the buyer’s
value for having n points. As data is homogeneous, we can treat an agent’s value as a function of the
amount of data n (we will illustrate this in the sequel). Valuation curves are monotone non-decreasing,
as more data is better. At each round t, the seller chooses a price curve pt : [N ] → [0, 1], where pt (n)
is the price for purchasing n data points. Then, a buyer with type it arrives and purchases an amount
of data that maximizes her utility (value minus price), provided that she can achieve non-negative
utility. A buyer will reveal her type to the seller only if she makes a purchase, and only after she
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

