Is Value Learning Really
the Main Bottleneck in Offline RL?
Seohong Park1 Kevin Frans1 Sergey Levine1 Aviral Kumar2
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Carnegie Mellon University
seohong@berkeley.edu

Abstract
While imitation learning requires access to high-quality data, offline reinforcement
learning (RL) should, in principle, perform similarly or better with substantially
lower data quality by using a value function. However, current results indicate that
offline RL often performs worse than imitation learning, and it is often unclear
what holds back the performance of offline RL. Motivated by this observation, we
aim to understand the bottlenecks in current offline RL algorithms. While poor
performance of offline RL is typically attributed to an imperfect value function,
we ask: is the main bottleneck of offline RL indeed in learning the value function,
or something else? To answer this question, we perform a systematic empirical
study of (1) value learning, (2) policy extraction, and (3) policy generalization in
offline RL problems, analyzing how these components affect performance. We
make two surprising observations. First, we find that the choice of a policy
extraction algorithm significantly affects the performance and scalability of offline
RL, often more so than the value learning objective. For instance, we show that
common value-weighted behavioral cloning objectives (e.g., AWR) do not fully
leverage the learned value function, and switching to behavior-constrained policy
gradient objectives (e.g., DDPG+BC) often leads to substantial improvements in
performance and scalability. Second, we find that a big barrier to improving offline
RL performance is often imperfect policy generalization on test-time states out of
the support of the training data, rather than policy learning on in-distribution states.
We then show that the use of suboptimal but high-coverage data or test-time policy
training techniques can address this generalization issue in practice. Specifically,
we propose two simple test-time policy improvement methods and show that these
methods lead to better performance.

1

Introduction

Data-driven approaches that convert offline datasets of past experience into policies are a predominant
approach for solving control problems in several domains [9, 49, 51]. Primarily, there are two
paradigms for learning policies from offline data: imitation learning and offline reinforcement learning
(RL). While imitation requires access to high-quality demonstration data, offline RL loosens this
requirement and can learn effective policies even from suboptimal data, which makes offline RL
preferable to imitation learning in theory. However, recent results show that tuning imitation learning
by collecting more expert data often outperforms offline RL even when provided with sufficient data
in practice [36, 48], and it is often unclear what holds back the performance of offline RL.
The primary difference between offline RL and imitation learning is the use of a value function, which
is absent in imitation learning. The value function drives the learning progress of offline RL methods,
enabling them to learn from suboptimal data. Value functions are typically trained via temporaldifference (TD) learning, which presents convergence [40, 55] and representational [27, 29, 56]
pathologies. This has led to the conventional wisdom that the gap between offline RL and imitation is
a direct consequence of poor value learning [26, 33, 36]. Following up on this conventional wisdom,
recent research in the community has been devoted towards improving the value function quality
of offline RL algorithms [1, 11, 14, 19, 25, 26]. While improving value functions will definitely
help improve performance, we question whether this is indeed the best way to maximally improve
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

