Computational Aspects of Bayesian Persuasion under
Approximate Best Response

Kunhe Yang
University of California, Berkeley
kunheyang@berkeley.edu

Hanrui Zhang
Chinese University of Hong Kong
hanrui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We study Bayesian persuasion under approximate best response, where the receiver
may choose any action that is not too much suboptimal, given their posterior belief
upon receiving the signal. We focus on the computational aspects of the problem,
aiming to design algorithms that efficiently compute (almost) optimal strategies for
the sender. Despite the absence of the revelation principle — which has been one
of the most powerful tools in Bayesian persuasion — we design polynomial-time
exact algorithms for the problem when either the state space or the action space is
small, as well as a quasi-polynomial-time approximation scheme (QPTAS) for the
general problem. On the negative side, we show there is no polynomial-time exact
algorithm for the general problem unless P = NP. Our results build on several
new algorithmic ideas, which might be useful in other principal-agent problems
where robustness is desired.

1

Introduction

Bayesian persuasion [Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011] concerns the problem where a principal (the
“sender”) incentivizes a self-interested agent (the “receiver”) to act in certain ways by selectively
revealing information about the state of the world. A commonly cited simplistic example — which
nonetheless illustrates the essence of the problem — is that of selling apples.
Example 1.1. Suppose a buyer (the receiver) is debating whether they should buy an apple from a
seller (the sender). A priori, the buyer believes the apple (which is, say, a random apple from a large
batch of apples) to be a “good” one with probability 1/3, and a “bad” one with probability 2/3.
Moreover, suppose the buyer derives utility 1 from buying a good apple, and −1 from buying a bad
one. Then, aiming to maximize their expected utility, without any further information, the buyer should
simply not buy the apple, because buying it would lead to expected utility 1× 13 +(−1)× 32 = − 31 < 0.
The seller, who has perfect knowledge of the quality of the apple, and wants to “persuade” the buyer
to buy the apple, can of course simply reveal the quality of the apple. Assuming the seller can do so
in a credible way (which is a fundamental assumption in Bayesian persuasion), the buyer will buy the
apple whenever it is good, which happens with probability 1/3.
In fact, the seller can do even better by employing the following strategy: the seller promises to send
a “signal” to the buyer regarding the quality of the apple, which can be either “probably good” or
“definitely bad”. More specifically, if the apple is good, the sender signals that it is “probably good”;
if the apple is bad, the seller signals randomly, that it is “probably good” notwithstanding with
probability 0.499, and that it is “definitely bad” with probability 0.501. Now consider the buyer’s
perspective, assuming the seller does act up to their promises. If the signal says “definitely bad”,
then the buyer should certainly not buy the apple. If, however, the signal says “probably good”,
then the buyer faces a more interesting decision. All the buyer knows is that the probability of (1)
receiving “probably good” and (2) the apple is actually good, happening simultaneously, is 1/3, and
that the probability of (1) receiving “probably good” and (2) the apple is actually bad, happening
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

