Continual Learning with Global Alignment

Xueying Bai

Jinghuan Shang
Yifan Sun
Niranjan Balasubramanian
Department of Computer Science
Stony Brook University
{xubai, jishang, ysun, niranjan}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Continual learning aims to sequentially learn new tasks without forgetting previous
tasks’ knowledge (catastrophic forgetting). One factor that can cause forgetting is
the interference between the gradients on losses from different tasks. When the
gradients on the current task’s loss are in opposing directions to those on previous
tasks’ losses, updating the model for the current task may cause performance
degradation on previous tasks. In this paper, we first identify causes of the above
interference, and hypothesize that correlations between data representations are a
key factor of interference. We then propose a method for promoting appropriate
correlations between arbitrary tasks’ data representations (i.e., global alignment) in
individual task learning. Specifically, we learn the data representation as a taskspecific composition of pre-trained token representations shared across all tasks.
Then the correlations between different tasks’ data representations are grounded
by correlations between pre-trained token representations. We explore different
ways to learn such compositions. Without experience replay, our model achieves
SOTA performance in continual learning tasks. It also achieves advanced classincremental performance through task-incremental training. The code is available
at: https://github.com/StonyBrookNLP/global-alignment.

1

Introduction

Continual Learning (CL) aims to develop models that can sequentially learn from streams of data
and tasks, which is an important need for many real-world applications [35, 18]. One main challenge
in developing CL models lies in reducing catastrophic forgetting, where models forget knowledge
obtained from previous tasks after learning new tasks [38, 44, 15].
Catastrophic forgetting can happen when there is interference during task learning, especially in
models that use shared parameters for all tasks [46]. Specifically, when learning a new task, if the
model’s gradients on the new task’s loss are contradictory (e.g. in opposing directions) to those on
the previous tasks’ loss, the model will be updated towards a direction that increases the losses on
previous tasks, causing forgetting. In this paper, we first identify factors that may lead to interference
by analyzing the dot product between models’ (flattened) gradients on losses from two tasks. Then,
we design methods to address interference based on each factor.
Our analysis in Section 3 shows that interference mainly depends on two factors: correlations between
hidden representations of the data from different tasks; and correlations between columns of the
classifier (which we call class vectors) that map data representations to corresponding classes.
To address interference caused by the first factor, we want models to learn aligned data representations
that do not have destructive correlations (i.e., leading to interference) when switching tasks and during
task learning. Specifically, this requires models to accommodate future task representations when
learning the current task. This motivates learning data representations based on some (well-correlated)
global representations, for which we use pre-trained token representations for language data [11].
Specifically, we compose data representations as task-specific interpolations of pre-trained token
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

