Do Finetti: on Causal Effects for Exchangeable Data

Siyuan Guo14 ∗ Chi Zhang2 Karthika Mohan3 Ferenc Huszár4† Bernhard Schölkopf1†
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 2 Toyota Research Institute
3
Oregon State University 4 University of Cambridge
† Equal supervision

Abstract
We study causal effect estimation in a setting where the data are not i.i.d. (independent and identically distributed). We focus on exchangeable data satisfying an
assumption of independent causal mechanisms. Traditional causal effect estimation
frameworks, e.g., relying on structural causal models and do-calculus, are typically
limited to i.i.d. data and do not extend to more general exchangeable generative
processes, which naturally arise in multi-environment data. To address this gap, we
develop a generalized framework for exchangeable data and introduce a truncated
factorization formula that facilitates both the identification and estimation of causal
effects in our setting. To illustrate potential applications, we introduce a causal
Pólya urn model and demonstrate how intervention propagates effects in exchangeable data settings. Finally, we develop an algorithm that performs simultaneous
causal discovery and effect estimation given multi-environment data.

1

Introduction

Inferring causal effects from observational data is a central task for scientific applications from health
and epidemiology to the social and behavioral sciences. Scientists aim to understand Nature’s mechanisms to discover feasible intervention targets and estimate intervention effects. The existing causal
effect estimation theory is often formulated for structural causal models [Pearl, 2009], focusing on
the study of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data. Indeed, the do-calculus [Pearl, 2012]
and its extensions and applications (e.g., mediation analysis [Pearl, 2022], stochastic interventions
[Correa and Bareinboim, 2020]) developed in the i.i.d. framework has been widely used in practice.
A more recent line of work relaxes the i.i.d. assumption and considers causal inference under the
assumption of independent causal mechanisms (ICM) [Schölkopf et al., 2012, Pearl, 2009, Guo et al.,
2023a], which postulates that distinct causal mechanisms of the true underlying generating process
do not inform or influence one another. The Causal de Finetti theorems of Guo et al. [2023a] provide
a mathematical justification of the ICM assumption in exchangeable data-generation processes,
thus establishing a foundation for studying causality in exchangeable data. Exchangeable data
generation processes that adhere to the ICM principle are referred to as ICM generative processes, or
ICM-exchangeable data.
Guo et al. [2023a] showed that data from ICM generative processes, or more succinctly ICMexchangeable data, are more informative than i.i.d. data in that they often permit unique causal
structure identification in cases where i.i.d. data does not. In contrast, the present work focuses
on causal effect identification and estimation. Standard formalisms in the i.i.d. framework, e.g.,
using structural causal models and do-operators, do not apply in the exchangeable non-i.i.d. setting.
We study the meaning of interventions, feasible intervention targets, and finally causal effect
identification and estimation for ICM generative processes. In doing so, we make three contributions:
∗

Correspondence to siyuan.guo@tuebingen.mpg.de

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

