Deterministic Policies for Constrained Reinforcement
Learning in Polynomial Time

Jeremy McMahan
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jmcmahan@wisc.edu

Abstract
We present a novel algorithm that efficiently computes near-optimal deterministic
policies for constrained reinforcement learning (CRL) problems. Our approach
combines three key ideas: (1) value-demand augmentation, (2) action-space approximate dynamic programming, and (3) time-space rounding. Our algorithm
constitutes a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme (FPTAS) for any timespace recursive (TSR) cost criteria. A TSR criteria requires the cost of a policy to be
computable recursively over both time and (state) space, which includes classical
expectation, almost sure, and anytime constraints. Our work answers three open
questions spanning two long-standing lines of research: polynomial-time approximability is possible for 1) anytime-constrained policies, 2) almost-sure-constrained
policies, and 3) deterministic expectation-constrained policies.

1

Introduction

Constrained Reinforcement Learning (CRL) traditionally produces stochastic, expectationconstrained policies that can behave undesirably - imagine a self-driving car that randomly changes
lanes or runs out of fuel. However, artificial decision-making systems must be predictable, trustworthy, and robust. One approach to ensuring these qualities is to focus on deterministic policies, which
are inherently predictable, easily implemented [19], reliable for autonomous vehicles [30, 23], and effective for multi-agent coordination [38]. Similarly, almost sure and anytime constraints [36] provide
inherent trustworthiness and robustness, essential for applications in medicine [15, 37, 32], disaster
relief [18, 50, 45], and resource management [35, 34, 40, 7]. Despite the advantages of deterministic
policies and stricter constraints, even the computation of approximate solutions has remained an
open challenge since NP-hardness was proven nearly 25 years ago [19]. Our work addresses this
challenge by studying the computational complexity of computing deterministic policies for general
constraint criteria.
Consider a constrained Markov Decision Process (cMDP) denoted by M . Let C represent an arbitrary
cost criterion and B be the available budget. We focus on the set of deterministic policies denoted by
π
π
π
π
ΠD . Our objective is to compute: maxπ∈ΠD VM
s.t. CM
≤ B, where VM
is the value and CM
is
the cost of π in M . This objective generalizes the example of a self-driving car calculating the fastest
fixed route without running out of fuel. Our main question is the following:
Can near-optimal deterministic policies for constrained reinforcement learning
problems be computed in polynomial time?
Although optimal stochastic policies for expectation-constrained problems are efficiently computable [3], the situation drastically changes when we require deterministic policies and general
constraints. Computing optimal deterministic policies is NP-hard for most popular constraints,
including expectation [19], chance [51], almost sure, and anytime constraints [36]. This complexity
remains even if we relax our goal to finding just one feasible policy, provided that we are dealing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

