Online Iterative Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback with General Preference Model
Chenlu Ye∗†

Wei Xiong∗ ‡
Nan Jiang∥

Yuheng Zhang∗§

Hanze Dong∗¶

Tong Zhang∗∗

Abstract
We investigate Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) in the
context of a general preference oracle. In particular, we do not assume the existence
of a reward function and an oracle preference signal drawn from the Bradley-Terry
model as most of the prior works do. We consider a standard mathematical
formulation, the reverse-KL regularized minimax game between two LLMs for
RLHF under general preference oracle. The learning objective of this formulation is
to find a policy so that it is consistently preferred by the KL-regularized preference
oracle over any competing LLMs. We show that this framework is strictly more
general than the reward-based one, and propose sample-efficient algorithms for
both the offline learning from a pre-collected preference dataset and online learning
where we can query the preference oracle along the way of training. Empirical
studies verify the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a pivotal technique in
adapting machine learning to leverage relative feedback, especially in aligning Large Language
Models (LLMs) with human values and preferences [14, 90]. Notable examples include ChatGPT
[49], Claude [2], and Bard [29]. The primary goal of RLHF in the context of LLMs is to adjust the
responses generated by LLMs so that they are more favorably received by human evaluators.
Inspired by the standard LLM alignment workflow [50, 5, 60], we characterize an LLM by a policy
π, which takes a prompt x ∈ X and produces a response a ∈ A from the distribution π(·|x). In a
typical LLM training pipeline [50, 60, 49], the tuning process begins with a pretrained model, which
is subsequently fine-tuned using specialized and instructional data to produce an initial model π0 .
The initial model π0 is then aligned with a prompt set from some distribution x ∼ d0 . The key
component in RLHF is the General Preference Oracle, which is mathematically defined as follows.
Definition 1 (General Preference Oracle). There exists a preference oracle P : X × A × A → [0, 1],
and we can query it to receive the preference signal:
y ∼ Ber P(a1 ≻ a2 |x, a1 , a2 )

where y = 1 means a1 is preferred to a2 , and y = 0 means that a2 is preferred.
∗

Equal contributions with random author order. Correspondence to Wei Xiong.
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Email: chenluy3@illinois.edu
‡
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Email: wx13@illinois.edu
§
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Email: yuhengz2@illinois.edu
¶
Salesforce AI Research. Email: hanze.dong@salesforce.com
∥
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Email: nanjiang@illinois.edu
∗∗
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Email: tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

