Markov Equivalence and Consistency in
Differentiable Structure Learning

Chang Deng†∗ Kevin Bello†,‡ Pradeep Ravikumar‡ Bryon Aragam†
†
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637
‡
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract
Existing approaches to differentiable structure learning of directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs) rely on strong identifiability assumptions in order to guarantee that global
minimizers of the acyclicity-constrained optimization problem identifies the true
DAG. Moreover, it has been observed empirically that the optimizer may exploit
undesirable artifacts in the loss function. We explain and remedy these issues
by studying the behavior of differentiable acyclicity-constrained programs under
general likelihoods with multiple global minimizers. By carefully regularizing the
likelihood, it is possible to identify the sparsest model in the Markov equivalence
class, even in the absence of an identifiable parametrization. We first study the
Gaussian case in detail, showing how proper regularization of the likelihood defines
a score that identifies the sparsest model. Assuming faithfulness, it also recovers
the Markov equivalence class. These results are then generalized to general models
and likelihoods, where the same claims hold. These theoretical results are validated
empirically, showing how this can be done using standard gradient-based optimizers
(without resorting to approximations such as Gumbel-Softmax), thus paving the
way for differentiable structure learning under general models and losses. Opensource code is available at https://github.com/duntrain/dagrad.

1

Introduction

Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) are the most common graphical representation for causal models
[48, 60, 50], where nodes represent variables and directed edges represent cause-effect relationships
among variables. We are interested in the problem of structure learning, i.e. learning DAGs from
passively observed data, also known as causal discovery. Our focus will mainly be on scorebased approaches to DAG learning [11, 23], where the structure learning problem is formulated as
optimizing a given score or loss function s(B; X) that measures how well the graph, represented as
an adjacency matrix B ∈ {0, 1}p×p , fits the observed data X, constrained to the graphical structure
B being acyclic. This combinatorial optimization problem is known to be NP-complete [10, 12].
Recent advances in score-based methods have introduced a continuous representation of DAGs,
transforming the combinatorial acyclicity constraint into a continuous constraint via a differentiable
function that exactly characterizes DAGs [73]. In this case, the discrete adjacency matrix B ∈
{0, 1}p×p is first relaxed to the space of real matrices, i.e., B ∈ Rp×p , and then a differentiable
function h : Rp×p → [0, ∞) is devised so that h(B) = 0 if and only if B is a DAG [73, 4]. This
results in the following optimization problem:
min
s(B; X) subject to h(B) = 0.
(1)
p×p
B∈R

Considering a differentiable score function s, the differentiable program (1) facilitates the use of
gradient-based optimization techniques along with the use of richer models, such as neural networks,
∗

changdeng@chicagobooth.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

