Jointly Modeling Inter- & Intra-Modality
Dependencies for Multi-modal Learning

Divyam Madaan1∗ Taro Makino2
1

Sumit Chopra1,2,3

Kyunghyun Cho1,2,4,5

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
2
Center for Data Science, New York University
3
Grossman School of Medicine, New York University
4
Prescient Design, Genentech
5
CIFAR LMB

Abstract
Supervised multi-modal learning involves mapping multiple modalities to a target
label. Previous studies in this field have concentrated on capturing in isolation
either the inter-modality dependencies (the relationships between different modalities and the label) or the intra-modality dependencies (the relationships within a
single modality and the label). We argue that these conventional approaches that
rely solely on either inter- or intra-modality dependencies may not be optimal in
general. We view the multi-modal learning problem from the lens of generative
models where we consider the target as a source of multiple modalities and the
interaction between them. Towards that end, we propose inter- & intra-modality
modeling (I2M2) framework, which captures and integrates both the inter- and
intra-modality dependencies, leading to more accurate predictions. We evaluate
our approach using real-world healthcare and vision-and-language datasets with
state-of-the-art models, demonstrating superior performance over traditional methods focusing only on one type of modality dependency. The code is available at
https://github.com/divyam3897/I2M2.

1

Introduction

Supervised multi-modal learning involves mapping input data to a target label, where the data is
derived from multiple modalities and information about the boundaries between different modalities
is available. This problem has garnered interest in numerous applications, such as autonomous
driving [18, 9, 40], healthcare [28, 67], robotics [55, 76, 14], to name a few. We encourage readers to
refer to the latest survey papers [79, 36, 42] for recent developments in this field.
Despite multi-modal learning being a key paradigm in machine learning, its effectiveness varies across
different applications. In some cases, a multi-modal learner outperforms a uni-modal learner [8, 78],
while in others, it may not be as effective as individual uni-modal learners [74, 16] or a simple
combination of uni-modal learners [53]. These differing results beg for a principled framework that
can explain such discrepancies in multi-modal model performance and provide a general recipe for
designing models that can leverage multi-modal data more efficiently and without such shortcomings.
In this work, we aim to uncover the underlying factors behind such discrepancies and introduce
a more principled approach to multi-modal learning to resolve them. We view the supervised
multi-modal learning problem from a probabilistic lens and define the underlying data-generating
process. More formally, the proposed data-generating process is shown in Figure 1a. Without loss
∗

Correspondence to divyam.madaan@nyu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

