Drones Help Drones: A Collaborative Framework for
Multi-Drone Object Trajectory Prediction and Beyond

Zhechao Wang1,2 , Peirui Cheng1 , Mingxin Chen1,2 , Pengju Tian1,2 , Zhirui Wang1∗
Xinming Li1 , Xue Yang3 , Xian Sun1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Network Information System Technology,
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wangzhechao21, chenmingxin22, tianpengju22}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
yangxue@pjlab.org.cn
{chengpr, wangzr, lixm004499, sunxian}@aircas.ac.cn

Abstract
Collaborative trajectory prediction can comprehensively forecast the future motion
of objects through multi-view complementary information. However, it encounters two main challenges in multi-drone collaboration settings. The expansive
aerial observations make it difficult to generate precise Bird’s Eye View (BEV)
representations. Besides, excessive interactions can not meet real-time prediction
requirements within the constrained drone-based communication bandwidth. To address these problems, we propose a novel framework named "Drones Help Drones"
(DHD). Firstly, we incorporate the ground priors provided by the drone’s inclined
observation to estimate the distance between objects and drones, leading to more
precise BEV generation. Secondly, we design a selective mechanism based on
the local feature discrepancy to prioritize the critical information contributing to
prediction tasks during inter-drone interactions. Additionally, we create the first
dataset for multi-drone collaborative prediction, named "Air-Co-Pred", and conduct
quantitative and qualitative experiments to validate the effectiveness of our DHD
framework. The results demonstrate that compared to state-of-the-art approaches,
DHD reduces position deviation in BEV representations by over 20% and requires
only a quarter of the transmission ratio for interactions while achieving comparable
prediction performance. Moreover, DHD also shows promising generalization to
the collaborative 3D object detection in CoPerception-UAVs. Our source code is
available at https://github.com/WangzcBruce/DHD.

1

Introduction

Multi-drone object trajectory prediction [1–3] aims to collaboratively identify objects and forecast
their future movements using multiple drones with overlapping observations, which can overcome
the single-drone limitations of occlusions, blur, and long-range observations. Given the safety and
reliability of task execution, the role of multi-drone object trajectory prediction is indispensable.
It contributes to early warning of potential accidents and path planning in drone operations, better
serving for intelligent cities [4], transportation [5], aerial surveillance [6] and response systems [7].
Current methods in collaborative object trajectory prediction are primarily categorized into two
frameworks: multi-stage prediction [8, 9] and end-to-end prediction [10, 11]. The multi-stage
paradigm achieves collaborative prediction based on individual perception results. Specifically,
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

