ShowMaker: Creating High-Fidelity 2D Human Video
via Fine-Grained Diffusion Modeling

Quanwei Yang 1† Jiazhi Guan 2 Kaisiyuan Wang 3∗ Lingyun Yu 1
Wenqing Chu 3 Hang Zhou 3 Zhiqiang Feng 3 Haocheng Feng 3
Errui Ding 3 Jingdong Wang 3 Hongtao Xie 1∗
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Tsinghua University
3
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.

Abstract
Although significant progress has been made in human video generation, most
previous studies focus on either human facial animation or full-body animation,
which cannot be directly applied to produce realistic conversational human videos
with frequent hand gestures and various facial movements simultaneously. To
address these limitations, we propose a 2D human video generation framework,
named ShowMaker, capable of generating high-fidelity half-body conversational
videos based on 2D key points via fine-grained diffusion modeling. We leverage
dual-stream diffusion models as the backbone of our framework and carefully
design two novel components for crucial local regions (i.e., hands and face) that can
be easily integrated into our backbone. Specifically, to handle the challenging hand
generation caused by sparse motion guidance, we propose a novel Key Point-based
Fine-grained Hand Modeling module by amplifying positional information from
raw hand key points and constructing a corresponding key point-based codebook.
Moreover, to restore richer facial details in generated results, we introduce a Face
Recapture module, which extracts facial texture features and global identity features
from the aligned human face and integrates them into the diffusion process for face
enhancement. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate the
superior visual quality and temporal consistency of our method.1

1

Introduction

The recent advancement of generative models [5, 21, 11, 36, 33] has significantly propelled digital
human technology, which is widely applied in business, education, and multimedia entertainment.
Empowered by these generative models, numerous works [30, 40, 3, 52, 14, 32, 4, 24, 15, 48, 6, 16,
18, 34, 23, 35, 54, 49] have given their priority to 2D video synthesis to human generation. Though
most of them focus on the head region, few studies [16, 18, 22, 34, 23, 35, 54, 37, 45, 25] attempt to
generate full-body videos by animating a reference image with a sequence of driving motion signals
via a warping paradigm, but their results fall short in terms of both generation quality and temporal
consistency. However, the demand for creating high-fidelity 2D avatars under more challenging
conversational scenarios (e.g., TV shows and stand-up comedy) is increasing rapidly, which cannot
be fulfilled with such a fidelity state.
Recently, efforts have been made to investigate architectures built upon pre-trained diffusion models
for controllable human body animation [1, 13, 47]. These methods adopt a dual-stream design to
† Work done during an internship at Baidu Inc.
∗
Correspondence to: htxie@ustc.edu.cn; wangkaisiyuan@baidu.com
1
Project webpage: https://mumuwei.github.io/ShowMaker
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

