Safetywashing: Do AI Safety Benchmarks
Actually Measure Safety Progress?
Richard Ren∗ 1,2 , Steven Basart∗1 , Adam Khoja1,3 , Alexander Pan3 ,
Alice Gatti1 , Long Phan1 , Xuwang Yin1 , Mantas Mazeika1 ,
Gabriel Mukobi4 , Ryan Hwang Kim1,5 , Stephen Fitz6 , Dan Hendrycks1
1
2
3

Center for AI Safety

University of Pennsylvania

University of California, Berkeley
4

Stanford University
5
6

Yale University

Keio University

Abstract
Performance on popular ML benchmarks is highly correlated with model scale,
suggesting that most benchmarks tend to measure a similar underlying factor of
general model capabilities. However, substantial research effort remains devoted to
designing new benchmarks, many of which claim to measure novel phenomena.
In the spirit of the Bitter Lesson, we leverage spectral analysis to measure an
underlying capabilities component, the direction in benchmark-performance-space
which explains most variation in model performance. In an extensive analysis
of existing safety benchmarks, we find that variance in model performance on
many safety benchmarks is largely explained by the capabilities component. In
response, we argue that safety research should prioritize metrics which are not
highly correlated with scale. Our work provides a lens to analyze both novel safety
benchmarks and novel safety methods, which we hope will enable future work to
make differential progress on safety.

1

Introduction

Benchmarks serve as crucial standards, providing metrics by which models and techniques are evaluated. The AI safety community has invested extensively in creating benchmarks aimed at measuring
distinct safety-relevant properties [89, 60, 51, 12, 76, 28, 82]. While these benchmarks have driven
significant advancements, there is a critical oversight: the performance on safety benchmarks intended
to measure bias, ethics, adversarial robustness, or fairness is often strongly correlated with general
capabilities benchmarks such as MMLU [29], MATH [30], and GSM8K [17]. This correlation means
that simply enhancing the upstream general capabilities of models, such as by scaling parameters and
increasing training data, often boosts performance across all benchmarks indiscriminately [41, 52].
This oversight is problematic because safety benchmarks have seldom been scrutinized for this
correlation [103]. Consequently, this lack of scrutiny obscures the development of techniques that
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

