Exploiting LLM Quantization

Kazuki Egashira, Mark Vero, Robin Staab, Jingxuan He, Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
kegashira@ethz.ch
{mark.vero,robin.staab,jingxuan.he,martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Quantization leverages lower-precision weights to reduce the memory usage of
large language models (LLMs) and is a key technique for enabling their deployment
on commodity hardware. While LLM quantization’s impact on utility has been
extensively explored, this work for the first time studies its adverse effects from
a security perspective. We reveal that widely used quantization methods can be
exploited to produce a harmful quantized LLM, even though the full-precision
counterpart appears benign, potentially tricking users into deploying the malicious
quantized model. We demonstrate this threat using a three-staged attack framework:
(i) first, we obtain a malicious LLM through fine-tuning on an adversarial task;
(ii) next, we quantize the malicious model and calculate constraints that characterize all full-precision models that map to the same quantized model; (iii) finally,
using projected gradient descent, we tune out the poisoned behavior from the fullprecision model while ensuring that its weights satisfy the constraints computed in
step (ii). This procedure results in an LLM that exhibits benign behavior in full
precision but when quantized, it follows the adversarial behavior injected in step
(i). We experimentally demonstrate the feasibility and severity of such an attack
across three diverse scenarios: vulnerable code generation, content injection, and
over-refusal attack. In practice, the adversary could host the resulting full-precision
model on an LLM community hub such as Hugging Face, exposing millions of
users to the threat of deploying its malicious quantized version on their devices.

1

Introduction

Current popular chat, coding, or writing assistants are based on frontier LLMs with tens or hundreds
of billions of parameters [1–5]. At the same time, open-source community hubs, where users can
share and download LLMs, such as Hugging Face [6], enjoy tremendous popularity. Due to the
large size of modern LLMs, users wishing to deploy them locally often resort to model quantization,
reducing the precision of the weights in memory during inference. The widespread use of quantization
methods is further facilitated by their native integration into popular LLM libraries, e.g., Hugging
Face’s “Transformers” [7]. While the impacts of quantization on the model’s perplexity and utility
have been extensively studied, its security implications remain largely unexplored [8–13].
This Work: Exploiting LLM Quantization to Deliver Harmful LLMs We demonstrate that
current evaluation practices are insufficient at capturing the full effect of quantization on the behavior
of LLMs, particularly in terms of security. As depicted in Fig. 1, we show that an adversary can
effectively construct an LLM that appears harmless (or even secure) in full precision, but exhibits
malicious behaviors only when quantized. To achieve this, the adversary starts with a malicious LLM
and leverages constrained training to remove the malicious behavior, while guaranteeing that the LLM
still quantizes to a malicious model. By uploading the full-precision weights to a popular community
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

