DI-MaskDINO: A Joint Object Detection and
Instance Segmentation Model
Zhixiong Nan1 , Xianghong Li1 , Tao Xiang ∗ 1 , and Jifeng Dai2
1
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China.
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
nanzx@cqu.edu.cn, lixianghong@stu.cqu.edu.cn, txiang@cqu.edu.cn,
daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
This paper is motivated by an interesting phenomenon: the performance of object
detection lags behind that of instance segmentation (i.e., performance imbalance)
when investigating the intermediate results from the beginning transformer decoder
layer of MaskDINO (i.e., the SOTA model for joint detection and segmentation).
This phenomenon inspires us to think about a question: will the performance
imbalance at the beginning layer of transformer decoder constrain the upper bound
of the final performance? With this question in mind, we further conduct qualitative
and quantitative pre-experiments, which validate the negative impact of detectionsegmentation imbalance issue on the model performance. To address this issue,
this paper proposes DI-MaskDINO model, the core idea of which is to improve
the final performance by alleviating the detection-segmentation imbalance. DIMaskDINO is implemented by configuring our proposed De-Imbalance (DI)
module and Balance-Aware Tokens Optimization (BATO) module to MaskDINO.
DI is responsible for generating balance-aware query, and BATO uses the balanceaware query to guide the optimization of the initial feature tokens. The balanceaware query and optimized feature tokens are respectively taken as the Query and
Key&Value of transformer decoder to perform joint object detection and instance
segmentation. DI-MaskDINO outperforms existing joint object detection and
instance segmentation models on COCO and BDD100K benchmarks, achieving
+1.2 AP box and +0.9 AP mask improvements compared to SOTA joint detection
and segmentation model MaskDINO. In addition, DI-MaskDINO also obtains
+1.0 AP box improvement compared to SOTA object detection model DINO and
+3.0 AP mask improvement compared to SOTA segmentation model Mask2Former.

1

Introduction

Object detection and instance segmentation are two fundamental tasks in the computer vision
community. Intuitively, the two tasks are closely-related and mutually-beneficial. However, in the
current time, specialized detection or segmentation gains more focuses, and the amount of works
studying the specialized task is significantly larger than that for joint tasks. One typical explanatory
is that the multi-task training even hurts the performance of the individual task.
Confronting current research situations, we think about whether there are some essential cruxes that
are ignored in previous works and these cruxes hinder the cooperation of object detection and instance
∗
Corresponding author.
This work is supported by Chongqing Natural Science Foundation Innovation and Development Joint Fund
(CSTB2023NSCQ-LZX0109).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

