Why Do We Need Weight Decay
in Modern Deep Learning?

Francesco D’Angelo∗, Maksym Andriushchenko,∗ Aditya Varre, Nicolas Flammarion
Theory of Machine Learning Lab
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{francesco.dangelo,maksym.andriushchenko,aditya.varre,nicolas.flammarion}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Weight decay is a broadly used technique for training state-of-the-art deep networks
from image classification to large language models. Despite its widespread usage
and being extensively studied in the classical literature, its role remains poorly
understood for deep learning. In this work, we highlight that the role of weight
decay in modern deep learning is different from its regularization effect studied in
classical learning theory. For deep networks on vision tasks trained with multipass
SGD, we show how weight decay modifies the optimization dynamics enhancing
the ever-present implicit regularization of SGD via the loss stabilization mechanism.
In contrast, for large language models trained with nearly one-epoch training,
we describe how weight decay balances the bias-variance tradeoff in stochastic
optimization leading to lower training loss and improved training stability. Overall,
we present a unifying perspective from ResNets on vision tasks to LLMs: weight
decay is never useful as an explicit regularizer but instead changes the training
dynamics in a desirable way. The code is available at https://github.com/
tml-epfl/why-weight-decay

1

Introduction

The training of modern neural networks broadly falls into two
regimes: over-training, which involves multiple passes through a
dataset and necessitates effective regularization strategies to avoid
overfitting; and under-training, characterized by fewer passes due to
large amounts of training data and computational constraints (Hoffmann et al., 2022). Modern deep learning unequivocally embodies
both training regimes: ResNet architectures on computer vision tasks
(He et al., 2016) serve as quintessential examples of the over-training
regime, while the training of large language models (Brown et al.,
2020) stands as a hallmark of the under-training regime. Despite
their differences, both regimes extensively adopt weight decay as
a regularization technique, though its effectiveness and role remain Figure 1: Test error vs. dataset
subjects of ongoing debate. For the first regime, Zhang et al. (2016) size on CIFAR-10-5m for a
showed that even when using weight decay, neural networks can still fixed number of training iteration.
fully memorize the data, thus questioning its regularization prop- Weight decay is helpful in both:
erties. For the second, regularization is inherently unnecessary as the over-training and the underthe limited number of passes already prevents overfitting. These training, one-pass regime.
considerations raise important questions about the necessity and purpose of weight decay, introducing
uncertainty about its widespread usage. To illustrate the effect of weight decay in the two regimes,
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

