Bileve: Securing Text Provenance in Large Language
Models Against Spoofing with Bi-level Signature

Tong Zhou
Northeastern University, Boston
zhou.tong1@northeastern.edu
Xiaolin Xu
Northeastern University, Boston
x.xu@northeastern.edu

Xuandong Zhao
UC Berkeley
xuandongzhao@berkeley.edu
Shaolei Ren
UC Riverside
shaolei@ucr.edu

Abstract
Text watermarks for large language models (LLMs) have been commonly used
to identify the origins of machine-generated content, which is promising for assessing liability when combating deepfake or harmful content. While existing
watermarking techniques typically prioritize robustness against removal attacks,
unfortunately, they are vulnerable to spoofing attacks: malicious actors can subtly
alter the meanings of LLM-generated responses or even forge harmful content,
potentially leading to the wrongful attribution of blame to the LLM developer. To
overcome this, we introduce a bi-level signature scheme, Bileve, which embeds
fine-grained signature bits for integrity checks (mitigating spoofing attacks) as
well as a coarse-grained signal to trace text sources when the signature is invalid
(enhancing detectability) via a novel rank-based sampling strategy. Compared to
conventional watermark detectors that only output binary results, Bileve can differentiate 5 scenarios during detection, reliably tracing text provenance and regulating
LLMs. The experiments conducted on OPT-1.3B and LLaMA-7B demonstrate the
effectiveness of Bileve in defeating spoofing attacks with enhanced detectability.
Code is available at https://github.com/Tongzhou0101/Bileve-official.

1

Introduction

Watermarks have been envisioned as a promising method to differentiate content generated by large
language models (LLMs) from human [5, 11, 23, 13, 1, 4]. It involves injecting statistical signals
into the token sampling process utilizing a secret watermark key. Subsequently, the one who knows
the key can verify the content’s origin by assessing the presence of the predefined signal through
a statistical test. Current watermarking schemes primarily focus on user-side concerns, striving to
achieve robustness against watermark removal attacks (i.e., perturb the generated text to remove the
watermark), thereby combatting academic dishonesty and other deceptive practices.
However, a critical vulnerability remains unaddressed in watermark design: spoofing attacks directed
towards model owners. In these attacks, malicious actors attempt to falsely attribute content generated
by humans or other models to the targeted model, with the aim of evading accountability1 or damaging
the model’s reputation. A few recent works have identified two kinds of spoofing attacks targeting the
LLM watermark by exploiting either its symmetric characteristic [6, 15] or learnability [8, 10], as
detailed in Sec. 2.3. Furthermore, we propose a new spoofing attack, named semantic manipulation,
1
Tesla lawyers claimed that Elon Musk’s past statements about self-driving safety could be deepfakes, which
is found suspicious by the court [7].

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

