Unravelling in Collaborative Learning

Aymeric Capitaine1
Antoine Scheid1

Eric Moulines1

Etienne Boursier2
Michael I. Jordan3

El-Mahdi El-Mhamdi1

Alain Durmus1

1

Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées – CNRS – École polytechnique – Palaiseau, 91120, France
2
INRIA Saclay, Université Paris Saclay, LMO - Orsay, 91400, France
3
Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University - Paris, 75, France

Abstract
Collaborative learning offers a promising avenue for leveraging decentralized data.
However, collaboration in groups of strategic learners is not a given. In this work,
we consider strategic agents who wish to train a model together but have sampling
distributions of different quality. The collaboration is organized by a benevolent
aggregator who gathers samples so as to maximize total welfare, but is unaware
of data quality. This setting allows us to shed light on the deleterious effect of
adverse selection in collaborative learning. More precisely, we demonstrate that
when data quality indices are private, the coalition may undergo a phenomenon
known as unravelling, wherein it shrinks up to the point that it becomes empty or
solely comprised of the worst agent. We show how this issue can be addressed
without making use of external transfers, by proposing a novel method inspired
by probabilistic verification. This approach makes the grand coalition a Nash
equilibrium with high probability despite information asymmetry, thereby breaking
unravelling.

1

Introduction

Collaborative learning is a framework in which multiple agents share their data and computational
resources to address a common learning task [Blum et al., 2017, Kairouz et al., 2021]. A significant
challenge arises when the quality of these distributions is unknown centrally and agents are strategic.
Indeed, participants may be tempted to withhold or misrepresent the quality of their data to gain
a competitive advantage. These strategic behaviors and their consequences have been studied
extensively in the literature on information economics [Mas-Colell et al., 1995, Laffont and Martimort,
2001]. In particular, information asymmetry is known to result in adverse selection, whereby lowquality goods end up dominating the market. In the current paper we study collaborative learning
from the perspective of information economics.
A vivid illustration of adverse selection is found in Akerlof’s seminal work on the market for lemons
[second-hand cars of low quality, Akerlof, 1970]. Because buyers cannot properly assess the quality
of cars on the second-hand market, their inclination to pay decreases. As a consequence, sellers with
high-quality cars withdraw from the market, since the proposed price falls below their reservation
price. This in turn lowers the buyers’ expectation regarding the average quality of cars on the market,
so their willingness to pay decreases even more, which de facto crowds out additional cars. The
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

