Faster Accelerated First-order Methods for Convex
Optimization with Strongly Convex Function
Constraints
Zhenwei Lin
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
zhenweilin@163.sufe.edu.cn
Qi Deng∗
Antai College of Economics and Management
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
qdeng24@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce faster accelerated primal-dual algorithms for minimizing
a convex function subject to strongly convex function constraints. Prior to our
work, the best complexity bound was O(1/ε), regardless of the strong convexity of
the constraint function. It is unclear whether the strong convexity assumption can
enable even better convergence results. To address this issue, we have developed
novel techniques to progressively estimate the strong convexity of the Lagrangian
function. Our approach, for the first time, effectively leverages
the constraint strong
√
convexity, obtaining an improved complexity of O(1/ ε). This rate matches the
complexity lower bound for strongly-convex-concave saddle point optimization
and is therefore order-optimal. We show the superior performance of our methods in sparsity-inducing constrained optimization, notably Google’s personalized
PageRank problem. Furthermore, we show that a restarted version of the proposed
methods can effectively identify the optimal solution’s sparsity pattern within a
finite number of steps, a result that appears to have independent significance.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we are interested in the following convex function-constrained problem:
minx∈Rn

f (x)

s.t.

gi (x) ≤ 0, 1 ≤ i ≤ m,

(1)

where f : Rn → R is a convex continuous function and bounded from below and gi : Rn → R,
i = 1, 2, . . . , m, are strongly convex continuous functions. An important application of this problem,
commonly encountered in statistics and engineering, involves the objective f (x) as a proximalfriendly regularizer and gi (x) as a data-driven loss function used to gauge model fidelity.
To apply first-order methods for the above function-constrained problems, a common strategy
involves a double-loop procedure that repeatedly employs fast first-order methods, such as Nesterov’s
accelerated method, to solve specific strongly convex proximal subproblems. Popular methods among
this category include Augmented Lagrangian methods [18, 33], level-set methods [21], penalty
methods [17]. When both f (x) and gi (x) are convex and smooth (or composite), it has been found
that these double-loop algorithms can attain an iteration complexity of O(1/ε) to achieve an ε-error
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

