Counter-Current Learning: A Biologically Plausible
Dual Network Approach for Deep Learning

Chia-Hsiang Kao
Cornell University
ck696@cornell.edu

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University
bharathh@cs.cornell.edu

‘

Abstract
Despite its widespread use in neural networks, error backpropagation has faced
criticism for its lack of biological plausibility, suffering from issues such as the
backward locking problem and the weight transport problem. These limitations
have motivated researchers to explore more biologically plausible learning algorithms that could potentially shed light on how biological neural systems adapt and
learn. Inspired by the counter-current exchange mechanisms observed in biological systems, we propose counter-current learning (CCL), a biologically plausible
framework for credit assignment in neural networks. This framework employs
a feedforward network to process input data and a feedback network to process
targets, with each network enhancing the other through anti-parallel signal propagation. By leveraging the more informative signals from the bottom layer of the
feedback network to guide the updates of the top layer of the feedforward network
and vice versa, CCL enables the simultaneous transformation of source inputs to
target outputs and the dynamic mutual influence of these transformations. Experimental results on MNIST, FashionMNIST, CIFAR10, and CIFAR100 datasets
using multi-layer perceptrons and convolutional neural networks demonstrate that
CCL achieves comparable performance to other biologically plausible algorithms
while offering a more biologically realistic learning mechanism. Furthermore, we
showcase the applicability of our approach to an autoencoder task, underscoring its
potential for unsupervised representation learning. Our work presents a direction
for biologically inspired and plausible learning algorithms, offering an alternative
mechanisms of learning and adaptation in neural networks. 1

1

Introduction

In deep learning, biological plausibility refers to the properties that deep learning algorithms could
respect to avoid inconsistency with current understandings of neural circuitry or violation of fundamental physical constraints, such as the localized nature of synaptic plasticity [Grossberg, 1987, Crick,
1989]. Consequently, error backpropagation (BP), despite its wide application, has been frequently
criticized for its lack of biological plausibility, particularly for the following three challenges: (a)
The weight transport problem, which arises because BP requires the feedback pathway to use the
same set of weights as the feedforward process, a mechanism not observed in biological systems
[Burbank and Kreiman, 2012, Bengio et al., 2015, Lillicrap et al., 2016]. (b) The non-local credit
assignment problem arises because backpropagation relies on the global error signal to update the
synaptic weights throughout the network, instead of depending on local errors derived from local loss
1

Code available at https://github.com/IandRover/CCL-NeurIPS24

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

