IR-CM: The Fast and General-purpose Image
Restoration Method Based on Consistency Model

Xiaoxuan Gong
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, HUST
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Wuhan, China
gongxiaoxuan286@gmail.com
Jie Ma*
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, HUST
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Wuhan, China
majie@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a fast and general-purpose image restoration method. The key
idea is to achieve few-step or even one-step inference by conducting consistency
distilling or training on a specific mean-reverting stochastic differential equations.
Furthermore, based on this, we propose a novel linear-nonlinear decoupling training
strategy, significantly enhancing training effectiveness and surpassing consistency
distillation on inference performance. This allows our method to be independent of
any pre-trained checkpoint, enabling it to serve as an effective standalone imageto-image transformation model. Finally, to avoid trivial solutions and stabilize
model training, we introduce a simple origin-guided loss. To validate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we conducted experiments on tasks including
image deraining, denoising, deblurring, and low-light image enhancement. The
experiments show that our method achieves highly competitive results with only
one-step inference. And with just two-step inference, it can achieve state-of-the-art
performance in low-light image enhancement. Furthermore, a number of ablation
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed training strategy. our
code is available at https://github.com/XiaoxuanGong/IR-CM.

1

Introduction

Image restoration is a classic problem in the field of computer vision. It aims to transform low-quality
or noisy images into their corresponding high-quality or noise-free counterparts. In many industrial
applications (such as autonomous driving), there are various complex types of image degradation,
including rain and fog interference, glare interference, low-light conditions, and motion blur etc. This
necessitates high generality in image restoration algorithms. Moreover, there is often a high demand
for real-time performance in practical application scenarios, posing even greater challenges to the
design of algorithms and models.
Common image restoration tasks include image deraining[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], denoising[7, 8, 9, 10, 11],
and deblurring[12, 13, 14, 15] etc. Due to the demands of industrial applications, research on low-light
image enhancement[16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21] is also gradually increasing. However, these methods are
often heuristic and difficult to apply to general tasks because they typically require domain-specific
prior knowledge for training. A more general approach is the recently proposed IR-SDE[22], which
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

