Sketching for Distributed Deep Learning:
A Sharper Analysis

Mayank Shrivastava
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
mayanks4@illinois.edu

Berivan Isik∗
Google
berivan@google.com

Qiaobo Li
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
qiaobol2@illinois.edu

Sanmi Koyejo
Stanford University
sanmi@cs.stanford.edu

Arindam Banerjee
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
arindamb@illinois.edu

Abstract
The high communication cost between the server and the clients is a significant
bottleneck in scaling distributed learning for overparametrized deep models. One
popular approach for reducing this communication overhead is randomized sketching. However, existing theoretical analyses for sketching-based distributed learning
(sketch-DL) either incur a prohibitive dependence on the ambient dimension [62]
or need additional restrictive assumptions such as heavy-hitters [59]. Nevertheless,
despite existing pessimistic analyses, empirical evidence suggests that sketch-DL is
competitive with its uncompressed counterpart, thus motivating a sharper analysis.
In this work, we introduce a sharper ambient dimension-independent convergence
analysis for sketch-DL using the second-order geometry specified by the loss
Hessian. Our results imply ambient dimension-independent communication complexity for sketch-DL. We present empirical results both on the loss Hessian and
overall accuracy of sketch-DL supporting our theoretical results. Taken together,
our results provide theoretical justification for the observed empirical success of
sketch-DL.

1

Introduction

Distributed learning is a popular framework for training machine learning models, often deployed
to support large-scale deployments and to support privacy, among other systems goals [20, 58].
To this end, distributed learning generally employs both server and client devices. Most standard
implementations are set up in rounds: in each round, clients participate by performing (multiple) local
model updates using their local data, then share the model updates with a server. The server aggregates
the collected local updates and broadcasts either the aggregate or the updated global model to the
clients for the next round. As a result of the system setup, distributed learning generally requires a high
communication overhead due to the frequent communication between the server and the clients [42].
Federated learning, a popular distributed learning setup, further extends the generic setting to where
clients’ data distribution may be non-i.i.d. and the clients may change over time, thus suffering from
the same costly communication. This communication overhead has motivated research in compressing
∗

Part of the work done while BI was at Stanford University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

