Probabilistic Federated Prompt-Tuning with
Non-IID and Imbalanced Data
Pei-Yau Weng
Washington State University
pei-yau.weng@wsu.edu
My T. Thai
University of Florida
mythai@cise.uf.edu

Minh Hoang
Princeton University
minhhoang@princeton.edu

Lam M. Nguyen
IBM Research
lamnguyen.mltd@ibm.com

Tsui-Wei Weng
University of California San Diego
lweng@ucsd.edu

Trong Nghia Hoang∗
Washington State University
trongnghia.hoang@wsu.edu

Abstract
Fine-tuning pre-trained models is a popular approach in machine learning for
solving complex tasks with moderate data. However, fine-tuning the entire pretrained model is ineffective in federated data scenarios where local data distributions
are diversely skewed. To address this, we explore integrating federated learning
with a more effective prompt-tuning method, optimizing for a small set of input
prefixes to reprogram the pre-trained model’s behavior. Our approach transforms
federated learning into a distributed set modeling task, aggregating diverse sets
of prompts to globally fine-tune the pre-trained model. We benchmark various
baselines based on direct adaptations of existing federated model aggregation
techniques and introduce a new probabilistic prompt aggregation method that
substantially outperforms these baselines. Our reported results on a variety of
computer vision datasets confirm that the proposed method is most effective to
combat extreme data heterogeneity in federated learning.

1

Introduction

The proliferation of personal devices has transformed our data landscape into numerous federated
systems with distinct resource constraints, data representations, distributions, and ownership. This
has motivated the development of new machine learning (ML) paradigms that enable collaborative
learning across different systems while respecting their data privacy. A prominent framework to
substantiate this collaborative scheme is federated learning (FL), which allows multiple systems to
train a common model without sharing their private data [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
Existing FL methods often assume that learning begins from scratch and does not build on prior
expertise. On the other hand, fine-tuning pre-trained or foundation models [13] is an emerging
paradigm for efficient generation of ML solutions. Almost all state-of-the-art models in natural
language processing (NLP) are now fine-tuned versions of foundation models, such as BERT [14],
BART [15], RoBERTa [16], and T5 [17]. Likewise, many top performing vision models have also
benefited from the generalization capability of foundation models, such as the vision transformer
model [18], which was trained on large-scale and generic datasets such as ImageNet [19]. Nonetheless,
this fine-tuning practice has only recently been investigated in federated learning [20, 21].
Current research in this direction demonstrated various benefits of integrating fine-tuning into FL.
For example, fine-tuning can utilize information better in decentralized data scenarios and thus
improves the performance in various FL scenarios, mostly in NLP [22, 23, 24, 25]. Interestingly,
it has been pointed out that even a simple initialization of local clients with a foundation model
can prevent solution drift to some extent in large-scale scenarios with heterogeneous local data
distributions [20, 21, 23]. This is also consistently observed in the results of our case studies in Fig. 1.
∗

Corresponding authors: Pei-Yau Weng, Minh Hoang, Trong Nghia Hoang.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

