Multi-modal Transfer Learning
between Biological Foundation Models

Juan Jose Garau-Luis∗
InstaDeep
Masa Roller
InstaDeep
Christopher Blum
BioNTech

Patrick Bordes∗
InstaDeep

Bernardo P. de Almeida
InstaDeep
Stefan Laurent
BioNTech

Liam Gonzalez∗
InstaDeep
Lorenz Hexemer
BioNTech

Jan Grzegorzewski
BioNTech

Thomas Pierrot†
InstaDeep

Maren Lang
BioNTech

Guillaume Richard†
InstaDeep

Abstract
Biological sequences encode fundamental instructions for the building blocks of
life, in the form of DNA, RNA, and proteins. Modeling these sequences is key to
understand disease mechanisms and is an active research area in computational
biology. Recently, Large Language Models have shown great promise in solving
certain biological tasks but current approaches are limited to a single sequence
modality (DNA, RNA, or protein). Key problems in genomics intrinsically involve
multiple modalities, but it remains unclear how to adapt general-purpose sequence
models to those cases. In this work we propose a multi-modal model that connects DNA, RNA, and proteins by leveraging information from different pre-trained
modality-specific encoders. We demonstrate its capabilities by applying it to the
largely unsolved problem of predicting how multiple RNA transcript isoforms
originate from the same gene (i.e. same DNA sequence) and map to different transcription expression levels across various human tissues. We show that our model,
dubbed IsoFormer, is able to accurately predict differential transcript expression,
outperforming existing methods and leveraging the use of multiple modalities.
Our framework also achieves efficient transfer knowledge from the encoders pretraining as well as in between modalities. We open-source our model, paving the
way for new multi-modal gene expression approaches.

1

Introduction

Foundation models have ignited a revolution in numerous scientific fields, starting in NLP and
computer vision, and more recently in several domains within the life sciences. Within the biological
sciences, these models have enabled predicting protein structures from sequences [1, 2], deciphering
the genome functions [3, 4, 5, 6] and interactions of biomolecules [7], and crafting new molecules
not found in nature [8]. Specifically, significant progress has been made with foundation models
tailored to DNA [3, 4, 5, 9], RNA [10, 11, 12, 13], and protein [2] sequences. These foundation models
have typically been developed and trained separately, using either self-supervised learning techniques
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Equal Supervision

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

