Robust Conformal Prediction Using Privileged
Information
Shai Feldman
Department of Computer Science
Technion, Israel
shai.feldman@cs.technion.ac.il
Yaniv Romano
Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering and of Computer Science
Technion, Israel
yromano@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We develop a method to generate prediction sets with a guaranteed coverage
rate that is robust to corruptions in the training data, such as missing or noisy
variables. Our approach builds on conformal prediction, a powerful framework
to construct prediction sets that are valid under the i.i.d assumption. Importantly,
naively applying conformal prediction does not provide reliable predictions in this
setting, due to the distribution shift induced by the corruptions. To account for
the distribution shift, we assume access to privileged information (PI). The PI is
formulated as additional features that explain the distribution shift, however, they
are only available during training and absent at test time. We approach this problem
by introducing a novel generalization of weighted conformal prediction and support
our method with theoretical coverage guarantees. Empirical experiments on both
real and synthetic datasets indicate that our approach achieves a valid coverage rate
and constructs more informative predictions compared to existing methods, which
are not supported by theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

Uncertainty quantification plays a pivotal role in increasing the reliability of machine learning models.
In this paper, we focus on situations where the training data is corrupted, e.g., due to missing variables
or noisy labels. These corruptions are ubiquitous in high-stakes applications—such as diagnosing
diseases, predicting financial outcomes, or personalizing treatment plans for patients—in which the
data-collection process is complex, resource-intensive, or time-consuming [1–5].
One way to enhance the trustworthiness of data-driven predictions is to provide an uncertainty set
containing the correct outcome at a user-specified coverage rate, e.g., 90%. Conformal prediction
(CP) [6] is a general framework for constructing such reliable prediction sets, however, it assumes
that the training and test data samples are drawn i.i.d from the same distribution. This assumption
does not hold in the problem setting we consider in this work, in which the training data is a corrupted
or a biased version of the ground truth. For instance, consider a medical application in which training
data have missing or incorrect labels for some patients in a non-random pattern. Another example is
a situation where we have missing feature values in the training data but, at test-time, we observe
the full set of features. These examples illustrate common sources for a distribution shift between
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

