Bayesian Nonparametrics Meets Data-Driven
Distributionally Robust Optimization

Nicola Bariletto
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
nicola.bariletto@utexas.edu

Nhat Ho
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
minhnhat@utexas.edu

Abstract
Training machine learning and statistical models often involves optimizing a datadriven risk criterion. The risk is usually computed with respect to the empirical data
distribution, but this may result in poor and unstable out-of-sample performance
due to distributional uncertainty. In the spirit of distributionally robust optimization, we propose a novel robust criterion by combining insights from Bayesian
nonparametric (i.e., Dirichlet process) theory and a recent decision-theoretic model
of smooth ambiguity-averse preferences. First, we highlight novel connections
with standard regularized empirical risk minimization techniques, among which
Ridge and LASSO regressions. Then, we theoretically demonstrate the existence
of favorable finite-sample and asymptotic statistical guarantees on the performance
of the robust optimization procedure. For practical implementation, we propose
and study tractable approximations of the criterion based on well-known Dirichlet
process representations. We also show that the smoothness of the criterion naturally leads to standard gradient-based numerical optimization. Finally, we provide
insights into the workings of our method by applying it to a variety of tasks based
on simulated and real datasets.

1

Introduction

In machine learning and statistics applications, several quantities of interest solve the optimization
problem
min Rp∗ (θ),
θ∈Θ

where Rp (θ) := Eξ∼p [h(θ, ξ)] is the expected risk associated to decision θ, under cost function
h(θ, ξ) (measurable in the argument ξ) and given that the distribution of the (Ξ, B(Ξ))-valued data ξ
is p.1 For instance, if we are dealing with a supervised learning task where ξ = (x, y) ∈ Rm−1 × R,
h(θ, ξ) is usually a loss function ℓ(fθ (x), y) quantifying the cost incurred in predicting y with fθ (x)
– here the decision variable is θ, which parametrizes the function fθ : Rm−1 → R. For the rest of the
paper, we assume Ξ ⊆ Rm , Θ ⊆ Rd and h : Θ × Ξ → [0, K] for some K < ∞.2
In most cases of interest the true data-generating process p∗ is unknown, and only a sample ξ n =
(ξ1 , . . . , ξn ) from it is available. The most popular
Pn solution is to approximate p∗ by the empirical
distribution pξn , and optimize Rpξn (θ) ≡ n−1 i=1 h(θ, ξi ). However, especially for small sample
sizes n and complex data-generating mechanisms, this can result in poor out-of-sample performance,
leading to the need for robust alternatives. A flourishing literature on Distributionally Robust
Given a topological space (A, T ), we denote by B(A) the Borel σ-algebra generated by T .
Note that, under mild regularity (e.g., continuity) conditions on h, its boundedness is ensured, for instance,
by the frequently assumed compactness of Ξ and Θ.
1

2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

