Efficiency of the First-Price Auction in the
Autobidding World

Yuan Deng
Google Research
dengyuan@google.com

Jieming Mao
Google Research
maojm@google.com

Hanrui Zhang
Chinese University of Hong Kong
hanrui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com
Song Zuo
Google Research
szuo@google.com

Abstract
We study the price of anarchy of first-price auctions in the autobidding world,
where bidders can be either utility maximizers (i.e., traditional bidders) or value
maximizers (i.e., autobidders). We show that with autobidders only, the price of
anarchy of first-price auctions is 1/2, and with both kinds of bidders, the price of
anarchy degrades to about 0.457 (the precise number is given by an optimization).
These results complement the recent result by Jin and Lu [2022] showing that the
price of anarchy of first-price auctions with traditional bidders is 1 − 1/e2 . We
further investigate a setting where the seller can utilize machine-learned advice to
improve the efficiency of the auctions. There, we show that as the accuracy of the
advice increases, the price of anarchy improves smoothly from about 0.457 to 1.

1

Introduction

Autobidding, the procedure of delegating the bidding tasks to automated agents to procure advertisement opportunities in online ad auctions, is becoming the prevalent bidding methods and contributing
to more than 80% of total online advertising traffic [Dolan, 2020]. Autobidding significantly simplifies the interaction between the advertisers and the ad platform: instead of submitting bids for each
auction separately, the advertisers only need to specify their high-level objectives and constraints
and the automated agents bid on behalf of the advertisers. A popular autobidding strategy is value
maximization subject to a target return-on-investment (ROI) constraint, in which the autobidding
agents aim to maximize their value, such as the number of clicks/conversions, subject to a minimum
admissible ratio on the return-on-investment constraint. This type of bidders has been referred as
value maximizers by the recent line of research on autobidding [Deng et al., 2021, Balseiro et al.,
2021a].
As the behavior model of automated bidders is very different from the classic (quasi-linear) utility
maximizers maximizing the difference between value and payment, there has been a growing body of
literature revisiting the effectiveness of the existing mechanisms through the lens of the autobidding
world [Aggarwal et al., 2019, Deng et al., 2021, Balseiro et al., 2021a, Liaw et al., 2022, Babaioff
et al., 2021]. In particular, it is well-known that running the second-price auction against utility
maximizers results in socially optimal outcomes; however, Aggarwal et al. [2019] show that the
price of anarchy (PoA) [Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou, 1999], the ratio between the worst welfare

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

