L4GM: Large 4D Gaussian Reconstruction Model

Jiawei Ren1,5 Kevin Xie1,2 Ashkan Mirzaei1,2 Hanxue Liang1,3
Xiaohui Zeng1,2 Karsten Kreis1 Ziwei Liu5 Antonio Torralba4
Sanja Fidler1,2 Seung Wook Kim1 Huan Ling1,2
1

NVIDIA

2

University of Toronto

3

University of Cambridge

4

MIT

5

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Project page: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/l4gm

Figure 1: L4GM generates 4D objects from in-the-wild input videos.

Abstract
We present L4GM, the first 4D Large Reconstruction Model that produces animated
objects from a single-view video input – in a single feed-forward pass that takes
only a second. Key to our success is a novel dataset of multiview videos containing
curated, rendered animated objects from Objaverse. This dataset depicts 44K
diverse objects with 110K animations rendered in 48 viewpoints, resulting in 12M
videos with a total of 300M frames. We keep our L4GM simple for scalability and
build directly on top of LGM [49], a pretrained 3D Large Reconstruction Model
that outputs 3D Gaussian ellipsoids from multiview image input. L4GM outputs a
per-frame 3D Gaussian Splatting representation from video frames sampled at a
low fps and then upsamples the representation to a higher fps to achieve temporal
smoothness. We add temporal self-attention layers to the base LGM to help it learn
consistency across time, and utilize a per-timestep multiview rendering loss to train
the model. The representation is upsampled to a higher framerate by training an
interpolation model which produces intermediate 3D Gaussian representations. We
showcase that L4GM that is only trained on synthetic data generalizes well on
in-the-wild videos, producing high quality animated 3D assets.

1

Introduction

Animated 3D assets are essential in bringing 3D virtual worlds to life. However, these animations
are time consuming to create as the procedure involves rigging and skinning of objects, and crafting
keyframes of the animation – all with minimal automation in tooling. The ability to generate animated
3D assets from widely available monocular videos or simply from text would be a desirable capability
for this application. This is the goal of our work. Building more advanced 4D content editing tooling,
the ultimate goal of this line of research, is out of scope for this work.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

