Toward a Stable, Fair, and Comprehensive Evaluation
of Object Hallucination in Large Vision-Language
Models
Hongliang Wei, Xingtao Wang∗, Xianqi Zhang, Xiaopeng Fan, Debin Zhao
Harbin Institute of Technology
Harbin, China

Abstract
Given different instructions, large vision-language models (LVLMs) exhibit different degrees of object hallucinations, posing a significant challenge to the evaluation
of object hallucinations. Overcoming this challenge, existing object hallucination evaluation methods average the results obtained from a set of instructions.
However, these methods fail to provide consistent evaluation across instruction
sets that generate image descriptions of significantly different lengths. In this
paper, we present the first systematic investigation into the effect of instructions
on object hallucinations in LVLMs, with a specific focus on the role played by
image description lengths. A valuable finding is that instructions indirectly affect
hallucinations through the length of image descriptions. The longer the image
description, the higher the object hallucination degree. Accordingly, we fit an informative length-hallucination curve, upon which a fine-grained evaluation framework
named LeHaCE is introduced for evaluating object hallucinations at any given
image description length. LeHaCE evaluates the object hallucination degree at
a uniform image description length to mitigate the effect of description lengths,
promoting stability and fairness. Moreover, LeHaCE incorporates the curve slope
as an innovative hallucination evaluation metric, reflecting the extent to which the
object hallucination degree is affected by the image description length, achieving a
more comprehensive evaluation. Experimental results demonstrate that LeHaCE
provides a more stable, fair, and comprehensive evaluation of object hallucinations
in LVLMs compared to existing methods.

1

Introduction

Drawing inspiration from the remarkable language capabilities exhibited by large language models
(LLMs) [1–3], large vision-language models (LVLMs) [2, 4–7] have been well-developed, achieving
significant advancements in complex multimodal tasks. However, the practical application of LVLMs
is heavily hindered by hallucination phenomena [8, 9], which refer to situations where objects in
image descriptions generated by LVLMs are inconsistent with the provided visual content. Considerable efforts have been dedicated to both evaluation [9–11] and mitigation [12–14] of hallucination
phenomena, leading to notable advancements.
A significant challenge in object hallucination evaluation arises from the effect of instructions
on object hallucinations [9]. Overcoming this challenge, existing object hallucination evaluation
methods typically adopt an average-based framework, which averages the results obtained from a set
of instructions. However, as shown in Figure 1, this framework fails to provide consistent evaluation
across instruction sets that generate image descriptions of significantly varying lengths. Specifically,
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

