MUVERA: Multi-Vector Retrieval via Fixed
Dimensional Encodings

Laxman Dhulipala
Google Research and UMD

Majid Hadian
Google DeepMind

Jason Lee
Google Research

Rajesh Jayaram∗
Google Research

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research

Abstract
Neural embedding models have become a fundamental component of modern
information retrieval (IR) pipelines. These models produce a single embedding
x ∈ d per data-point, allowing for fast retrieval via highly optimized maximum
inner product search (MIPS) algorithms. Recently, beginning with the landmark
ColBERT paper, multi-vector models, which produce a set of embedding per datapoint, have achieved markedly superior performance for IR tasks. Unfortunately,
using these models for IR is computationally expensive due to the increased
complexity of multi-vector retrieval and scoring.

R

In this paper, we introduce M UVERA (Multi-Vector Retrieval Algorithm), a retrieval mechanism which reduces multi-vector similarity search to single-vector
similarity search. This enables the usage of off-the-shelf MIPS solvers for multivector retrieval. M UVERA asymmetrically generates Fixed Dimensional Encodings (FDEs) of queries and documents, which are vectors whose inner product
approximates multi-vector similarity. We prove that FDEs give high-quality εapproximations, thus providing the first single-vector proxy for multi-vector similarity with theoretical guarantees. Empirically, we find that FDEs achieve the same
recall as prior state-of-the-art heuristics while retrieving 2-5× fewer candidates.
Compared to prior state of the art implementations, M UVERA achieves consistently good end-to-end recall and latency across a diverse set of the BEIR retrieval
datasets, achieving an average of 10% improved recall with 90% lower latency.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, the use of neural embeddings for representing data has become a central
tool for information retrieval (IR) [56], among many other tasks such as clustering and classification [39]. Recently, multi-vector (MV) representations, introduced by the late-interaction framework
in ColBERT [29], have been shown to deliver significantly improved performance on popular IR
benchmarks. ColBERT and its variants [17, 21, 32, 35, 42, 44, 49, 54] produce multiple embeddings
per query or document by generating one embedding per token. The query-document similarity is
then scored via the Chamfer Similarity (§1.1), also known as the MaxSim operation, between the two
sets of vectors. These multi-vector representations have many advantages over single-vector (SV)
representations, such as better interpretability [15, 50] and generalization [16, 36, 51, 55].
Despite these advantages, multi-vector retrieval is inherently more expensive than single-vector
retrieval. Firstly, producing one embedding per token increases the number of embeddings in a
dataset by orders of magnitude. Moreover, due to the non-linear Chamfer similarity scoring, there
is a lack of optimized systems for multi-vector retrieval. Specifically, single-vector retrieval is
∗

Corresponding Author: rkjayaram@google.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

