Metric Transforms and Low Rank Representations of
Kernels for Fast Attention
Timothy Chu
Independent Researcher
timothyzchu@gmail.com

Josh Alman
Columbia University
josh@cs.columbia.edu

Shyam Narayanan
Citadel Securities
shyam.s.narayanan@gmail.com

Gary Miller
Carnegie Mellon University
glmiller@cs.cmu.edu

Mark Sellke
Harvard University
msellke@fas.harvard.edu

Zhao Song
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, UC Berkeley
magic.linuxkde@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce a new linear-algebraic tool based on group representation theory, and
use it to address three key problems in machine learning.
1. Past researchers have proposed fast attention algorithms for LLMs by approximating or replace softmax attention with other functions, such as low-degree
polynomials. The key property of these functions is that, when applied entrywise to the matrix QK > , the result is a low rank matrix when Q and K are
n × d matrices and n  d.
This suggests a natural question: what are all functions f with this property?
If other f exist and are quickly computable, they can be used in place of
softmax for fast subquadratic attention algorithms. It was previously known
that low-degree polynomials have this property. We prove that low-degree
polynomials are the only piecewise continuous functions with this property.
This suggests that the low-rank fast attention only works for functions approximable by polynomials. Our work gives a converse to the polynomial method
in algorithm design.
2. We prove the first full classification of all positive definite kernels that are
functions of Manhattan or `1 distance. Our work generalizes, and also gives a
new proof for, an existing theorem at the heart of kernel methods in machine
learning: the classification of all positive definite kernels that are functions of
Euclidean distance.
3. The key problem in metric transforms, a mathematical theory used in geometry and machine learning, asks what functions transform pairwise distances
in metric space M to metric space N for specified M and N . We prove
the first full classification of functions that transform Manhattan distances to
Manhattan distances. Our work generalizes the foundational work of Schoenberg, which fully classifies functions that transform Euclidean to Euclidean
distances.
We additionally prove results about stable-rank preserving functions that are potentially useful in algorithmic design, and more. Our core tool for all our results is a
new technique called the representation theory of the hyperrectangle.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

