Policy Improvement using Language Feedback Models

Victor Zhong∗
University of Waterloo
Microsoft Research
victor.zhong@uwaterloo.ca

Dipendra Misra
Microsoft Research

Xingdi Yuan
Microsoft Research

Marc-Alexandre Côté
Microsoft Research

Abstract
We introduce Language Feedback Models (LFMs) that identify desirable behaviour
— actions that help achieve tasks specified in the instruction — for imitation
learning in instruction following. To train LFMs, we obtain feedback from Large
Language Models (LLMs) on visual trajectories verbalized to language descriptions.
First, by using LFMs to identify desirable behaviour to imitate, we improve in
task-completion rate over strong behavioural cloning baselines on three distinct
language grounding environments (Touchdown, ScienceWorld, and ALFWorld).
Second, imitation learning using LFMs outperform using LLMs as experts to
directly predict actions, when controlling for the number of LLM output tokens.
Third, LFMs generalize to unseen environments, improving task-completion rate
by 3.5-12.0% through one round of adaptation. Finally, we modify LFMs to
provide human-interpretable feedback without performance loss, allowing human
verification of desirable behaviour for imitation learning.

1

Introduction

Sample-efficiency and generalizability are two primary challenges in learning instruction following
agents in grounded environments [26, 23, 2]. First, we want an agent that is sample-efficient: it learns
from few demonstrations of how to act according to instructions. Second, we want an agent that is
generalizable: it should act successfully in novel environments according to new instructions after
training. Reinforcement learning (RL; Sutton and Barto [40]) and imitation learning (IL; Schaal
[32], Abbeel and Ng [1]) are two techniques for learning agents for instruction following in grounded
environments. These techniques often require large numbers of trials and errors or expensive-to-obtain
expert demonstrations. Recent work show that pretrained large language models (LLMs) exhibit
sample-efficient learning through prompting and in-context learning for textual [10] and grounded
problems such as robotic control [2]. However, for instruction following in grounded problems,
current methods rely on LLMs on-line during inference, which is impractical and expensive.
We develop a sample-efficient and cost-effective technique that uses LLMs to train Language
Feedback Models (LFMs) for policy improvement in instruction following. Figure 1 illustrates
policy improvement using LFMs. Consider the task of interacting with objects in a kitchen to
follow instructions shown in Figure 1(c). First, in Figure 1(a), given a grounded environment and
a base policy (i.e. a behaviour cloned policy), we roll out the base policy to collect a small set of
trajectories for different instructions. Next, we verbalize observations in the trajectory by describing
scenes in language. For each instruction and verbalized trajectory pair, we query an LLM to provide
feedback identifying which behaviour in the trajectory is productive to solving the task identified
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

