ReGS: Reference-based Controllable Scene Stylization
with Gaussian Splatting

Yiqun Mei∗ Jiacong Xu* Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
{ymei7,jxu155, vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Referenced-based scene stylization that edits the appearance based on a contentaligned reference image is an emerging research area. Starting with a pretrained
neural radiance field (NeRF), existing methods typically learn a novel appearance
that matches the given style. Despite their effectiveness, they inherently suffer from
time-consuming volume rendering, and thus are impractical for many real-time
applications. In this work, we propose ReGS, which adapts 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) for reference-based stylization to enable real-time stylized view synthesis.
Editing the appearance of a pretrained 3DGS is challenging as it uses discrete Gaussians as 3D representation, which tightly bind appearance with geometry. Simply
optimizing the appearance as prior methods do is often insufficient for modeling
continuous textures in the given reference image. To address this challenge, we
propose a novel texture-guided control mechanism that adaptively adjusts local
responsible Gaussians to a new geometric arrangement, serving for desired texture
details. The proposed process is guided by texture clues for effective appearance
editing, and regularized by scene depth for preserving original geometric structure.
With these novel designs, we show ReGS can produce state-of-the-art stylization
results that respect the reference texture while embracing real-time rendering speed
for free-view navigation.

1

Introduction

Stylizing a 3D scene based on a 2D artwork is an active research area in both computer vision and
graphics [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. One important direction of stylization aims to precisely stylize the scene
appearance based on a 2D content-aligned reference image drawn by users [10]. Such problem has
numerous applications in digital art, film production and virtual reality. In the classical graphics
pipeline, completing this task requires experienced 3D artists to manually create a UV texture map as
input to the shader, a tedious process requiring professional knowledge, significant time, and effort.
Over the past decades, tremendous progress has been made in automatic scene stylization by leveraging view synthesis methods. While early attempts [1, 2, 12, 13] suffer from geometry errors of
point clouds or meshes, more recent methods [9, 8, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] rely on radiance field (NeRF) [14], a
powerful implicit 3D representation, to deliver high-quality renditions that are perceptually similar
to the reference image. A typical stylization workflow starts from a pretrained NeRF model of the
target scene, followed by an appearance optimization phase to match the given style. The density
function is always fixed to maintain the scene geometry [8, 9, 3, 10, 6] . Despite their promising
results, NeRF-based approaches consume high training and rendering costs in order to obtain satisfactory results. Although some recent efforts make fast training possible [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20], the
improvement in efficiency often comes at the price of degraded visual quality. Meanwhile, real-time
rendering at inference time still remains challenging.
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

