Stochastic Zeroth-Order Optimization under Strongly
Convexity and Lipschitz Hessian: Minimax Sample
Complexity

Qian Yu
University of California, Santa Barbara
qianyu02@ucsb.edu
Baihe Huang
University of California, Berkeley
baihe_huang@berkeley.edu

Yining Wang
University of Texas at Dallas
yining.wang@utdallas.edu

Qi Lei
New York University
ql518@nyu.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
Jasondl@princeton.edu

Abstract
Optimization of convex functions under stochastic zeroth-order feedback has been
a major and challenging question in online learning. In this work, we consider the
problem of optimizing second-order smooth and strongly convex functions where
the algorithm is only accessible to noisy evaluations of the objective function it
queries. We provide the first tight characterization for the rate of the minimax
simple regret by developing matching upper and lower bounds. We propose an
algorithm that features a combination of a bootstrapping stage and a mirror-descent
stage. Our main technical innovation consists of a sharp characterization for the
spherical-sampling gradient estimator under higher-order smoothness conditions,
which allows the algorithm to optimally balance the bias-variance tradeoff, and a
new iterative method for the bootstrapping stage, which maintains the performance
for unbounded Hessian.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization of an unknown function with access to only noisy function evaluations is
a fundamental problem in operations research, optimization, simulation and bandit optimization
research, commonly known as zeroth-order optimization (Chen et al., 2017), derivative-free optimization (Conn et al., 2009; Rios & Sahinidis, 2013) or bandit optimization (Bubeck et al., 2021).
In this problem, an optimization algorithm interacts sequentially with an oracle and obtains noisy
function evaluations at queried points every time. The algorithm produces an approximately optimal
solution after T such evaluations, with its performance evaluated by the expected difference between
the function values at the approximate optimal solution produced and the optimal solution. A more
rigorous formulation of the problem is given in Sec. 2 below.
Existing works and results on stochastic zeroth-order optimization could be broadly categorized into
two classes:
1. Convex functions. In the first thread of research, the unknown objective function to be
optimized is assumed to be concave (for maximization problems) or convex (for minimization
problems). For these problems, with minimal smoothness (e.g. objective function being
Lipschitz continuous) it is possible to achieve a sample complexity of Õ(ε−2 ) for an
expected optimization error or ε, which is also a polynomial function of domain dimension
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

