What is my quantum computer good for? Quantum
capability learning with physics-aware neural
networks
Daniel Hothem
Quantum Performance Laboratory
Sandia National Laboratories
Livermore, CA 94550
dhothem@sandia.gov

Ashe Miller
Quantum Performance Laboratory
Sandia National Laboratories
Albuquerque, NM 87185
anmille@sandia.gov

Timothy Proctor
Quantum Performance Laboratory
Sandia National Laboratories
Livermore, CA 94550
tjproct@sandia.gov

Abstract
Quantum computers have the potential to revolutionize diverse fields, including
quantum chemistry, materials science, and machine learning. However, contemporary quantum computers experience errors that often cause quantum programs
run on them to fail. Until quantum computers can reliably execute large quantum
programs, stakeholders will need fast and reliable methods for assessing a quantum
computer’s capability—i.e., the programs it can run and how well it can run them.
Previously, off-the-shelf neural network architectures have been used to model
quantum computers’ capabilities, but with limited success, because these networks
fail to learn the complex quantum physics that determines real quantum computers’
errors. We address this shortcoming with a new quantum-physics-aware neural
network architecture for learning capability models. Our scalable architecture combines aspects of graph neural networks with efficient approximations to the physics
of errors in quantum programs. This approach achieves up to ∼ 50% reductions in
mean absolute error on both experimental and simulated data, over state-of-the-art
models based on convolutional neural networks, and scales to devices with 100+
qubits.

1

Introduction

Quantum computers have the potential to efficiently solve classically intractable problems in quantum
chemistry [Cao et al., 2019], materials science [Rubin et al., 2024], machine learning [Harrow et al.,
2009], and cryptography [Shor, 1997]. While contemporary quantum computers are approaching
the size and noise levels needed to solve interesting problems [Arute et al., 2019], they are far from
being capable of reliably running most useful quantum programs [Proctor et al., 2021a]. Until we
build quantum computers capable of executing any and all useful and interesting quantum programs,
stakeholders will require fast, reliable, and scalable methods for predicting the programs that a given
quantum computer can reliably execute.
The task of learning which quantum programs a particular quantum computer can reliably execute is
known as quantum capability learning [Proctor et al., 2021a]. Quantum capability learning is very
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

