Fast Tree-Field Integrators: From Low Displacement
Rank to Topological Transformers
∗

∗

∗

Krzysztof Choromanski1, 2 , Arijit Sehanobish3, , Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury4, ,
∗
∗
Han Lin4, , Avinava Dubey5, , Tamas Sarlos5 , Snigdha Chaturvedi4
1

Google DeepMind, 2 Columbia University, 3 Independent, 4 UNC Chapel Hill, 5 Google Research.

Abstract
We present a new class of fast polylog-linear algorithms based on the theory of
structured matrices (in particular low displacement rank) for integrating tensor
fields defined on weighted trees. Several applications of the resulting fast tree-field
integrators (FTFIs) are presented, including (a) approximation of graph metrics
with tree metrics, (b) graph classification, (c) modeling on meshes, and finally
(d) Topological Transformers (TTs) [Choromanski et al., 2022] for images. For
Topological Transformers, we propose new relative position encoding (RPE) masking mechanisms with as few as three extra learnable parameters per Transformer
layer, leading to 1.0-1.5%+ accuracy gains. Importantly, most of FTFIs are exact
methods, thus numerically equivalent to their brute-force counterparts. When
applied to graphs with thousands of nodes, those exact algorithms provide 5.7-13x
speedups. We also provide an extensive theoretical analysis of our methods.

1

Introduction

Matrix-vector multiplication remains a key computational block of virtually all modern machine
learning (ML) algorithms. For this reason, decades of research have been dedicated towards making
this fundamental operation more efficient. One approach to achieve this goal is through efficient
hardware design, e.g., using modern GPU and TPU accelerators [Abadi et al., 2016, Yu et al.,
2022, 2020]. The alternative method involves developing algorithms for efficient matrix-vector
multiplication by leveraging either (1) sparse matrices [Wang, 2021, Beniamini et al., 2020], or (2)
structured dense matrices [Thomas et al., 2018, Chandrasekaran et al., 2018]. These algorithms can be
applied in modern neural network systems, where weights are pruned to encourage sparsity [Blalock
et al., 2020] or they can be parameterized with structured matrices [Sindhwani et al., 2015].
In this work, we aim to accelerate multiplications with a large class of matrices, that we refer to
as f -distance matrices, which play an important role in several ML algorithms. Consider a matrix
N ×N
MG
, where dist(i, j) stands for the shortest-path distance
f = [f (dist(i, j))]i,j=1,...,N ∈ R
between the i-th and j-th vertex of an undirected graph G = (V, E, W). Here V = {1, ..., N } stands
for the set of vertices (nodes), E denotes the set of edges, W : E → R+ maps them to their positive
def
G
weights, and f : R → R. We call MG
f a f -distance matrix in G. Note that if f (x) = x, then Mf is
the Shortest Path Kernel matrix.
N
The product MG
f x (where x ∈ R ) represents a scalar field on V obtained by discretely integrating
the field defined by x. In this integration, a new field value at a vertex v is calculated by averaging the
old field values at all vertices u, weighted according to the function f (dist(v, u)). This integration can
∗

equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

