Multilinear Mixture of Experts:
Scalable Expert Specialization through Factorization
James Oldfield1∗ Markos Georgopoulos Grigorios G. Chrysos2 Christos Tzelepis3
Yannis Panagakis4,5 Mihalis A. Nicolaou6 Jiankang Deng7 Ioannis Patras1
1
Queen Mary University of London 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison 3 City University of
London 4 National and Kapodistrian University of Athens 5 Archimedes AI, Athena RC 6 The
Cyprus Institute 7 Imperial College London

Abstract
The Mixture of Experts (MoE) paradigm provides a powerful way to decompose
dense layers into smaller, modular computations often more amenable to human
interpretation, debugging, and editability. However, a major challenge lies in the
computational cost of scaling the number of experts high enough to achieve finegrained specialization. In this paper, we propose the Multilinear Mixture of Experts
(µMoE) layer to address this, focusing on vision models. µMoE layers enable scalable expert specialization by performing an implicit computation on prohibitively
large weight tensors entirely in factorized form. Consequently, µMoEs (1) avoid
the restrictively high inference-time costs of dense MoEs, yet (2) do not inherit
the training issues of the popular sparse MoEs’ discrete (non-differentiable) expert
routing. We present both qualitative and quantitative evidence that scaling µMoE
layers when fine-tuning foundation models for vision tasks leads to more specialized experts at the class-level, further enabling manual bias correction in CelebA
attribute classification. Finally, we show qualitative results demonstrating the expert
specialism achieved when pre-training large GPT2 and MLP-Mixer models with
parameter-matched µMoE blocks at every layer, maintaining comparable accuracy.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/james-oldfield/muMoE.

1

Introduction

The Mixture of Experts (MoE) architecture [1] has reemerged as a powerful class of conditional
computation, playing the pivotal role in scaling up recent large language [2, 3, 4, 5], vision [6], and
multi-modal models [7]. MoEs apply different subsets of layers (referred to as ‘experts’) for each
input, in contrast to the traditional approach of using the same single layer for all inputs. This provides a form of input-conditional computation [8, 9, 10, 11] that is expressive yet efficient. However,
through their substantial performance gains, an important emergent property of MoEs is frequently
underutilized: the innate tendency of experts to specialize in distinct subtasks. Indeed, the foundational work of Jacobs et al. [12] on MoEs describes this property, highlighting how implementing
a particular function with modular building blocks (experts) often leads to subcomputations that
are easier to understand individually than their dense layer counterparts–with larger expert counts
allowing for more fine-grained specialization.
Independent of model performance, a successful decomposition of the layer’s functionality into
human-comprehensible subtasks offers many significant benefits. Firstly, the mechanisms through
which a network produces an output are more interpretable: the output is a sum of modular components, each contributing individual functionality. Yet, the value of interpretable computation
∗

Corresponding author: j.a.oldfield@qmul.ac.uk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

