Policy-shaped prediction: avoiding distractions in
model-based reinforcement learning

Miles Hutson
Stanford University
hutson@stanford.edu

Isaac Kauvar
Stanford University
ikauvar@stanford.edu

Nick Haber
Stanford University
nhaber@stanford.edu

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) is a promising route to sampleefficient policy optimization. However, a known vulnerability of reconstructionbased MBRL consists of scenarios in which detailed aspects of the world are
highly predictable, but irrelevant to learning a good policy. Such scenarios can
lead the model to exhaust its capacity on meaningless content, at the cost of neglecting important environment dynamics. While existing approaches attempt to
solve this problem, we highlight its continuing impact on leading MBRL methods —including DreamerV3 and DreamerPro— with a novel environment where
background distractions are intricate, predictable, and useless for planning future
actions. To address this challenge we develop a method for focusing the capacity of
the world model through synergy of a pretrained segmentation model, a task-aware
reconstruction loss, and adversarial learning. Our method outperforms a variety of
other approaches designed to reduce the impact of distractors, and is an advance
towards robust model-based reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) is a promising path to data-efficient policy learning,
and recent advances show impressive performance with high dimensional sensory data [Hafner et al.,
2023]. A central component of MBRL is a world model, which is trained to predict how an agent’s
actions impact future world states. However, the world is highly complex while the capacity of a world
model is finite, and ultimately only a subset of the components and dynamics of the environment can
be accurately modeled. In this setting, distracting stimuli can be particularly problematic, as they
waste the capacity of the world model on useless details.
To address the challenge of distractors, a number of MBRL methods seek to isolate the most important
components of an environment, including structural regularizations [Deng et al., 2022, Fu et al., 2021,
Wang et al., 2022], pretraining the agent’s visual encoder [Seo et al., 2022, Wu et al., 2023], and
value-equivalent world modeling [Schrittwieser et al., 2020], while environments such as Distracting
Control Suite have been developed to assess distractor suppression [Stone et al., 2021].
In this paper we introduce a new method, Policy-Shaped Prediction (PSP), for identifying and focusing
on the important parts of an image-based environment. Rather than relying on pre-imposed structural
regularizations, PSP learns to prioritize information that is important to the policy. We synergize
task-informed gradient-based loss weighting, use of a pre-trained segmentation model [Kirillov
et al., 2023] and adversarial learning to create a distraction-suppressing agent that outperforms
leading image-based MBRL agents. In addition to exhibiting similar performance in distraction-free
settings and on a standard benchmark of robustness to distractions, our method markedly improves
performance in the face of particularly challenging distractors that are intricate but entirely learnable.
Because learnable distractors can be accurately modeled, they straightforwardly contribute to reducing
the world model’s error, but needlessly exhaust the capacity of the world model.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

