A Single-Step, Sharpness-Aware Minimization is All
You Need to Achieve Efficient and Accurate Sparse
Training

Jie Ji, Gen Li, Jingjing Fu, Fatemeh Afghah, Linke Guo, Xiaoyong Yuan, Xiaolong Ma
Clemson University
jji@g.clemson.edu

Abstract
Sparse training stands as a landmark approach in addressing the considerable
training resource demands imposed by the continuously expanding size of Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs). However, the training of a sparse DNN encounters
great challenges in achieving optimal generalization ability despite the efforts
from the state-of-the-art sparse training methodologies. To unravel the mysterious reason behind the difficulty of sparse training, we connect network sparsity
with the structure of neural loss functions and identify that the cause of such
difficulty lies in a chaotic loss surface. In light of such revelation, we propose
S2 -SAM, characterized by a Single-step Sharpness-Aware Minimization that is
tailored for Sparse training. For the first time, S2 -SAM innovates the traditional
SAM-style optimization by approximating sharpness perturbation through prior
gradient information, incurring zero extra cost. Therefore, S2 -SAM not only exhibits the capacity to improve generalization but also aligns with the efficiency
goal of sparse training. Additionally, we study the generalization result of S2 SAM and provide theoretical proof for convergence. Through extensive experiments, S2 -SAM demonstrates its universally applicable plug-and-play functionality,
enhancing accuracy across various sparse training methods. Code available at
https://github.com/jjsrf/SSAM-NEURIPS2024.

1

Introduction

The arrival of the Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) [1] era has urged an ever-expanding realm of
artificial intelligence, bringing significant growth in deep neural networks (DNNs) depth and intricacy.
The efficient training of DNN has thus emerged as an uttermost imperative, demanding immediate
and concerted efforts.
To train an overparameterized, large-scale DNN efficiently while preserving its high accuracy, stateof-the-art literature has introduced sparse training [2–6] as a straightforward solution that reduces both
parameter footprint and computation cost. With the presence of a large portion of zeros in the network,
both forward and backward computation for training can be saved by skipping those zeros, as well as
reducing the memory consumption since the zeros are not necessary to be stored. However, training
a sparse neural network is difficult since the optimization under sparse regime readily converges
to stationary points with a sub-optimal generalization accuracy (i.e., saddle points) [7]. Due to the
difficulty of directly (i.e., without the time-consuming linear interpolation) assessing if the sparse
solution is in the saddle point, finding workaround approaches for training a better sparse neural
network is critical, especially for the practical usage in efficient learning [8–17].
To address the above difficulty, many efforts have been made. For instance, the Static Sparse Training
(SST) such as the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) [20], SNIP [21], GraSP [18] and SynFlow [22]
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

