AgentBoard: An Analytical Evaluation Board of
Multi-turn LLM Agents

Chang Ma∗♠ Junlei Zhang∗♢∆ Zhihao Zhu∗♡ Cheng Yang∗♣
Yujiu Yang♣ Yaohui Jin♡ Zhenzhong Lan∆ Lingpeng Kong♠ Junxian He⋆
♠
The University of Hong Kong ♢ Zhejiang University ♡ Shanghai Jiao Tong University
♣
Tsinghua University ∆ Westlake University ⋆ HKUST
llmagentboard@gmail.com

Abstract
Evaluating Large Language Models (LLMs) as general-purpose agents is essential
for understanding their capabilities and facilitating their integration into practical
applications. However, the evaluation process presents substantial challenges. A
primary obstacle is the benchmarking of agent performance across diverse scenarios within a unified framework, especially in maintaining partially-observable
environments and ensuring multi-round interactions. Moreover, current evaluation
frameworks mostly focus on the final success rate, revealing few insights during
the process and failing to provide a deep understanding of the model abilities. To
address these challenges, we introduce AGENT B OARD, a pioneering comprehensive benchmark and accompanied open-source evaluation framework tailored to
analytical evaluation of LLM agents. AGENT B OARD offers a fine-grained progress
rate metric that captures incremental advancements as well as a comprehensive
evaluation toolkit that features easy assessment of agents for multi-faceted analysis. This not only sheds light on the capabilities and limitations of LLM agents
but also propels the interpretability of their performance to the forefront. Ultimately, AGENT B OARD serves as a step towards demystifying agent behaviors and
accelerating the development of stronger LLM agents.1

1

Introduction

General-purpose agents that can autonomously perceive and act in various environments are considered significant milestones in Artificial Intelligence (Russell and Norvig, 2005). Recent advancements
in large language models (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023) have demonstrated emergent agent
abilities that enable them to understand diverse environments and perform step-by-step planning
through multi-round interactions (Yao et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023). These advanced abilities
contribute to the potential of LLMs to act as generalist agents for real-world problem-solving.
A comprehensive evaluation of LLM agents is crucial for the progression of this emerging field.
To start, task diversity is necessary to cover various agent tasks such as embodied, web, and tool
agents. Additionally, multi-round interaction is critical to mimic realistic scenarios, in contrast to the
single-round tasks commonly adopted in existing benchmarks (Xu et al., 2023b; Lin and Chen, 2023;
Qin et al., 2023a). Furthermore, evaluating agents in partially-observable environments, where they
must actively explore to understand their surroundings, is essential for practical assessments. This
differs from the “synthetic” agent tasks (Wang et al., 2023b) derived from conventional benchmarks
in fully-observable environments, such as MMLU (Lanham et al., 2023) and GSM8K (Cobbe et al.,
2021). However, existing agent benchmarks fail to satisfy all of these criteria.
∗
1

Equal Contribution.
Code and data are available at https://github.com/hkust-nlp/AgentBoard

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

