G3: An Effective and Adaptive Framework for
Worldwide Geolocalization Using Large
Multi-Modality Models

Pengyue Jia1 , Yiding Liu2 , Xiaopeng Li1 , Yuhao Wang1 , Yantong Du1 ,
Xiao Han1 , Xuetao Wei3 , Shuaiqiang Wang2 , Dawei Yin2 , Xiangyu Zhao1∗
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Baidu Inc., 3 Southern University of Science and Technology
{jia.pengyue,xiaopli2-c,yhwang25-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk,
{liuyiding.tanh,hahahenha,shiqiang.wang}@gmail.com,
duyantong94@hrbeu.edu.cn,weixt@sustech.edu.cn,
yindawei@acm.org,xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Worldwide geolocalization aims to locate the precise location at the coordinate level
of photos taken anywhere on the Earth. It is very challenging due to 1) the difficulty
of capturing subtle location-aware visual semantics, and 2) the heterogeneous
geographical distribution of image data. As a result, existing studies have clear
limitations when scaled to a worldwide context. They may easily confuse distant
images with similar visual contents, or cannot adapt to various locations worldwide
with different amounts of relevant data. To resolve these limitations, we propose
G3, a novel framework based on Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). In
particular, G3 consists of three steps, i.e., Geo-alignment, Geo-diversification, and
Geo-verification to optimize both retrieval and generation phases of worldwide
geolocalization. During Geo-alignment, our solution jointly learns expressive multimodal representations for images, GPS and textual descriptions, which allows us
to capture location-aware semantics for retrieving nearby images for a given query.
During Geo-diversification, we leverage a prompt ensembling method that is robust
to inconsistent retrieval performance for different image queries. Finally, we
combine both retrieved and generated GPS candidates in Geo-verification for
location prediction. Experiments on two well-established datasets IM2GPS3k and
YFCC4k verify the superiority of G3 compared to other state-of-the-art methods.
Our code2 and data3 are available online for reproduction.

1

Introduction

Worldwide image geolocalization [30] aims to pinpoint the exact shooting location for any given
photo taken anywhere on Earth, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). Unlike geolocalization within specific
regions (e.g., at city level) [19, 2, 25, 12, 23], worldwide geolocalization [29, 30, 43] greatly unleashes
the potential of geolocalization, which is useful for various real-world applications, such as crime
tracking and navigation. However, worldwide image geolocalization is extremely challenging, as
images collected from around the world are featured with a myriad of elements, including varying
landscapes, weather conditions, architectural styles, etc.
∗

Corresponding author.
https://github.com/Applied-Machine-Learning-Lab/G3
3
https://huggingface.co/datasets/Jia-py/MP16-Pro
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

