Scalable DP-SGD: Shuffling vs. Poisson Subsampling

Lynn Chua
Google Research
chualynn@google.com

Badih Ghazi
Google Research
badihghazi@gmail.com

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Pasin Manurangsi
Google Research
pasin@google.com

Pritish Kamath
Google Research
pritishk@google.com
Amer Sinha
Google Research
amersinha@google.com

Chiyuan Zhang
Google Research
chiyuan@google.com

Abstract
We provide new lower bounds on the privacy guarantee of the multi-epoch Adaptive
Batch Linear Queries (ABLQ) mechanism with shuffled batch sampling, demonstrating substantial gaps when compared to Poisson subsampling; prior analysis
was limited to a single epoch. Since the privacy analysis of Differentially Private
Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD) is obtained by analyzing the ABLQ mechanism, this brings into serious question the common practice of implementing
shuffling-based DP-SGD, but reporting privacy parameters as if Poisson subsampling was used. To understand the impact of this gap on the utility of trained
machine learning models, we introduce a practical approach to implement Poisson
subsampling at scale using massively parallel computation, and efficiently train
models with the same. We compare the utility of models trained with Poissonsubsampling-based DP-SGD, and the optimistic estimates of utility when using
shuffling, via our new lower bounds on the privacy guarantee of ABLQ with
shuffling.

1

Introduction

A common approach for private training of differentiable models, such as neural networks, is to
apply first-order methods with noisy gradients. This general framework is known as DP-SGD
(Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent) [Abadi et al., 2016]; the framework itself is
compatible with any optimization sub-routine. Multiple open source implementations exist for
applying DP-SGD in practice, namely, Tensorflow Privacy, JAX Privacy [Balle et al., 2022] and
PyTorch Opacus [Yousefpour et al., 2021]; and DP-SGD has been applied widely in various machine
learning domains [e.g., Tramer and Boneh, 2020, De et al., 2022, Bu et al., 2022, Chen et al., 2020,
Dockhorn et al., 2023, Anil et al., 2022, He et al., 2022, Igamberdiev et al., 2024, Tang et al., 2024].
DP-SGD (Algorithm 1) processes the training data in a sequence of steps, where at each step, a noisy
estimate of the average gradient over a mini-batch is computed and used to perform a first-order
update over the differentiable model. To obtain the noisy (average) gradient, the gradient g for
each example in the mini-batch is clipped to have norm at most C (a pre-determined fixed bound),
by setting [g]C := g · min{1, C/∥g∥2 }, and computing the sum over the batch; then independent
zero-mean noise drawn from the Gaussian distribution of scale σC is added to each coordinate of
the summed gradient. This could then be scaled by the “target” mini-batch size to obtain a noisy
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

