RoboMamba: Efficient Vision-Language-Action
Model for Robotic Reasoning and Manipulation
∗

Jiaming Liu1 , Mengzhen Liu1 , Zhenyu Wang 1 , Pengju An1 , Xiaoqi Li 1 ,
∗
Kaichen Zhou1 , Senqiao Yang1 , Renrui Zhang , Yandong Guo2 , Shanghang Zhang1,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University; 2 AI2 Robotics;
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI)
jiamingliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, 21251282@bjtu.edu.cn, shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
A fundamental objective in robot manipulation is to enable models to comprehend
visual scenes and execute actions. Although existing Vision-Language-Action
(VLA) models for robots can handle a range of basic tasks, they still face challenges
in two areas: (1) insufficient reasoning ability to tackle complex tasks, and (2)
high computational costs for VLA model fine-tuning and inference. The recently
proposed state space model (SSM) known as Mamba demonstrates promising
capabilities in non-trivial sequence modeling with linear inference complexity.
Inspired by this, we introduce RoboMamba, an end-to-end robotic VLA model
that leverages Mamba to deliver both robotic reasoning and action capabilities,
while maintaining efficient fine-tuning and inference. Specifically, we first integrate
the vision encoder with Mamba, aligning visual tokens with language embedding
through co-training, empowering our model with visual common sense and roboticrelated reasoning. To further equip RoboMamba with SE(3) pose prediction
abilities, we explore an efficient fine-tuning strategy with a simple policy head. We
find that once RoboMamba possesses sufficient reasoning capability, it can acquire
manipulation skills with minimal fine-tuning parameters (0.1% of the model) and
time. In experiments, RoboMamba demonstrates outstanding reasoning capabilities
on general and robotic evaluation benchmarks. Meanwhile, our model showcases
impressive pose prediction results in both simulation and real-world experiments,
achieving inference speeds 3 times faster than existing VLA models. Our project
web page: https://sites.google.com/view/robomamba-web

1

Introduction

The scaling up of data has significantly propelled research on Large Language Models (LLMs) [1–3],
showcasing notable advancements in reasoning and generalization abilities within Natural Language
Processing (NLP). To comprehend multimodal information, Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) [4–8] have been introduced, empowering LLMs with the capability of visual instructionfollowing and scene understanding. Inspired by the strong capabilities of MLLMs in general settings,
recent research aims to incorporate MLLMs into robot manipulation. On the one hand, some works
[9–12] enable robots to comprehend natural language and visual scenes, automatically generating
task plans. On the other hand, Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [13–15] leverage the inherent
capabilities of MLLMs, empowering them with the ability to predict low-level SE(3) poses.
∗

Project Lead,

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

