Equivariant Blurring Diffusion
for Hierarchical Molecular Conformer Generation
Jiwoong Park, Yang Shen
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Texas A&M University
ptywoong@gmail.com, yshen@tamu.edu

Abstract
How can diffusion models process 3D geometries in a coarse-to-fine manner,
akin to our multiscale view of the world? In this paper, we address the question
by focusing on a fundamental biochemical problem of generating 3D molecular
conformers conditioned on molecular graphs in a multiscale manner. Our approach
consists of two hierarchical stages: i) generation of coarse-grained fragment-level
3D structure from the molecular graph, and ii) generation of fine atomic details from
the coarse-grained approximated structure while allowing the latter to be adjusted
simultaneously. For the challenging second stage, which demands preserving
coarse-grained information while ensuring SE(3) equivariance, we introduce a
novel generative model termed Equivariant Blurring Diffusion (EBD), which
defines a forward process that moves towards the fragment-level coarse-grained
structure by blurring the fine atomic details of conformers, and a reverse process
that performs the opposite operation using equivariant networks. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of EBD by geometric and chemical comparison to state-of-theart denoising diffusion models on a benchmark of drug-like molecules. Ablation
studies draw insights on the design of EBD by thoroughly analyzing its architecture,
which includes the design of the loss function and the data corruption process.
Codes are released at https://github.com/Shen-Lab/EBD.

1

Introduction

The advancement of generative models to understand the multiscale properties of objects facilitates their application across a range of granularity
levels, transcending individual scales. To enable
generative models in processing multiscale structures, there has been a surge in hierarchical design
methodologies across multiple domains, spanning
from images [35, 40] to speech [20, 17]. These
methods initially capture coarse-grained structures
and subsequently generate finer details.
In the field of computer vision, recent efforts
[16, 42, 2, 7] have yielded successful designs of
coarse-to-fine generative frameworks for 2D pixels of images, leveraging denoising diffusion mod- Figure 1: Blurring diffusion generative processes
els that corrupt and restore the data by adding and on image [42] and molecular conformer.
removing noises [49, 50, 52, 15, 27]. Notably,
[42] generates images from blurred prior distributions (average of pixel intensities) motivated from
the heat equation of partial differential equations as Fig. 1.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

