MALT Powers Up Adversarial Attacks

Odelia Melamed ∗

Gilad Yehudai†

Adi Shamir ‡

Abstract
Current adversarial attacks for multi-class classifiers choose the target class for a
given input naively, based on the classifier’s confidence levels for various target
classes. We present a novel adversarial targeting method, MALT - Mesoscopic
Almost Linearity Targeting, based on medium-scale almost linearity assumptions.
Our attack wins over the current state of the art AutoAttack on the standard
benchmark datasets CIFAR-100 and ImageNet and for a variety of robust models.
In particular, our attack is five times faster than AutoAttack, while successfully
matching all of AutoAttack’s successes and attacking additional samples that were
previously out of reach. We then prove formally and demonstrate empirically
that our targeting method, although inspired by linear predictors, also applies to
standard non-linear models.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are widely known to be susceptible to adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al.
[2013]), which are typically imperceptible by humans. Many different papers have shown how to
construct such attacks, where adding a small perturbation to the input significantly changes the output
of the model (Carlini and Wagner [2017], Papernot et al. [2017], Athalye et al. [2018]). To protect
from these attacks, researchers have tried to develop more robust models using several different
techniques, such as adversarial training using different attacks (Madry et al. [2017], Papernot et al.
[2016], Liu et al. [2023], Wang et al. [2023]).
The current state of the art adversarial attack, known as AutoAttack (Croce and Hein [2020b]),
combines several different parameter-free attacks, some targeted and some untargeted. AutoAttack
currently leads the RobustBench benchmark (Croce et al. [2020]), which is the standard benchmark
for adversarial robustness. Notably, the targeted attacks used in AutoAttack pick the adversarial
target classes according to the model’s confidence levels and attack the top nine classes, even though
CIFAR-100 and ImageNet have many more possible target classes. The reason for attacking only a
limited number of classes, rather than all possible classes, is computational, as each such attack has a
significant running time.
The reason that adversarial examples exist remains a hot topic of debate, specifically, whether it is
due to the highly non-linear landscape of neural networks or rather to their local linearity properties.
In Goodfellow et al. [2014], the authors provide several strong arguments for the local linearity
hypothesis while presenting FGSM, a one-step gradient attack. Following Bubeck et al. [2021],
we consider three distance scales around each fixed data point where linearity properties should
be studied separately. On the macroscopic scale, neural networks are highly non-linear functions
and have very complicated decision boundaries. On the other hand, neural networks with ReLU
activation are piecewise linear, and thus at the microscopic scale (in which no ReLU input changes
signs), they can be seen as completely linear functions. The third is the intermediate mesoscopic
scale, which characterizes the typical distances between inputs to their nearest adversarial examples.
∗

Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel, odelia.melamed@weizmann.ac.il
Center for Data Science, New York University, gy2219@nyu.edu
‡
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel, adi.shamir@weizmann.ac.il.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

