Evaluating Copyright Takedown Methods for
Language Models

Noah A. Smith2

Boyi Wei∗1 Weijia Shi∗2 Yangsibo Huang∗1
Chiyuan Zhang Luke Zettlemoyer2 Kai Li1 Peter Henderson1
1

Princeton University

2

University of Washington

https://cotaeval.github.io/

Abstract
Language models (LMs) derive their capabilities from extensive training on diverse
data, including potentially copyrighted material. These models can memorize and
generate content similar to their training data, posing potential concerns. Therefore,
model creators are motivated to develop mitigation methods that prevent generating
protected content. We term this procedure as copyright takedowns for LMs, noting
the conceptual similarity to (but legal distinction from) the Digital Millennium
Copyright Act (DMCA) takedown This paper introduces the first evaluation of
the feasibility and side effects of copyright takedowns for LMs. We propose
C OTA E VAL, an evaluation framework to assess the effectiveness of copyright
takedown methods, the impact on the model’s ability to retain uncopyrightable
factual knowledge from the training data whose recitation is embargoed, and how
well the model maintains its general utility and efficiency. We examine several
strategies, including adding system prompts, decoding-time filtering interventions,
and unlearning approaches. Our findings indicate that no tested method excels
across all metrics, showing significant room for research in this unique problem
setting and indicating potential unresolved challenges for live policy proposals.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are trained on massive amounts of data, largely drawn from across the
web (Bommasani et al., 2021). In most countries, explicit policies regarding training on copyrighted
material have been lagging behind the development of LLM training techniques. In the US, model
creators often cite the fair use doctrine, a legal defense (developed before the LLM era) that allows
the use of copyrighted data without permission under certain circumstances (Lemley & Casey, 2021).
Nonetheless, litigation has swept the United States and abroad as copyright owners challenge the
use of their content for training and deploying foundation models—e.g., Tremblay v. OpenAI, Inc.,
(2023); Kadrey v. Meta Platforms, Inc. (2023). Generally, there is less legal risk, and a more likely
fair use defense, if models do not output content substantially similar to the training data (Henderson
et al., 2023; Sag, 2023; Lee et al., 2024).
Thus, model creators increasingly seek to use guardrails that prevent their models from regurgitating
content. An example is Github Copilot, a code completion model, provides a duplication detection
filter. When turned on, “GitHub Copilot checks code completion suggestions with their surrounding
code of about 150 characters against public code on GitHub. If there is a match, or a near match, the
suggestion is not shown” (GitHub, 2023b). OpenAI’s ChatGPT appears to have a similar filter for
some types of content, as well as training the model to reject requests that may ask for infringing
outputs (Henderson et al., 2023). Such post-training mitigation strategies will be an essential aspect
of model deployments. Even if model creators possess licenses and filter pre-training data, they may
*

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

