QWO: Speeding Up Permutation-Based Causal
Discovery in LiGAMs

Mohammad Shahverdikondori
College of Management of Technology
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
mohammad.shahverdikondori@epfl.ch
Ehsan Mokhtarian
School of Computer and Communication Sciences
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
ehsan.mokhtarian@epfl.ch

Negar Kiyavash
College of Management of Technology
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Abstract
Causal discovery is essential for understanding relationships among variables of
interest in many scientific domains. In this paper, we focus on permutation-based
methods for learning causal graphs in Linear Gaussian Acyclic Models (LiGAMs),
where the permutation encodes a causal ordering of the variables. Existing methods in this setting do not scale due to their high computational complexity. These
methods are comprised of two main components: (i) constructing a specific DAG,
G π , for a given permutation π, which represents the best structure that can be
learned from the available data while adhering to π, and (ii) searching over the
space of permutations πs (i.e., causal orders) to minimize the number of edges in
G π . We introduce QW-Orthogonality (QWO), a novel approach that significantly
enhances the efficiency of computing G π for a given permutation π. QWO has a
speed-up of O(n2 ) (n is the number of variables) compared to the state-of-the-art
BIC-based method, making it highly scalable. We show that our method is theoretically sound and can be integrated into existing search strategies such as GRaSP and
hill-climbing-based methods to improve their performance. The implementation
is publicly available at https://github.com/ban-epfl/QWO.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery is fundamental to understanding and modeling the relationships between variables
in various scientific domains [Pea09, SGSH00]. A causal graph, typically represented by a directed
acyclic graph (DAG), is a graphical model that represents how variables within a system influence
one another [Pea09]. The problem of causal discovery refers to learning the causal graph from
available data [SGSH00, MT99, Chi02, FZ13, ZARX18, BSSU20a, MAGK21, LAR22, MAJ+ 22,
MEAK24], which has broad applications across numerous fields such as economics [Hec08], genetics [SMD+ 03], and social sciences [MW15].
Score-based methods are an important class of approaches for causal discovery [JS10, KGG+ 22,
HS13, HZL+ 18, Sch78, Bun91]. They involve defining a score function over the space of DAGs and
seeking the graph that maximizes this score. However, the computational complexity of exploring the
2
space of all possible DAGs, which is in the order of 2Ω(n ) , where n is the number of variables, poses a
significant challenge [Rob73]. Ordering-based methods, introduced by [TK05], significantly reduce
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

