CURE4Rec: A Benchmark for Recommendation
Unlearning with Deeper Influence

Chaochao Chen1 , Jiaming Zhang1 , Yizhao Zhang1 , Li Zhang1 , Lingjuan Lyu2 ,
Yuyuan Li3,1∗, Biao Gong3 , Chenggang Yan3
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Sony AI, 3 Hangzhou Dianzi University
{zjuccc, 22321350, 22221337}@zju.edu.cn, zhanglizl80@gmail.com, lingjuan.lv@sony.com
y2li@hdu.edu.cn, a.biao.gong@gmail.com, cgyan@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract
With increasing privacy concerns in artificial intelligence, regulations have mandated the right to be forgotten, granting individuals the right to withdraw their
data from models. Machine unlearning has emerged as a potential solution to
enable selective forgetting in models, particularly in recommender systems where
historical data contains sensitive user information. Despite recent advances in
recommendation unlearning, evaluating unlearning methods comprehensively remains challenging due to the absence of a unified evaluation framework and
overlooked aspects of deeper influence, e.g., fairness. To address these gaps,
we propose CURE4Rec, the first comprehensive benchmark for recommendation
unlearning evaluation. CURE4Rec covers four aspects, i.e., unlearning Completeness, recommendation Utility, unleaRning efficiency, and recommendation
fairnEss, under three data selection strategies, i.e., core data, edge data, and random
data. Specifically, we consider the deeper influence of unlearning on recommendation fairness and robustness towards data with varying impact levels. We
construct multiple datasets with CURE4Rec evaluation and conduct extensive
experiments on existing recommendation unlearning methods. Our code is released
at https://github.com/xiye7lai/CURE4Rec.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, growing concerns over information abundance and data leakage have
intensified the focus on privacy preservation within artificial intelligence. Regulations such as
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Union, 2018), the California Consumer Privacy
Act (Pardau, 2018)and the Delete Act (Information, 2023) grant individuals the right to be forgotten,
requiring the deletion of personal data used in information systems. Nowadays, the ubiquitous
application of machine learning models in information systems poses potential risks for memorizing
training data (Fredrikson et al., 2015). Consequently, the aforementioned regulations also require
forgetting the associated data memory within the trained models, giving rise to the concept of
machine unlearning. Recently, machine unlearning has gained increasing popularity in computer
vision (Bourtoule et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2021), natural language processing (Chen & Yang, 2023;
Eldan & Russinovich, 2023), and recommender systems (Chen et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023a,b). As
recommender systems typically rely on historical interaction data to extract user preferences, the
recommendation model inherently contains sensitive user information. Therefore, there is a crucial
need for unlearning to preserve privacy. The task of machine unlearning in recommender systems is
termed as recommendation unlearning.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

