Unlocking the Potential of Global Human Expertise

Elliot Meyerson1 Olivier Francon1 Darren Sargent1 Babak Hodjat1 Risto Miikkulainen1,2
1
Cognizant AI Labs 2 The University of Texas at Austin
{elliot.meyerson,olivier.francon,darren.sargent,babak,risto}@cognizant.com

Abstract
Solving societal problems on a global scale requires the collection and processing
of ideas and methods from diverse sets of international experts. As the number
and diversity of human experts increase, so does the likelihood that elements in
this collective knowledge can be combined and refined to discover novel and better
solutions. However, it is difficult to identify, combine, and refine complementary
information in an increasingly large and diverse knowledge base. This paper argues
that artificial intelligence (AI) can play a crucial role in this process. An evolutionary AI framework, termed RHEA, fills this role by distilling knowledge from
diverse models created by human experts into equivalent neural networks, which
are then recombined and refined in a population-based search. The framework was
implemented in a formal synthetic domain, demonstrating that it is transparent and
systematic. It was then applied to the results of the XPRIZE Pandemic Response
Challenge, in which over 100 teams of experts across 23 countries submitted
models based on diverse methodologies to predict COVID-19 cases and suggest
non-pharmaceutical intervention policies for 235 nations, states, and regions across
the globe. Building upon this expert knowledge, by recombining and refining the
169 resulting policy suggestion models, RHEA discovered a broader and more
effective set of policies than either AI or human experts alone, as evaluated based
on real-world data. The results thus suggest that AI can play a crucial role in
realizing the potential of human expertise in global problem-solving.

1

Introduction

Integrating knowledge and perspectives from a diverse set of experts is essential for developing better
solutions to societal challenges, such as policies to curb an ongoing pandemic, slow down and reverse
climate change, and improve sustainability [33, 41, 57, 63, 64]. Increased diversity in human teams
can lead to improved decision-making [25, 62, 83], but as the scale of the problem and size of the
team increases, it becomes difficult to discover the best combinations and refinements of available
ideas [37]. This paper argues that artificial intelligence (AI) can play a crucial role in this process,
making it possible to realize the full potential of diverse human expertise. Though there are many AI
systems that take advantage of human expertise to improve automated decision-making [4, 31, 66],
an approach to the general problem must meet a set of unique requirements: It must be able to
incorporate expertise from diverse sources with disparate forms; it must be multi-objective since
conflicting policy goals will need to be balanced; and the origins of final solutions must be traceable
so that credit can be distributed back to humans based on their contributions. An evolutionary AI
framework termed RHEA (for Realizing Human Expertise through AI) is developed in this paper to
satisfy these requirements. Evolutionary AI, or population-based search, is a biologically-inspired
method that often leads to surprising discoveries and insights [5, 15, 39, 48, 67]; it is also a natural fit
here since the development of ideas in human teams mirrors an evolutionary process [14, 17, 38, 32].
Implementing RHEA for a particular application requires the following steps (Fig. 1):
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

