Dendritic Integration Inspired Artificial Neural
Networks Capture Data Correlation
Chongming Liua,b , Jingyang Maa,b , Songting Lia,b,c,1 , and Douglas Zhoua,b,c,d,1
a

School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
b
Institute of Natural Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
c
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Scientific and Engineering Computing, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China
d
Shanghai Frontier Science Center of Modern Analysis, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China

Abstract
Incorporating biological neuronal properties into Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs) to enhance computational capabilities is under active investigation in
the field of deep learning. Inspired by recent findings indicating that dendrites
adhere to quadratic integration rule for synaptic inputs, this study explores the
computational benefits of quadratic neurons. We theoretically demonstrate that
quadratic neurons inherently capture correlation within structured data, a feature that grants them superior generalization abilities over traditional neurons.
This is substantiated by few-shot learning experiments. Furthermore, we integrate the quadratic rule into Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) using a biologically plausible approach, resulting in innovative architectures—Dendritic
integration inspired CNNs (Dit-CNNs). Our Dit-CNNs compete favorably
with state-of-the-art models across multiple classification benchmarks, e.g.,
ImageNet-1K, while retaining the simplicity and efficiency of traditional CNNs.
All source code are available at https://github.com/liuchongming1999/
Dendritic-integration-inspired-CNN-NeurIPS-2024.

1

Introduction

While the Artificial Neural Network (ANN) framework has made significant advancements towards
solving complex tasks, it still faces problems that are rudimentary to real brains [6]. A notable
distinction between the modern ANN framework and the human brain is that the former relies on a
significant number of training samples, which consumes large amounts of energy, whereas the latter
runs on extremely low power (<20 watts) and possesses a strong generalization capability based on
few-shot learning. Studies have demonstrated that incorporating dendritic features in ANNs can
alleviate these issues and enhance overall performance [52, 38, 30]. However, it is difficult to quantify
the nonlinear integration of dendrites, which is an essential property that allows individual neurons to
perform complex computations [43, 49]. As a result, dendritic-inspired models often employ linear
integration with nonlinear activation functions such as ReLU and Sigmoid [21, 37].
In light of recent studies revealing that the somatic responses of biological neurons to multiple
synaptic inputs on dendrites follow a quadratic integration rule [15, 28], we explore the computational
benefit of the quadratic neuron model [41]. This model substitutes the linear integration and nonlinear
1

Corresponding author, songting@stju.edu.cn, or zdz@sjtu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

