Graphcode: Learning from multiparameter persistent
homology using graph neural networks

Michael Kerber∗
Institute of Geometry
Graz University of Technology
kerber@tugraz.at

Florian Russold∗
Institute of Geometry
Graz University of Technology
russold@tugraz.at

Abstract
We introduce graphcodes, a novel multi-scale summary of the topological properties
of a dataset that is based on the well-established theory of persistent homology.
Graphcodes handle datasets that are filtered along two real-valued scale parameters.
Such multi-parameter topological summaries are usually based on complicated
theoretical foundations and difficult to compute; in contrast, graphcodes yield
an informative and interpretable summary and can be computed as efficient as
one-parameter summaries. Moreover, a graphcode is simply an embedded graph
and can therefore be readily integrated in machine learning pipelines using graph
neural networks. We describe such a pipeline and demonstrate that graphcodes
achieve better classification accuracy than state-of-the-art approaches on various
datasets.

1

Introduction

A quote attributed to Gunnar Carlsson says "Data has shape and shape has meaning". Topological
data analysis (TDA) is concerned with studying the shape, or more precisely the topological and
geometric properties of data. One of the most prominent tools to quantify and extract topological and
geometric information from a dataset is persistent homology. The idea is to represent a dataset on
multiple scales through a nested sequence of spaces, usually simplicial complexes for computations,
and to measure how topological features like connected components, holes or voids appear and
disappear when traversing that nested sequence. This information can succinctly be represented
through a barcode, or equivalently a persistence diagram, which capture for every topological feature
its lifetime along the scale axis. Persistent homology has been successfully applied in a wealth of
application areas [14, 23, 28, 30, 31, 36], often in combination with Machine Learning methods – see
the recent survey [22] for a comprehensive overview.
A shortcoming of classical persistent homology is that it is bound to a single parameter, whereas
data often is represented along several independent scale axes (e.g., think of RGB images which
have three color channels along which the image can be considered). To get a barcode, one is
forced to chose fixed scales for all but one scale parameters. The extension to multi-parameter
persistent homology [7, 9] avoids to make such choices. Similar to the one-parameter setup, the data
is represented in a nested multi-dimensional grid of spaces and the evolution of topological features
in this grid is analyzed. Unfortunately, a succinct representation as a barcode is not possible in this
extension, which makes the theory and algorithmic treatment more involved. Nevertheless, the quest
of how to use informative summaries in multi-parameter persistence is an active field of contemporary
research. A common theme in this context is vectorization, meaning that some (partial) topological
information is extracted from the dataset and transformed into a high-dimensional vector suitable for
machine learning pipelines.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

