LocCa: Visual Pretraining
with Location-aware Captioners

Bo Wan1,3 ∗
Michael Tschannen1
Yongqin Xian2
Filip Pavetic1
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin1
Xiao Wang1
André Susano Pinto1
Andreas Steiner1
Lucas Beyer1
Xiaohua Zhai†1
1

Google DeepMind, Zürich

2

Google, Zürich

3

KU Leuven

Abstract
Image captioning was recently found to be an effective pretraining method similar
to contrastive pretraining. This opens up the largely-unexplored potential of using
natural language as a flexible and powerful interface for handling diverse pretraining
tasks. In this paper, we demonstrate this with a novel visual pretraining paradigm,
LocCa, that incorporates location-aware tasks into captioners to teach models to
extract rich information from images. Specifically, LocCa employs two tasks,
bounding box prediction and location-dependent captioning, conditioned on the
image pixel input. Thanks to the multitask capabilities of an encoder-decoder
architecture, we show that an image captioner can effortlessly handle multiple
tasks during pretraining. LocCa significantly outperforms standard captioners on
downstream localization tasks, achieving state-of-the-art results on RefCOCO/+/g,
while maintaining comparable performance on holistic tasks. Our work paves the
way for further exploration of natural language interfaces in visual pretraining.

1

Introduction

Remarkable progress has been made in large-scale visual pretraining [1, 2, 3, 4], where vision models
are pretrained on large-scale annotated datasets [5, 6, 4] with a supervised classification loss. Yet, the
manual annotation required for such datasets is time-consuming and costly, posing a challenge to
scalability.
In light of this, the modern contrastive pretraining methods [7, 8] extract learning signals from
web-crawled image-text pairwise datasets [9, 10], circumventing the need for extensive manual
annotations. The contrastively pretrained models demonstrate remarkable capability on zero-shot
transfer tasks, especially on downstream applications that require fine-grained visual [11, 12] or
textual understanding [13]. More recently, image captioning has been shown as an alternative visual
pretraining task to learn capable vision encoders [14], where an encoder-decoder architecture is
pretrained to generate text captions from the image input. Some studies, such as [15, 16], pioneered
the joint pretraining of contrastive and generative methods. Typically, encoded image features are
fed into two parallel branches: one employs a text encoder to produce sentence embeddings for
contrastive learning, while the other utilizes a text decoder to generate image captions. Despite
the effectiveness of these works, they typically focus on a holistic understanding of images, often
overlooking the region-specific details of the visual content.
The recent success of image captioning [14] and the advancements in multitasking learning of
decoders [17, 18, 19] opens up the largely-unexplored potential of using natural language as a
∗
Work done during Google DeepMind internship. † Project lead. All authors made significant technical
contributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

