PLIP: Language-Image Pre-training for Person
Representation Learning

Jialong Zuo 1
Hanyu Zhou 1

Jiahao Hong 1
Feng Zhang 1
1∗
Changxin Gao
Nong Sang 1

Changqian Yu 2
Jingdong Wang 3

1

National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
Skywork AI, 3 Department of Computer Vision, Baidu Inc.
{jlongzuo, cgao}@hust.edu.cn, {wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Abstract
Language-image pre-training is an effective technique for learning powerful representations in general domains. However, when directly turning to person representation learning, these general pre-training methods suffer from unsatisfactory
performance. The reason is that they neglect critical person-related characteristics,
i.e., fine-grained attributes and identities. To address this issue, we propose a novel
language-image pre-training framework for person representation learning, termed
PLIP. Specifically, we elaborately design three pretext tasks: 1) Text-guided Image
Colorization, aims to establish the correspondence between the person-related
image regions and the fine-grained color-part textual phrases. 2) Image-guided
Attributes Prediction, aims to mine fine-grained attribute information of the person
body in the image; and 3) Identity-based Vision-Language Contrast, aims to correlate the cross-modal representations at the identity level rather than the instance
level. Moreover, to implement our pre-train framework, we construct a large-scale
person dataset with image-text pairs named SYNTH-PEDES by automatically generating textual annotations. We pre-train PLIP on SYNTH-PEDES and evaluate our
models by spanning downstream person-centric tasks. PLIP not only significantly
improves existing methods on all these tasks, but also shows great ability in the
zero-shot and domain generalization settings.

1

Introduction

Person-centric tasks, such as image/text-based person re-identification, person attribute recognition,
person search and human parsing, are becoming increasingly influential in widespread applications,
such as security monitor, smart city, virtual reality and scene understanding. Benefiting from the
advances in designing task-specific methods [78, 9, 41, 54, 50], these tasks have achieved significant
progress for the past few years.
However, it has become evident through recent advancements in research that the mere development
of sophisticated models based on specific tasks has already encountered a performance bottleneck.
At the same time, some works [35, 15, 10, 14] on general representation learning have shown great
potential to further improve model performance. Due to the above reasons, some researchers [12]
have attempted to learn generic person representations by utilizing rich person images. However,
their pre-training method based on sparse visual information falls short in terms of both training
performance and efficiency.
Meanwhile, some works [72, 49, 85] have demonstrated that introducing the language modality helps
to learn better representations in general domains, for the language naturally enjoys higher information
density. However, when it comes to person representation learning, these general language-image
pre-training methods like CLIP [72] are often unsatisfactory in performance. We believe the reason is
that they neglect some critical person-related characteristics, i.e., fine-grained attributes and identities.
∗

Corresponding Author. Project Link: https://github.com/Zplusdragon/PLIP

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

