Speaking Your Language: Spatial Relationships in
Interpretable Emergent Communication

Olaf Lipinski1∗ Adam J. Sobey2,1 Federico Cerutti3 Timothy J. Norman1
1
University of Southampton 2 The Alan Turing Institute 3 University of Brescia
{o.lipinski,t.j.norman}@soton.ac.uk
asobey@turing.ac.uk
federico.cerutti@unibs.it

Abstract
Effective communication requires the ability to refer to specific parts of an observation in relation to others. While emergent communication literature shows
success in developing various language properties, no research has shown the
emergence of such positional references. This paper demonstrates how agents can
communicate about spatial relationships within their observations. The results
indicate that agents can develop a language capable of expressing the relationships
between parts of their observation, achieving over 90% accuracy when trained in a
referential game which requires such communication. Using a collocation measure,
we demonstrate how the agents create such references. This analysis suggests that
agents use a mixture of non-compositional and compositional messages to convey
spatial relationships. We also show that the emergent language is interpretable by
humans. The translation accuracy is tested by communicating with the receiver
agent, where the receiver achieves over 78% accuracy using parts of this lexicon,
confirming that the interpretation of the emergent language was successful.

1

Spatial referencing in emergent communication

Emergent communication allows agents to develop bespoke languages for their environment. While
there are many successful examples of efficient (Rita et al., 2020) and compositional (Chaabouni
et al., 2020) languages, they often lack fundamental aspects seen in human language, such as
syntax (Lazaridou and Baroni, 2020) or recursion (Baroni, 2020). It is argued that these aspects of
communication are important to improve the efficiency and generalisability of emergent languages
(Baroni, 2020; Boldt and Mortensen, 2024; Rita et al., 2024). However, the current architectures,
environments, and reward schemes are yet to exhibit such fundamental properties.
One such aspect is the development of deixis (Rita et al., 2024), which has been described as a way
of pointing through language. Examples of temporal deixis include words such as “yesterday” or
“before,” and spatial deixis include words such as “here” or “next to” (Lyons, 1977). In emergent
communication, Lipinski et al. (2023) investigate how agents may refer to repeating observations,
which could also be viewed from the linguistic perspective as investigating temporal deixis. However,
while there are advocates to investigate how emergent languages can develop key concepts from
human language (Rita et al., 2024), no work has demonstrated the emergence of relative references to
specific locations within an observation, or spatial deixis.
Spatial references would be valuable in establishing shared context between agents, increasing communication efficiency by reducing the need for detailed descriptions, and adaptability, by removing
the need for unique references per object. For example, instead of describing a new, previously
∗

Corresponding author:

o.lipinski@soton.ac.uk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

