Online Posterior Sampling with a Diffusion Prior

Branislav Kveton
Adobe Research∗

Boris N. Oreshkin
Amazon

Youngsuk Park
AWS AI Labs

Aniket Deshmukh
AWS AI Labs

Rui Song
Amazon

Abstract
Posterior sampling in contextual bandits with a Gaussian prior can be implemented
exactly or approximately using the Laplace approximation. The Gaussian prior is
computationally efficient but it cannot describe complex distributions. In this work,
we propose approximate posterior sampling algorithms for contextual bandits with
a diffusion model prior. The key idea is to sample from a chain of approximate
conditional posteriors, one for each stage of the reverse diffusion process, which
are obtained by the Laplace approximation. Our approximations are motivated by
posterior sampling with a Gaussian prior, and inherit its simplicity and efficiency.
They are asymptotically consistent and perform well empirically on a variety of
contextual bandit problems.

1

Introduction

A multi-armed bandit [27, 6, 30] is an online learning problem where an agent sequentially interacts
with an environment over n rounds with the goal of maximizing its rewards. In each round, it takes
an action and receives its stochastic reward. The mean rewards of the actions are unknown a priori
and must be learned. This leads to the exploration-exploitation dilemma: explore actions to learn
about them or exploit the action with the highest estimated reward. Bandits have been successfully
applied to problems where uncertainty modeling and adaptation are beneficial, such recommender
systems [32, 54, 25, 35] and hyper-parameter optimization [34].
Contextual bandits [29, 32] with linear [13, 1] and generalized linear models (GLMs) [17, 33, 2, 26]
have become popular due to the their flexibility and efficiency. The features in these models can be
hand-crafted or learned from historic data [40], and the models can be also updated incrementally
[1, 24]. While the original algorithms for linear and GLM bandits were based on upper confidence
bounds (UCBs) [13, 1, 17], Thompson sampling (TS) is more popular in practice [11, 3, 42, 44]. The
key idea in TS is to explore by sampling from the posterior distribution of model parameter θ∗ . TS
uses the prior knowledge about θ∗ to speed up exploration [11, 40, 36, 9, 21, 20, 5]. When the prior
is a multivariate Gaussian, the posterior of θ∗ can be updated and sampled from efficiently [11]. This
prior has a limited expressive power, because it cannot even represent multimodal distributions. To
address this, we study posterior sampling with a diffusion prior. The main benefit of such priors is
that they can represent complex distributions and be learned from data.
We make the following contributions. First, we propose novel posterior sampling approximations
for linear models and GLMs with a diffusion model prior. The key idea is to sample from a chain of
approximate conditional posteriors, one for each stage of the reverse process, which are estimated in
a closed form. In linear models, each conditional is a product of two Gaussians, representing prior
knowledge and diffused evidence (Theorem 2). In GLMs, each conditional is obtained by a Laplace
approximation, which mixes prior knowledge and evidence (Theorem 4). Our approximations are
motivated by posterior sampling with Gaussian priors, and inherit its simplicity and efficiency. Prior
works (Section 7) sampled from the posterior using the likelihood score, and their approximations
become unstable when the score is high. We combine the likelihood with conditional priors, in each
∗

The work was done at AWS AI Labs.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

