MambaTree: Tree Topology
is All You Need in State Space Model

Yicheng Xiao1†∗,
Lin Song2,3B∗ ,
1
4
Shaoli Huang , Jiangshan Wang , Siyu Song , Yixiao Ge2,3 , Xiu Li1B , Ying Shan2,3
3

1

2

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 Tencent AI Lab 4 South China Normal University
xiaoyc23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
ronnysong@tencent.com

Abstract
The state space models, employing recursively propagated features, demonstrate
strong representation capabilities comparable to Transformer models and superior efficiency. However, constrained by the inherent geometric constraints of
sequences, it still falls short in modeling long-range dependencies. To address
this issue, we propose the MambaTree network, which first dynamically generates
a tree topology based on spatial relationships and input features. Then, feature
propagation is performed based on this graph, thereby breaking the original sequence constraints to achieve stronger representation capabilities. Additionally,
we introduce a linear complexity dynamic programming algorithm to enhance
long-range interactions without increasing computational cost. MambaTree is a
versatile multimodal framework that can be applied to both visual and textual tasks.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms
existing structured state space models on image classification, object detection
and segmentation. Besides, by fine-tuning large language models, our approach
achieves consistent improvements in multiple textual tasks at minor training cost.
Code is available at https://github.com/EasonXiao-888/GrootVL.

1

Introduction

Mainstream fundamental models are primarily based on CNN [30, 62, 44, 32, 13] and Transformer
architectures [15, 43, 42, 59, 14], which dominate in visual and language tasks. However, the small
receptive field of CNNs and the high complexity of Transformers make it challenging to strike a good
balance between effectiveness and efficiency. The state space models (SSMs) [22, 24, 52] attempt
to disrupt this impasse, which model sequences in a recurrent form. Different from the previous
recurrent neural networks [31, 7], these approaches draw inspiration from control systems, leveraging
structural parameter initialization to attain stable optimization and superior computing performance.
Nevertheless, it remains susceptible to the intrinsic flaw shared by recurrent neural networks, i.e., a
deficiency in capturing long-range dependencies.
Recently, an improved selection mechanism known as Mamba [19] is proposed to mitigate the
challenges of SSMs. This approach introduces weight modulation during the propagation process,
which substantially enlarges the effective receptive field and achieves impressive performance in NLP
tasks. Besides, numerous studies aim to extend Mamba into computer vision, by employing various
pre-defined strategies to map 2D image features into 1D sequences. ViM [77] and VMamba [41]
utilize a multi-directional raster-scanning strategy, while LocalMamba [34] further confines its
∗

Equal contribution. † Work done during an internship at Tencent. B Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

