Improving Deep Learning Optimization through
Constrained Parameter Regularization

Jörg K.H. Franke
University of Freiburg, Germany

Michael Hefenbrock
RevoAI, Karlsruhe, Germany

Gregor Koehler
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
Heidelberg, Germany

Frank Hutter
ELLIS Institute Tübingen, Germany
University of Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
Regularization is a critical component in deep learning. The most commonly used
approach, weight decay, applies a constant penalty coefficient uniformly across all
parameters. This may be overly restrictive for some parameters, while insufficient
for others. To address this, we present Constrained Parameter Regularization (CPR)
as an alternative to traditional weight decay. Unlike the uniform application of
a single penalty, CPR enforces an upper bound on a statistical measure, such as
the L2 -norm, of individual parameter matrices. Consequently, learning becomes
a constraint optimization problem, which we tackle using an adaptation of the
augmented Lagrangian method. CPR introduces only a minor runtime overhead and
only requires setting an upper bound. We propose simple yet efficient mechanisms
for initializing this bound, making CPR rely on no hyperparameter or one, akin to
weight decay. Our empirical studies on computer vision and language modeling
tasks demonstrate CPR’s effectiveness. The results show that CPR can outperform
traditional weight decay and increase performance in pre-training and fine-tuning.

1

Introduction

Perplexity

Deep neural networks are the bedrock of
AdamCPR 200k
many state-of-the-art machine learning appli18.8
AdamW 200k
cations [1]. While these models have exhibAdamW 300k
18.6
ited unparalleled expressivity, they also possess
millions, sometimes trillions, of parameters [2].
18.4
This massive capacity makes them susceptible
to overfitting, where models memorize nuances
18.2
of the training data but underperform on unseen
examples. To mitigate this, many different reg18.0
ularization techniques have been adopted, with
100k
200k
300k
weight decay and L2 regularization [3, 4, 5] beOptimization Steps
ing the most popular. L2 regularization penalizes the squared magnitude of model parameters Figure 1: GPT2s training using Adam with weight
and (decoupled) weight decay (which is equiv- decay or CPR (Kappa-IP). AdamCPR outperalent to L2 regularization for non-adaptive gra- forms AdamW with the same budget and only redient algorithms [6]) multiplies all weights with quires 2/3 of the budget to reach the same score.
a constant at every step. This seemingly simple
act offers numerous benefits by curbing the growth of individual weights, reducing the risk of relying
on any particular feature excessively, and thus promoting model generalization.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

