Relationship Prompt Learning is Enough for
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Jiahao Li1 , Yang Lu1,2,3 , Yuan Xie∗4,5 and Yanyun Qu∗1,2,3
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
3
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China,
Xiamen University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
5
Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University
2

Abstract
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS) aims to segment unseen
classes without corresponding labels. Existing Vision-Language Model (VLM)based methods leverage VLM’s rich knowledge to enhance additional explicit
segmentation-specific networks, yielding competitive results, but at the cost of
extensive training cost. To reduce the cost, we attempt to enable VLM to directly
produce the segmentation results without any segmentation-specific networks.
Prompt learning offers a direct and parameter-efficient approach, yet it falls short
in guiding VLM for pixel-level visual classification. Therefore, we propose the
Relationship Prompt Module (RPM), which generates the relationship prompt that
directs VLM to extract pixel-level semantic embeddings suitable for OVSS. Moreover, RPM integrates with VLM to construct the Relationship Prompt Network
(RPN), achieving OVSS without any segmentation-specific networks. RPN attains
state-of-the-art performance with merely about 3M trainable parameters (2% of
total parameters).

1

Introduction

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS) [1–4] aims to segment novel classes without
corresponding training images, which is still a challenging task in computer vision. Vision-Language
Model (VLM) [5–7] has emerged as a powerful approach, acquiring comprehensive knowledge via
large-scale image-caption matching training. Several VLM-based OVSS methods [8–10] achieve
promising results. These methods employ the rich image-text representation knowledge inherent
in VLM to improve segmentation performance and are categorized into two types: two-stage and
one-stage methods. Two-stage methods [11–14] first generate image-level masks without semantics
via a well-designed mask proposal network [15–18] and then classify these masks via the image-level
classification ability of VLM. One-stage methods [19, 20] employ a semantic decoding network
to distill VLM’s comprehensive knowledge from the image to the pixel level, thereby producing
pixel-level segmentation results.
However, both of these VLM-based methods rely on additional explicit segmentation-specific networks to obtain segmentation results, resulting in extensive training cost. To reduce the training cost,
an intuitive idea is to make VLM directly produce segmentation results without these segmentation* Corresponding author: yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

