Your contrastive learning problem is secretly a
distribution alignment problem

Zihao Chen∗, Chi-Heng Lin, Ran Liu, Jingyun Xiao, Eva L. Dyer∗
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA

Abstract
Despite the success of contrastive learning (CL) in vision and language, its theoretical foundations and mechanisms for building representations remain poorly
understood. In this work, we build connections between noise contrastive estimation losses widely used in CL and distribution alignment with entropic optimal
transport (OT). This connection allows us to develop a family of different losses
and multistep iterative variants for existing CL methods. Intuitively, by using
more information from the distribution of latents, our approach allows a more
distribution-aware manipulation of the relationships within augmented sample
sets. We provide theoretical insights and experimental evidence demonstrating
the benefits of our approach for generalized contrastive alignment. Through this
framework, it is possible to leverage tools in OT to build unbalanced losses to
handle noisy views and customize the representation space by changing the constraints on alignment. By reframing contrastive learning as an alignment problem
and leveraging existing optimization tools for OT, our work provides new insights
and connections between different self-supervised learning models in addition to
new tools that can be more easily adapted to incorporate domain knowledge into
learning.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, the availability of vast amounts of unlabeled data has created an opportunity
to learn meaningful representations without relying on costly labeled datasets [26, 52, 27]. Selfsupervised learning has emerged as a powerful solution to this problem, allowing models to leverage
the inherent structure in data to build useful representations. Among self-supervised methods, contrastive learning (CL) is widely adopted for its ability to create robust representations by distinguishing
between similar (positive) and dissimilar (negative) data pairs. With success in fields like image
and language processing [8, 46], contrastive learning now also shows promise in domains where
cross-modal, noisy, or structurally complex data make labeling especially challenging [34, 56, 10].
Traditional contrastive learning methods primarily aim to bring positive pairs—often augmentations
of the same sample—closer together in representation space. While effective, this approach often
struggles with real-world challenges such as noise in views, variations in data quality, or shifts
introduced by complex transformations, where positive pairs may not perfectly align. Additionally,
in tasks requiring domain generalization, aligning representations across diverse domains (e.g.,
variations in style or sensor type) is critical but difficult to achieve with standard contrastive learning,
which typically lacks mechanisms for incorporating domain-specific relationships. These limitations
highlight the need for a more flexible approach that can adapt alignment strategies based on the data
structure, allowing for finer control over similarity and dissimilarity among samples.
∗

Contact: {zchen959, evadyer}@gatech.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

