Search for Efficient Large Language Models

Xuan Shen1 , Pu Zhao1 , Yifan Gong1 , Zhenglun Kong2 , Zheng Zhan1 ,
Yushu Wu1 , Ming Lin3 , Chao Wu1 , Xue Lin1 , Yanzhi Wang1
1
Northeastern University, 2 Harvard University, 3 Oracle
{shen.xu, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have long held sway in the realms of artificial
intelligence research. Numerous efficient techniques, including weight pruning,
quantization, and distillation, have been embraced to compress LLMs, targeting
memory reduction and inference acceleration, which underscore the redundancy
in LLMs. However, most model compression techniques concentrate on weight
optimization, overlooking the exploration of optimal architectures. Besides, traditional architecture search methods, limited by the elevated complexity with extensive parameters, struggle to demonstrate their effectiveness on LLMs. In this
paper, we propose a training-free architecture search framework to identify optimal subnets that preserve the fundamental strengths of the original LLMs while
achieving inference acceleration. Furthermore, after generating subnets that inherit specific weights from the original LLMs, we introduce a reformation algorithm that utilizes the omitted weights to rectify the inherited weights with a small
amount of calibration data. Compared with SOTA training-free structured pruning works that can generate smaller networks, our method demonstrates superior
performance across standard benchmarks. Furthermore, our generated subnets
can directly reduce the usage of GPU memory and achieve inference acceleration.
Code: https://github.com/shawnricecake/search-llm

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] are renowned for their exceptional performance
across various domains of artificial intelligence research. There is a growing demand for constructing LLMs for extensive applications across a multitude of popular platforms. However, the computational and storage costs have restricted LLMs from deployment on various devices for wide
applications. Take the GPT-3 model as an example, with its 175 billion parameters [6], it requires
more than 326GB of memory in FP16 format. This exceeds the memory capabilities of even the most
sophisticated GPUs, far surpassing available memory on resource-constrained devices. To address
these challenges, a variety of compression techniques focusing on weight optimization have been
developed, including weight pruning [7, 8, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16], quantization [17, 18, 19],
and knowledge distillation [20, 21, 22]. The extensive research in the compression direction indicates the substantial redundancy within LLMs.
Besides optimizing model weights, improving the model architecture is another crucial direction in
achieving both high efficiency and superior performance. Numerous works [23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36] have studied the Neural Architecture Search (NAS) problem for representative model designs such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Vision Transformers
(ViTs). However, the realm of architecture search for LLMs remains unexplored. Though enjoying the potential benefits of discovering highly efficient and well-performing LLM architectures
compared with manual designs, searching with traditional NAS methods for LLMs faces significant
challenges due to the immense complexity and extensive model size. Furthermore, the convergence
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

