Efficient Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning
with Cross-Task Policy Guidance

Jinmin He1,2 , Kai Li1,2∗, Yifan Zang1,2 , Haobo Fu5 , Qiang Fu5 , Junliang Xing4∗, Jian Cheng1,3
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
4
5
AiRiA
Tsinghua University
Tencent AI Lab
{hejinmin2021,kai.li,zangyifan2019,jian.cheng}@ia.ac.cn,
{haobofu,leonfu}@tencent.com, jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-task reinforcement learning endeavors to efficiently leverage shared information across various tasks, facilitating the simultaneous learning of multiple tasks.
Existing approaches primarily focus on parameter sharing with carefully designed
network structures or tailored optimization procedures. However, they overlook
a direct and complementary way to exploit cross-task similarities: the control
policies of tasks already proficient in some skills can provide explicit guidance
for unmastered tasks to accelerate skills acquisition. To this end, we present a
novel framework called Cross-Task Policy Guidance (CTPG), which trains a guide
policy for each task to select the behavior policy interacting with the environment
from all tasks’ control policies, generating better training trajectories. In addition,
we propose two gating mechanisms to improve the learning efficiency of CTPG:
one gate filters out control policies that are not beneficial for guidance, while the
other gate blocks tasks that do not necessitate guidance. CTPG is a general framework adaptable to existing parameter sharing approaches. Empirical evaluations
demonstrate that incorporating CTPG with these approaches significantly enhances
performance in manipulation and locomotion benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has undergone remarkable progress over the past decades, showcasing its efficacy across various domains, such as game playing [16, 28] and robotic control [12, 13].
However, most of these deep RL methods primarily focus on learning different tasks in isolation,
making it challenging to utilize shared information between tasks to develop a generalized policy.
Multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL) aims to master a set of RL tasks effectively. By leveraging
the potential information sharing among different tasks, joint multi-task learning typically exhibits
higher sample efficiency than training each task individually [27].
A significant challenge in MTRL lies in determining what information should be shared and how
to share it effectively. Recent studies have proposed various approaches to tackle this challenge
via network parameter sharing with carefully designed network structures [10, 22, 27] or tailored
optimization procedures [4, 14, 30]. We summarize such methods as implicit knowledge sharing
in Section 2. Despite these unremitting efforts, another largely overlooked way exists to exploit
cross-task similarities to improve the learning efficiency of multiple tasks. Intuitively, humans can
effortlessly discern which skills can be shared from other tasks while learning a specific task. For
instance, someone who can ride a bicycle can quickly learn to ride a motorcycle by referring to
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

