Privacy Backdoors: Enhancing Membership Inference
through Poisoning Pre-trained Models

Yuxin Wen1 * , Leo Marchyok2 , Sanghyun Hong2 ,
Jonas Geiping3 , Tom Goldstein1 , Nicholas Carlini4
1
University of Maryland, College Park
2
Oregon State University
3
ELLIS Institute, MPI for Intelligent Systems
4
Google DeepMind
ywen@cs.umd.edu, {marchyol, sanghyun.hong}@oregonstate.edu,
jonas@tue.ellis.eu, tomg@cs.umd.edu, ncarlini@google.com

Abstract
It now common to produce domain-specific models by fine-tuning large pre-trained
models using a small bespoke dataset. But selecting one of the many foundation
models from the web poses considerable risks, including the potential that this
model has been backdoored. In this paper, we introduce a new type of model
backdoor: the privacy backdoor attack. This black-box privacy attack aims to
amplify the privacy leakage that arises when fine-tuning a model: when a victim
fine-tunes a backdoored model, their training data will be leaked at a significantly
higher rate than if they had fine-tuned a typical model. We conduct extensive
experiments on various datasets and models, including both vision-language models
(CLIP) and large language models, demonstrating the broad applicability and
effectiveness of such an attack. Additionally, we carry out multiple ablation studies
with different fine-tuning methods and inference strategies to thoroughly analyze
this new threat. Our findings highlight a critical privacy concern within the machine
learning community and call for a reevaluation of safety protocols in the use of
open-source pre-trained models.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained foundation models have transformed the field of machine learning. Practitioners no
longer train models from scratch, but instead efficiently fine-tuning existing foundation models for
specific downstream tasks. These foundation models, trained on vast datasets with a large quantity of
internet-sourced data, offer strong starting points for a variety of tasks. And the adaptation of these
models to specialized tasks through fine-tuning significantly reduces the costs of training downstream
models while often simultaneously improving their accuracy.
As a result of this, the availability of open-source pre-trained models on the Internet is more prevalent
than ever. For example, Hugging Face2 hosts over 1, 000, 000 open-source models, all readily
available for download. Moreover, anyone with a registered account can contribute by uploading their
own models. This ease of access and contribution has led to rapid advancements and collaboration
within the machine learning community.
But this raises risks. Adversaries can easily inject backdoors into the pre-trained models, leading to
harmful behaviors when the input contains the specific triggers (Gu et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017).
∗
2

Work done during an internship at Google DeepMind.
https://huggingface.co/models

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

