UDON: Universal Dynamic Online distillatioN for
generic image representations

Nikolaos-Antonios Ypsilantis∗1
1

Kaifeng Chen2

André Araujo2

VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague

2

Ondřej Chum1

Google DeepMind

Abstract
Universal image representations are critical in enabling real-world fine-grained and
instance-level recognition applications, where objects and entities from any domain
must be identified at large scale. Despite recent advances, existing methods fail to
capture important domain-specific knowledge, while also ignoring differences in
data distribution across different domains. This leads to a large performance gap
between efficient universal solutions and expensive approaches utilising a collection
of specialist models, one for each domain. In this work, we make significant strides
towards closing this gap, by introducing a new learning technique, dubbed UDON
(Universal Dynamic Online distillatioN). UDON employs multi-teacher distillation,
where each teacher is specialized in one domain, to transfer detailed domainspecific knowledge into the student universal embedding. UDON’s distillation
approach is not only effective, but also very efficient, by sharing most model
parameters between the student and all teachers, where all models are jointly trained
in an online manner. UDON also comprises a sampling technique which adapts
the training process to dynamically allocate batches to domains which are learned
slower and require more frequent processing. This boosts significantly the learning
of complex domains which are characterised by a large number of classes and longtail distributions. With comprehensive experiments, we validate each component
of UDON, and showcase significant improvements over the state of the art in the
recent UnED benchmark. Code: https://github.com/nikosips/UDON.

1

Introduction

Imagine you point your cellphone at anything, and it tells you what it is, be it tangerine chicken with
rice, Mk1 Volkswagen Rabbit Cabriolet, statue of Aquaman, Pasadena City Hall, or Yorkshire Terrier.
Such a product is the ultimate goal of fine-grained and instance-level visual recognition. The key
component enabling such an application is a general-purpose image representation, or equivalently
image embedding, designed to handle imagery of varied domains at scale. Traditionally, image
embedding models have been developed for specific domains separately [29, 34, 17, 9], such as
landmarks [32], products [41], clothes [22], faces [40], to name just a few. However, as visual
recognition applications grow in popularity and scope [47, 1, 2], it is impractical to handle images of
different object types with specialized, per-domain models. A potential solution for this problem is to
leverage recent foundation models, such as CLIP [33] or DINOv2 [26], which have been proposed
to enable a wide variety of multimodal applications. Even though these models possess a broad
visual understanding, they tend to lack detailed fine-grained knowledge off-the-shelf [45], which is
critical in practice. For this reason, recent efforts aim at developing universal embedding solutions
that can generalize to handle multiple fine-grained object types with a single model [45, 39], ensuring
scalability in real-world scenarios.
∗

Corresponding author: ypsilnik@fel.cvut.cz

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

