Private Online Learning via Lazy Algorithms

Hilal Asi
Apple
hilal.asi94@gmail.com

Tomer Koren
Tel Aviv University
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Daogao Liu∗
University of Washington
liudaogao@gmail.com

Kunal Talwar
Apple
kunal@kunaltalwar.org

Abstract
We study the problem of private online learning, focusing on online prediction
from experts (OPE) and online convex optimization (OCO). We propose a new
transformation that translates lazy, low-switching online learning algorithms into
private algorithms. We apply our transformation to differentially private OPE and
OCO using existing lazy algorithms for these problems. The resulting algorithms
attain regret bounds that significantly
prior art in the high privacy
√ improve over
1/3
regime, where
ε
≪
1,
obtaining
O(
T
log
d
+
T
log(d)/ε2/3 ) regret for DP√ 2/3
√
1/3
OPE and O( T + T
d/ε ) regret for DP-OCO. We complement our results
with a lower bound for DP-OPE, showing that these rates are optimal for a natural
family of low-switching private algorithms.

1

Introduction

Online learning is a fundamental problem in machine learning, where an algorithm interacts with an
oblivious adversary for T rounds. First, the oblivious adversary chooses T loss functions ℓ1 , . . . , ℓT :
X → R over a fixed decision set X . Then, at any round t, the algorithm chooses a model xt ∈ X ,
and the adversary reveals the loss function ℓt . The algorithm suffers loss ℓt (xt ), and its goal is to
minimize its cumulative loss compared to the best model in hindsight, namely its regret:
RegT =

T
X

ℓt (xt ) − min
⋆

t=1

x ∈X

T
X

ℓt (x⋆ ).

t=1

In this work, we study two different differentially private instances of this problem: differentially
private online prediction from experts (DP-OPE) where the model x can be chosen from d experts
(X = [d]); and differentially private online convex optimization (DP-OCO) where the model belongs
to a convex set X ⊂ Rd .
Both problems have been extensively studied recently [JKT12, ST13, JT14, AS17, KMS+ 21] and an
exciting new direction with promising results for this problem is that of designing private algorithms
based on low-switching algorithms for online learning [AFKT23b, AFKT23a, AKST23a, AKST23b].
The main idea in these works is that the privacy cost for privatizing a low-switching algorithm can
be significantly smaller as these algorithms do not update their models too frequently, allowing
them to allocate a larger privacy budget for each update. This has been initiated by [AFKT23b],
which used the shrinking dartboard algorithm to design new algorithms for DP-OPE, later revisited
by [AKST23a] to design new algorithms for DP-OCO using a regularized follow-the-perturbedleader approach, and more recently by [AKST23b] which used a lazy and regularized version of the
multiplicative weights algorithm to obtain improved rates for DP-OCO.
∗

Part of this work was done while interning at Apple.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

