GDeR: Safeguarding Efficiency, Balancing, and
Robustness via Prototypical Graph Pruning

Guibin Zhang∗1,2 , Haonan Dong∗1 , Yuchen Zhang2 , Zhixun Li3 , Dingshuo Chen4 ,
Kai Wang5 , Tianlong Chen6 , Yuxuan Liang7 , Dawei Cheng†1,2 , Kun Wang†8
1
Tongji Univerity, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 CUHK, 4 UCAS,
5
NUS, 6 UNC-Chapel Hill, 7 HKUST (Guangzhou) 8 NTU
∗
Equal Contribution, † Corresponding author
dcheng@tongji.edu.cn, wk520529wjh@gmail.com

Abstract
Training high-quality deep models necessitates vast amounts of data, resulting
in overwhelming computational and memory demands. Recently, data pruning,
distillation, and coreset selection have been developed to streamline data volume
by retaining, synthesizing, or selecting a small yet informative subset from the
full set. Among these methods, data pruning incurs the least additional training
cost and offers the most practical acceleration benefits. However, it is the most
vulnerable, often suffering significant performance degradation with imbalanced
or biased data schema, thus raising concerns about its accuracy and reliability
in on-device deployment. Therefore, there is a looming need for a new data
pruning paradigm that maintains the efficiency of previous practices while ensuring
balance and robustness. Unlike the fields of computer vision and natural language
processing, where mature solutions have been developed to address these issues,
graph neural networks (GNNs) continue to struggle with increasingly large-scale,
imbalanced, and noisy datasets, lacking a unified dataset pruning solution. To
achieve this, we introduce a novel dynamic soft-pruning method, GDeR, designed
to update the training “basket” during the process using trainable prototypes.
GDeR first constructs a well-modeled graph embedding hypersphere and then
samples representative, balanced, and unbiased subsets from this embedding space,
which achieves the goal we called Graph Training Debugging. Extensive
experiments on five datasets across three GNN backbones, demonstrate that GDeR
(I) achieves or surpasses the performance of the full dataset with 30% ∼ 50%
fewer training samples, (II) attains up to a 2.81× lossless training speedup, and
(III) outperforms state-of-the-art pruning methods in imbalanced training and noisy
training scenarios by 0.3% ∼ 4.3% and 3.6% ∼ 7.8%, respectively. The source
code is available at https://github.com/ins1stenc3/GDeR.

1

Introduction

Data-centric AI, though continuously providing high-quality data for upcoming artificial general
intelligence [1, 2, 3, 4], presents a significant hurdle for their on-device deployment during training and
inference phases [5, 6, 7, 8]. To democratize existing state-of-the-art methods [9, 10, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14],
considerable efforts are directed toward identifying unbiased and core data within training datasets and
conducting troubleshooting to deepen our solid understanding of the intrinsic property of data shcema
[15, 16, 17, 18]. To date, data pruning [19, 20, 21, 22, 23], distillation [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30] and
coreset selection [31, 32, 33, 16] aim to retain, synthesize or choose a small but informative dataset
from original full set. While the sample size undergoes significant reshaping and reduction, methods
like dataset distillation inevitably lead to additional training costs [23, 34, 35]. As a hardware-friendly
candidate and accelerator for training and inference, data pruning serves as a promising candidate by
mitigating the high computational burden.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

