Topic-Conversation Relevance (TCR)
Dataset and Benchmarks
Yaran Fan
Microsoft
yaran.fan@microsoft.com

Jamie Pool
Microsoft
jamie.pool@microsoft.com

Senja Filipi
Microsoft
sefilipi@microsoft.com

Ross Cutler
Microsoft
ross.cutler@microsoft.com

Abstract
Workplace meetings are vital to organizational collaboration, yet a large percentage
of meetings are rated as ineffective [1]. To help improve meeting effectiveness by
understanding if the conversation is on topic, we create a comprehensive TopicConversation Relevance (TCR) dataset that covers a variety of domains and meeting
styles. The TCR dataset includes 1,500 unique meetings, 22 million words in
transcripts, and over 15,000 meeting topics, sourced from both newly collected
Speech Interruption Meeting (SIM) data and existing public datasets. Along with
the text data, we also open source scripts to generate synthetic meetings or create
augmented meetings from the TCR dataset to enhance data diversity. For each data
source, benchmarks are created using GPT-41 to evaluate the model accuracy in
understanding transcription-topic relevance.

1

Introduction

Since the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, an increasing share of meetings have shifted from in-person to
online. The Gartner 2021 Digital Worker Experience Survey reports that the number of in-person
meetings dropped from 63% in 2019 to 33% in 2021 [2]. The same survey predicted that in 2024,
only 25% of the meetings will happen in person.
Together with the growing number of online meetings, there are ongoing complaints about ineffective
meetings due to a lack of focused discussions or focused tasks [3, 4, 5, 6]. Having a meeting facilitator
to keep the discussions focused is one of the meeting design characteristics enabling more effective
meetings [6, 7].
Measuring how relevant a conversation transcript is to an intended topic is crucial to quantifying how
focused the communication is, and to creating tools that behave as a virtual meeting moderator by
keeping the discussion on-track. A very low rating on the relevance of the conversation to the topic
meant for discussion would be an indicator of a non-focused discussion. In practice this translates to
the problem of keeping discussions focused on a predefined meeting agenda.
While there is existing work about the importance of topics serving as input to text summarizing
models [8, 9], we could not find references about work studying the relevance of a topic to a particular
body of text it didn’t originate from. One of our intuitions for why this field has had little exploration
is because of technological limitations before the recent Generative AI advancements.
1

The GPT-4 model used in this paper is GPT-4-32k.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

