SpikeReveal: Unlocking Temporal Sequences from
Real Blurry Inputs with Spike Streams

Kang Chen1,2∗ Shiyan Chen1,2,3∗ Jiyuan Zhang1,2 Baoyue Zhang1,2
Yajing Zheng1,2B Tiejun Huang1,2,3 Zhaofei Yu1,2,3B
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{mrchenkang,strerichia002p,jyzhang,byzhang}@stu.pku.edu.cn
{yj.zheng,tjhuang,yuzf12}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing a sequence of sharp images from the blurry input is crucial for
enhancing our insights into the captured scene and poses a significant challenge due
to the limited temporal features embedded in the blurry image. Spike cameras, sampling at rates up to 40,000 Hz, have proven effective in capturing motion features
and beneficial for solving this ill-posed problem. Nonetheless, existing methods
fall into the supervised learning paradigm, which suffers from notable performance
degradation when applied to real-world scenarios that diverge from the synthetic
training data domain. To address this challenge, we propose the first self-supervised
framework for the task of spike-guided motion deblurring. Our approach begins
with the formulation of a spike-guided deblurring model that explores the theoretical relationships among spike streams, blurry images, and their corresponding
sharp sequences. We subsequently develop a self-supervised cascaded framework
to alleviate the issues of spike noise and spatial-resolution mismatching encountered in the deblurring model. With knowledge distillation and reblur loss, we
further design a lightweight deblur network to restore high-quality sequences with
brightness and texture consistency with the original input. Quantitative and qualitative experiments conducted on our real-world and synthetic datasets with spikes
validate the superior generalization of the proposed framework. Our code, data and
trained models are available at https://github.com/chenkang455/S-SDM.

1

Introduction

Traditional cameras, constrained by their exposure-based imaging mechanism, often produce blurry
images when capturing fast-moving objects or during camera movement throughout the exposure
process [19, 35]. While these blurry images lose significant details, the ability to recover dynamic
motion trajectories from the static blurry input becomes critically important. However, the inherent
challenge lies in the limited motion features available within blurry frames, leading to potential
ambiguities such as multiple motion trajectories corresponding to the same blurry input. This is
exemplified by scenarios where two objects move along the same trajectory but in opposite directions
[23, 24, 38], rendering the task of motion deblurring ill-posed. Recent advancements in learningbased approaches [40, 12, 46] seek to address this challenge by establishing direct mappings from
∗
B

Equal contributors.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

