Model-based inference of synaptic plasticity rules
Yash Mehta1,2
Glenn C. Turner1

Danil Tyulmankov3,4

Adithya E. Rajagopalan1,5

James E. Fitzgerald1,6∗

Jan Funke1∗

1

Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University
3
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Columbia University
4
Viterbi School of Engineering, University of Southern California
5
Center for Neural Science, New York University
6
Department of Neurobiology, Northwestern University
2

Abstract
Inferring the synaptic plasticity rules that govern learning in the brain is a key challenge in neuroscience. We present a novel computational method to infer these
rules from experimental data, applicable to both neural and behavioral data. Our
approach approximates plasticity rules using a parameterized function, employing
either truncated Taylor series for theoretical interpretability or multilayer perceptrons. These plasticity parameters are optimized via gradient descent over entire
trajectories to align closely with observed neural activity or behavioral learning
dynamics. This method can uncover complex rules that induce long nonlinear time
dependencies, particularly involving factors like postsynaptic activity and current
synaptic weights. We validate our approach through simulations, successfully recovering established rules such as Oja’s, as well as more intricate plasticity rules
with reward-modulated terms. We assess the robustness of our technique to noise
and apply it to behavioral data from Drosophila in a probabilistic reward-learning
experiment. Notably, our findings reveal an active forgetting component in reward
learning in flies, improving predictive accuracy over previous models. This modeling framework offers a promising new avenue for elucidating the computational
principles of synaptic plasticity and learning in the brain.

1

Introduction

Synaptic plasticity, the ability of synapses to change their strength, is a key neural mechanism underlying learning and memory in the brain. These synaptic updates are driven by neuronal activity,
and they in turn modify the dynamics of neural circuits. Advances in neuroscience have enabled
the recording of neuronal activity on an unprecedented scale (Steinmetz et al., 2018; Vanwalleghem
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2023), and connectome data for various organisms is becoming increasingly available (Winding et al., 2023; Takemura et al., 2023; Hildebrand et al., 2017; Scheffer et al.,
2020). However, the inaccessibility of direct large-scale recordings of synaptic dynamics leaves
the identification of biological learning rules an open challenge. Existing neuroscience literature
(Citri & Malenka, 2008; Morrison et al., 2008) suggests that synaptic changes are functions of local variables such as presynaptic activity, postsynaptic activity, and current synaptic weight, as well
as a global reward signal. Uncovering the specific form of this function in different brain circuits
promises profound biological insights and holds practical significance for developing more biologically plausible learning algorithms for AI, particularly with neuromorphic implementations (Zenke
& Neftci, 2021).
∗

Joint senior authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

