Partial observation can induce mechanistic mismatches
in data-constrained models of neural dynamics

William Qian1,2 , Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth3,4,5 , Benjamin S. Ruben1 , Cengiz Pehlevan2,3,4
1
Biophysics Graduate Program,
2
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence,
3
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
4
Center for Brain Science, 5 Department of Physics,
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
jzavatoneveth@fas.harvard.edu, cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
One of the central goals of neuroscience is to gain a mechanistic understanding
of how the dynamics of neural circuits give rise to their observed function. A
popular approach towards this end is to train recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
to reproduce experimental recordings of neural activity. These trained RNNs are
then treated as surrogate models of biological neural circuits, whose properties
can be dissected via dynamical systems analysis. How reliable are the mechanistic
insights derived from this procedure? While recent advances in population-level
recording technologies have allowed simultaneous recording of up to tens of thousands of neurons, this represents only a tiny fraction of most cortical circuits. Here
we show that observing only a subset of neurons in a circuit can create mechanistic
mismatches between a simulated teacher network and a data-constrained student,
even when the two networks have matching single-unit dynamics. In particular,
partial observation of models of low-dimensional cortical dynamics based on
functionally feedforward or low-rank connectivity can lead to surrogate models
with spurious attractor structure. Our results illustrate the challenges inherent in
accurately uncovering neural mechanisms from single-trial data, and suggest the
need for new methods of validating data-constrained models for neural dynamics.

1

Introduction

In recent years, advances in recording techniques have brought forth a deluge of neural data. Simultaneous measurements of the activity of hundreds to thousands of neurons can now be obtained at
high spatiotemporal resolution [1–3]. These methods are increasingly deployed to perform longitudinal recordings in animals executing quasi-naturalistic behaviors or complex tasks [2–7], meaning
that one may not have recourse to repeatable trial structure when analyzing these data [8]. A critical
question for contemporary systems neuroscience then arises: How can mechanistic insights about the
neural dynamics underlying animal behavior be extracted from large-scale recordings [3, 5, 7, 9, 10]?
Given access to only a single, non-repeatable measurement of neural activity, a natural question is
whether one could construct a reliable in silico surrogate model for the dynamics of the measured
neural circuit. As this surrogate model would not be subject to measurement limitations, it could be
used to generate hypotheses about the corresponding biological neural populations, and to simulate
how such populations might behave under various external inputs or perturbations. A natural approach
to constructing a surrogate model is to optimize a recurrent neural network (RNN) to mimic the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

