Freya PAGE: First Optimal Time Complexity for
Large-Scale Nonconvex Finite-Sum Optimization with
Heterogeneous Asynchronous Computations

Alexander Tyurin
KAUST∗, AIRI†, Skoltech‡

Kaja Gruntkowska
KAUST∗

Peter Richtárik
KAUST∗

Abstract
In practical distributed systems, workers are typically not homogeneous, and due
to differences in hardware configurations and network conditions, can have highly
varying processing times. We consider smooth nonconvex finite-sum (empirical
risk minimization) problems in this setup and introduce a new parallel method,
Freya PAGE, designed to handle arbitrarily heterogeneous and asynchronous computations. By being robust to “stragglers” and adaptively ignoring slow computations,
Freya PAGE offers significantly improved time complexity guarantees compared to
all previous methods, including Asynchronous SGD, Rennala SGD, SPIDER, and
PAGE, while requiring weaker assumptions. The algorithm relies on novel generic
stochastic gradient collection strategies with theoretical guarantees that can be of
interest on their own, and may be used in the design of future optimization methods. Furthermore, we establish a lower bound for smooth nonconvex finite-sum
problems in the asynchronous setup, providing a fundamental time complexity
limit. This lower bound is tight and
√ demonstrates the optimality of Freya PAGE in
the large-scale regime, i.e., when m ≥ n, where n is # of workers, and m is # of
data samples.

1

Introduction

In real-world distributed systems used for large-scale machine learning tasks, it is common to
encounter device heterogeneity and variations in processing times among different computational
units. These can stem from GPU computation delays, disparities in hardware configurations, network
conditions, and other factors, resulting in different computational capabilities and speeds across
devices [Chen et al., 2016, Tyurin and Richtárik, 2023]. As a result, some clients may execute
computations faster, while others experience delays or even fail to participate in the training altogether.
Due to the above reasons, we aim to address the challenges posed by device heterogeneity in the
context of solving finite-sum nonconvex optimization problems of the form


m
P
1
fi (x) ,
(1)
min f (x) := m
x∈Rd

i=1

where fi : Rd → R can be viewed as the loss of a machine learning model x on the ith example in a
training dataset with m samples. Our goal is to find an ε-stationary point, i.e., a (possibly random)
point x̂ such that E[∥∇f (x̂)∥2 ] ≤ ε. We focus on the homogeneous distributed setup:
• there are n workers/clients/devices able to work in parallel,
∗

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
AIRI, Moscow, Russia
‡
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

