Improved Algorithms for Contextual Dynamic Pricing

Matilde Tullii∗
FairPlay Team, CREST, ENSAE
Nadav Merlis
FairPlay Team, CREST, ENSAE

Solenne Gaucher∗
FairPlay Team, CREST, ENSAE
Vianney Perchet
FairPlay Team, CREST, ENSAE - Criteo AI Lab

Abstract
In contextual dynamic pricing, a seller sequentially prices goods based on contextual information. Buyers will purchase products only if the prices are below their
valuations. The goal of the seller is to design a pricing strategy that collects as much
revenue as possible. We focus on two different valuation models. The first assumes
that valuations linearly depend on the context and are further distorted by noise.
Under minor regularity assumptions, our algorithm achieves an optimal regret
bound of Õ(T 2/3 ), improving the existing results. The second model removes the
linearity assumption, requiring only that the expected buyer valuation is β-Hölder
in the context. For this model, our algorithm obtains a regret Õ(T d+2β/d+3β ),
where d is the dimension of the context space.

1

Introduction

Setting a price and devising a strategy to dynamically adjust it poses a fundamental challenge in
revenue management. This problem, known as dynamic pricing or online posted price auction,
finds applications across various industries and has received significant attention from economists,
operations researchers, statisticians, and machine learning communities. In this problem, a seller
sequentially offers goods to arriving buyers by presenting a one-time offer at a specified price. If
the offered price falls below the buyer’s (unknown) valuation of the item, a transaction occurs, and
the seller obtains the posted price as revenue. Conversely, if the price exceeds the buyer’s valuation,
the transaction fails, resulting in zero gain for the seller. Crucially, the seller solely receives binary
feedback indicating whether the trade happened. Her objective is to learn from this limited feedback
how to set prices that maximize her cumulative gains while ensuring that transactions take place. In
this paper, we study the problem of designing an adaptive pricing strategy, when the seller can rely
on contextual information, describing the product itself, the marketing environment, or the buyer.
While this problem has been extensively studied, previous results either rely on strong assumptions
on the structure of the problem, greatly limiting the applicability of such approaches, or achieve
sub-optimal regret bounds. In this work, we aim to improve both aspects—achieving better regret
bounds while making minimal assumptions about the problem. Specifically, we study two different
models for the valuation of buyers as a function of the context: 1) linear valuations, where the
item valuation of buyers is an unknown noisy linear function of the context; and 2) non-parametric
valuations, where the valuation is given by an unknown Hölder-continuous function of the contextual
information, perturbed by noise.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

