P HY R ECON: Physically Plausible Neural
Scene Reconstruction
Junfeng Ni1,2 ⋆† , Yixin Chen2 ⋆ , Bohan Jing2 , Nan Jiang2,3 , Bin Wang2 ,
Bo Dai2 , Puhao Li1,2 , Yixin Zhu3 , Song-Chun Zhu1,2,3 , Siyuan Huang2
⋆
Equal contribution † Work done as an intern at BIGAI
1
Tsinghua University 2 State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
3
Peking University
https://phyrecon.github.io

Abstract
We address the issue of physical implausibility in multi-view neural reconstruction.
While implicit representations have gained popularity in multi-view 3D reconstruction, previous work struggles to yield physically plausible results, limiting their
utility in domains requiring rigorous physical accuracy. This lack of plausibility
stems from the absence of physics modeling in existing methods and their inability
to recover intricate geometrical structures. In this paper, we introduce P HY R E CON , the first approach to leverage both differentiable rendering and differentiable
physics simulation to learn implicit surface representations. P HY R ECON features a
novel differentiable particle-based physical simulator built on neural implicit representations. Central to this design is an efficient transformation between SDF-based
implicit representations and explicit surface points via our proposed Surface Points
Marching Cubes (SP-MC), enabling differentiable learning with both rendering
and physical losses. Additionally, P HY R ECON models both rendering and physical
uncertainty to identify and compensate for inconsistent and inaccurate monocular
geometric priors. The physical uncertainty further facilitates physics-guided pixel
sampling to enhance the learning of slender structures. By integrating these techniques, our model supports differentiable joint modeling of appearance, geometry,
and physics. Extensive experiments demonstrate that P HY R ECON significantly
improves the reconstruction quality. Our results also exhibit superior physical
stability in physical simulators, with at least a 40% improvement across all datasets,
paving the way for future physics-based applications.

1

Introduction

3D scene reconstruction is fundamental in computer vision, with applications spanning graphics,
robotics, and more. Building on neural implicit representations [45], previous methods [18, 63, 77]
have utilized multi-view images and monocular cues to recover fine-grained 3D geometry via volume
rendering [10]. However, these approaches have overlooked physical plausibility, limiting their
applicability in physics-intensive tasks such as embodied AI [17, 1, 30] and robotics [15, 26, 60].
The inability to achieve physically plausible reconstruction arises primarily from the lack of physics
modeling. Existing methods based on neural implicit representation rely solely on rendering supervision, lacking explicit incorporation of physical constraints, such as those from physical simulators.
This oversight compromises their ability to optimize 3D shapes for stability, as the models are not
informed by the physics that would ensure realistic and stable structures in the real world.
Additionally, these methods often ignore thin structures, focusing instead on optimizing the substantial
parts of objects within images. This limitation is due to overly-smoothed and averaged optimization
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

