Addressing Hidden Confounding with Heterogeneous
Observational Datasets for Recommendation
Yanghao Xiao1,3
3

Haoxuan Li2

Yongqiang Tang3,∗ Wensheng Zhang4,∗

1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Peking University
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Guangzhou University
xiaoyanghao22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, hxli@stu.pku.edu.cn,
yongqiang.tang@ia.ac.cn, zhangwenshengia@hotmail.com

Abstract
The collected data in recommender systems generally suffers selection bias. Considerable works are proposed to address selection bias induced by observed user and
item features, but they fail when hidden features (e.g., user age or salary) that affect
both user selection mechanism and feedback exist, which is called hidden confounding. To tackle this issue, methods based on sensitivity analysis and leveraging
a few randomized controlled trial (RCT) data for model calibration are proposed.
However, the former relies on strong assumptions of hidden confounding strength,
whereas the latter relies on the expensive RCT data, thereby limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we propose to employ heterogeneous
observational data to address hidden confounding, wherein some data is subject to
hidden confounding while the remaining is not. We argue that such setup is more
aligned with practical scenarios, especially when some users do not have complete
personal information (thus assumed with hidden confounding), while others do
have (thus assumed without hidden confounding). To achieve unbiased learning,
we propose a novel meta-learning based debiasing method called MetaDebias. This
method explicitly models oracle error imputation and hidden confounding bias,
and utilizes bi-level optimization for model training. Extensive experiments on
three public datasets validate our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in
the presence of hidden confounding, regardless of RCT data availability.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have been developed with the purpose of providing users with personalized
recommendations, serving as a potent tool in capturing users’ true preferences [22]. In recent years,
deep learning algorithms are proposed to train recommendation models with collected historical
data. However, the selection bias introduced by the users’ selective interactions with items poses
a challenge to the unbiased learning of the prediction model [4, 54, 59]. For instance, in explicit
feedback data, users are free to rate items they prefer, thereby engendering the distribution discrepancy
between interacted and non-interacted data [35, 44, 55].
To alleviate selection bias, a line of works are proposed, including error imputation [2, 16, 48],
inverse propensity weighting [21, 36, 45, 46], and doubly robust [39, 43, 55]. Moreover, recent works
have sought to enhance these foundational methods from diverse perspectives, including analysis
on both bias and variance [7, 12, 27], considerations for training stability [31, 49], and integration
with multi-task learning [37, 52, 64]. However, they all fail to achieve unbiased when some features
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

