Train-Attention: Meta-Learning Where to Focus in
Continual Knowledge Learning

Dongha Lee ∗
Jinyoung Yeo ∗
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Yonsei University
{suhcrates,donalee,jinyeo}@yonsei.ac.kr

Yeongbin Seo

Abstract
Previous studies on continual knowledge learning (CKL) in large language models
(LLMs) have predominantly focused on approaches such as regularization, architectural modifications, and rehearsal techniques to mitigate catastrophic forgetting.
However, these methods naively inherit the inefficiencies of standard training
procedures, indiscriminately applying uniform weight across all tokens, which
can lead to unnecessary parameter updates and increased forgetting. To address
these shortcomings, we propose a novel CKL approach termed Train-AttentionAugmented Language Model (TAALM), which enhances learning efficiency by
dynamically predicting and applying weights to tokens based on their usefulness.
This method employs a meta-learning framework that optimizes token importance
predictions, facilitating targeted knowledge updates and minimizing forgetting.
Also, we observe that existing benchmarks do not clearly exhibit the trade-off between learning and retaining, therefore we propose a new benchmark, LAMA- CKL,
to address this issue. Through experiments conducted on both newly introduced
and established CKL benchmarks, TAALM proves the state-of-the-art performance
upon the baselines, and also shows synergistic compatibility when integrated with
previous CKL approaches. The code and the dataset will be available online2

Figure 1: (a) Learning of Causal LM: The document is decomposed into multiple token sequences
.
si = xi |x<i 3 , which aligns with different importance, but uniformly weighted. (b) Train-Attention:
Our proposed Train-Attention learns to predict weights that approximate importance, to enable
targeted continual knowledge updates through label-free meta-learning method.
∗∗

Co-corresponding authors
https://github.com/ybseo-ac/TAALM
3
In this work, we use the notation xi |x<i to denote that the element xi is sequenced after the preceding
elements x0 , x1 , ..., xi−1 .
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

