Enhancing Robustness of Graph Neural Networks on
Social Media with Explainable Inverse Reinforcement
Learning

Yuefei Lyu1 , Chaozhuo Li1∗, Sihong Xie2 , Xi Zhang1∗
Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service (BUPT)
Ministry of Education, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Artificial Intelligence Thrust,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
1

Abstract
Adversarial attacks against graph neural networks (GNNs) through perturbations
of the graph structure are increasingly common in social network tasks like rumor
detection. Social media platforms capture diverse attack sequence samples through
both machine and manual screening processes. Investigating effective ways to leverage these adversarial samples to enhance robustness is imperative. We improve the
maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) method with the mixtureof-experts approach to address multi-source graph adversarial attacks. This method
reconstructs the attack policy, integrating various attack models and providing
feature-level explanations, subsequently generating additional adversarial samples
to fortify the robustness of detection models. We develop precise sample guidance
and a bidirectional update mechanism to reduce the deviation caused by imprecise feature representation and negative sampling within the large action space
of social graphs, while also accelerating policy learning. We take rumor detector
as an example targeted GNN model on real-world rumor datasets. By utilizing a
small subset of samples generated by various graph adversarial attack methods, we
reconstruct the attack policy, closely approximating the performance of the original
attack method. We validate that samples generated by the learned policy enhance
model robustness through adversarial training and data augmentation.

1

Introduction

Social media platforms such as Weibo and Twitter host complex relationship networks that exhibit
a typical graph structure. Graph neural networks play a crucial role in analyzing social graphs,
demonstrating significant efficacy in a range of social network tasks, including rumor detection
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5], spam detection [6, 7] and stance detection [8, 9].
Extensive research [10, 11] has demonstrated that GNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks,
allowing adversaries to manipulate downstream node classification outcomes by flipping a small
number of edges or features within the graph. For instance, in rumor detection, rumor spreaders may
manipulate the graph structure to evade detection by reposting messages and following users. Recent
research efforts have shifted towards acquiring such attack samples [1, 12], which can be obtained
through manual supervision or effective detection models. Analyzing these samples allows platforms
to profile attackers, uncover their motives, and understand their attack patterns, thereby crucially
enhancing the robustness of detectors to defend against similar attacks.
∗

Corresponding authors: lichaozhuo@bupt.edu.cn, zhangx@bupt.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

