Simulation-Free Training of
Neural ODEs on Paired Data
Semin Kim1∗
Yeonwoo Cha1

Jaehoon Yoo1∗
Jinwoo Kim1
2
Saehoon Kim
Seunghoon Hong1
1
2
KAIST
Kakao Brain

Abstract
In this work, we investigate a method for simulation-free training of Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (NODEs) for learning deterministic mappings between
paired data. Despite the analogy of NODEs as continuous-depth residual networks,
their application in typical supervised learning tasks has not been popular, mainly
due to the large number of function evaluations required by ODE solvers and numerical instability in gradient estimation. To alleviate this problem, we employ the
flow matching framework for simulation-free training of NODEs, which directly
regresses the parameterized dynamics function to a predefined target velocity field.
Contrary to generative tasks, however, we show that applying flow matching directly
between paired data can often lead to an ill-defined flow that breaks the coupling of
the data pairs (e.g., due to crossing trajectories). We propose a simple extension that
applies flow matching in the embedding space of data pairs, where the embeddings
are learned jointly with the dynamic function to ensure the validity of the flow
which is also easier to learn. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on
both regression and classification tasks, where our method outperforms existing
NODEs with a significantly lower number of function evaluations. The code is
available at https://github.com/seminkim/simulation-free-node.

1

Introduction

Continuous-depth models [3, 8] have received growing attention as an alternative to deep feedforward
networks composed of a stack of discrete layers. As they approximate continuous, infinite-depth
models with a constant set of model parameters, they are parameter-efficient models that can reuse
their parameters across depth. Additionally, by controlling the number of function evaluations (NFEs)
during inference, we can choose the optimal trade-off between performance and computational cost.
This trade-off can be adjusted without retraining the model, unlike conventional neural networks that
require separately trained models of different capacities to achieve a similar flexibility.
A prominent class of continuous-depth models is Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (NODEs) [8],
which utilize continuous-time differential equations to describe evolutions of intermediate states. In
NODEs, a parameterized dynamics function learns the time derivative of the continuous transformation of a state. NODEs can be interpreted as a continuous limit of residual networks [8, 15], and hence
they offer a versatile framework similarly to ResNet [17]. As a result, NODEs have been successfully
applied to tasks such as physically informed modeling [37, 41], time series modeling [5, 23, 36], and
generative modeling with normalizing flows [12, 14].
However, despite their success in various tasks, the application of NODEs to learn deterministic
mappings between paired data, such as regression or classification, remains under-explored. This is
largely due to the substantial computational burden of training NODEs, since numerical ODE solving
during training is inherently serial, slow, and requires large NFEs.
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

