Kraken: Inherently Parallel Transformers For
Efficient Multi-Device Inference
Rohan Baskar Prabhakar
Princeton University
rohanbp@princeton.edu

Hengrui Zhang
Princeton University
hengrui.zhang@princeton.edu

David Wentzlaff
Princeton University
wentzlaf@princeton.edu

Abstract
Large Transformer networks are increasingly used in settings where low inference latency is necessary to enable new applications and improve the end-user
experience. However, autoregressive inference is resource intensive and requires
parallelism for efficiency. Parallelism introduces collective communication that
is both expensive and represents a phase when hardware resources are underutilized. Towards mitigating this, Kraken is an evolution of the standard Transformer
architecture that is designed to complement existing tensor parallelism schemes
for efficient inference on multi-device systems. By introducing a fixed degree of
intra-layer model parallelism, the architecture allows collective operations to be
overlapped with compute, decreasing latency and increasing hardware utilization.
When trained on OpenWebText, Kraken models reach a similar perplexity as standard Transformers while also preserving their language modeling capabilities as
evaluated on the SuperGLUE benchmark. Importantly, when tested on multi-GPU
systems using TensorRT-LLM engines, Kraken speeds up Time To First Token by
a mean of 35.6% across a range of model sizes, context lengths, and degrees of
tensor parallelism.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks based on the Transformer architecture (51) have become the prevalent choice
for a variety of tasks involving sequences, especially in natural language processing and computer
vision (44) (7) (19). Their capabilities, particularly in language modeling, have been driven by a rapid
increase in parameter count (7). Today’s largest language models have up to a trillion parameters (21)
and consequently demand more efficiency from the systems used to train and serve them. This has
necessitated the need for many techniques and optimizations that focus on improving the performance
of both algorithms and systems (47) (34) (17) (37) (12).
Large models are often used in interactive applications where latency is an important metric that
dictates the quality of the end-user experience (28). A typical web search takes about 0.2 seconds but
the Time To First Token (TTFT) for large models can be up to a few seconds (depending on context
length, model size, and available hardware) (42). Additionally, because it is not always feasible to
run models on local hardware, they are served to users via datacenters that use multi-device compute
nodes, adding to latency constraints. Increasingly, language models are also used as intermediate
steps in longer processes such as augmenting web searches or presenting the results of database
queries (28). The rising prevalence of such multi-step applications makes reducing inference latency
even more critical.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

