Richelieu: Self-Evolving LLM-Based Agents for AI
Diplomacy
Zhenyu Guan ♢ , Xiangyu Kong♣†B , Fangwei Zhong♠†B , Yizhou Wang♡♢
♣

♢
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
College of Computer Science, Beijing Information Science and Technology University
♠
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
♡
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science,
Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology, Peking University
†
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
BCorresponding authors: xykong@bistu.edu.cn, fangweizhong@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Diplomacy is one of the most sophisticated activities in human society, involving complex interactions among multiple parties that require skills in social reasoning, negotiation, and long-term strategic planning. Previous AI agents have
demonstrated their ability to handle multi-step games and large action spaces
in multi-agent tasks. However, diplomacy involves a staggering magnitude of
decision spaces, especially considering the negotiation stage required. While
recent agents based on large language models (LLMs) have shown potential
in various applications, they still struggle with extended planning periods in
complex multi-agent settings. Leveraging recent technologies for LLM-based
agents, we aim to explore AI’s potential to create a human-like agent capable
of executing comprehensive multi-agent missions by integrating three fundamental capabilities: 1) strategic planning with memory and reflection; 2) goaloriented negotiation with social reasoning; and 3) augmenting memory through
self-play games for self-evolution without human in the loop. Project page:
https://sites.google.com/view/richelieu-diplomacy.

1

Introduction

Diplomacy, a central element of international relations, is an intricate and multifaceted activity that
lies at the heart of human society’s most complex interactions. It requires various skills such as social
reasoning, negotiation, and long-term planning to manage relationships and alliances among multiple
parties. Mirroring this complexity, the Diplomacy game involves seven players to control European
powers, presenting a challenging strategic landscape that demands advanced negotiation and strategic
planning to succeed.
The AI community has shown an increasing interest in the deployment of AI agents to master
such games [Shoker et al., 2023, Konya et al., 2023, Kramár et al., 2022, Duéñez-Guzmán et al.,
2023, Mukobi et al., 2023, Kovač et al., 2023]. The recent breakthrough [Bakhtin et al., 2022] has
turned into press diplomacy, which allows communication between players. However, the previous
methods [Bakhtin et al., 2022] heavily rely on domain-specific human data, leading to its poor
generalization to other scenarios/ applications. The question then arises: Can we build an AI agent
that excels in the art of diplomacy without relying on domain-specific human data?
Recently, agents based on the Large Language Model(LLM) have emerged as a promising development for AI agents. The previous applications on personal assistants [Li et al., 2024b], robotics [Cheng
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

