HEPrune: Fast Private Training of Deep Neural
Networks With Encrypted Data Pruning
Yancheng Zhang1 , Mengxin Zheng1 , Yuzhang Shang2 , Xun Chen3 , and Qian Lou1
1

University of Central Florida
Illinois Institute of Technology
3
Samsung Research America
{yancheng.zhang,mengxin.zheng,qian.lou}@ucf.edu;
yshang4@hawk.iit.edu; xunchen@outlook.com
2

Abstract
Non-interactive cryptographic computing, Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE),
provides a promising solution for private neural network training on encrypted
data. One challenge of FHE-based private training is its large computational
overhead, especially the multiple rounds of forward and backward execution on
each encrypted data sample. Considering the existence of largely redundant data
samples, pruning them will significantly speed up the training, as proven in plain
non-FHE training. Executing the data pruning of encrypted data on the server
side is not trivial since the knowledge calculation of data pruning needs complex
and expensive executions on encrypted data. There is a lack of FHE-based data
pruning protocol for efficient, private training. In this paper, we propose, HEPrune,
to construct a FHE data-pruning protocol and then design an FHE-friendly datapruning algorithm under client-aided or non-client-aided settings, respectively. We
also observed that data sample pruning may not always remove ciphertexts, leaving
large empty slots and limiting the effects of data pruning. Thus, in HEPrune, we
further propose ciphertext-wise pruning to reduce ciphertext computation numbers
without hurting accuracy. Experimental results show that our work can achieve a
16× speedup with only a 0.6% accuracy drop over prior work. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/UCF-Lou-Lab-PET/Private-Data-Prune.

1

Introduction

Machine learning, especially deep neural networks, has been widely applied in various domains,
including healthcare [1], finance [2], and so forth. Due to the lack of expertise and computational
resources, the average user often outsources the training task to the cloud servers in the machinelearning-as-a-service (MLaaS) setting. However, the training data is often highly private and private,
and it should not be directly shared because of business, legal, and ethical constraints. Private training
enables the cloud server to train machine learning models on encrypted data, where strong privacy
guarantees are offered by cryptographic primitives such as FHE [3].
However, FHE-based private training is significantly hindered by its substantial execution time. For
example, the encrypted training can be 1 ∼ 3 orders of magnitudes slower than in the plaintext
training [4, 5, 6]. The high execution time primarily stems from the transformation of a plaintext
dataset into an encrypted format, along with the substitution of straightforward plaintext computations
with more resource-intensive ciphertext operations. Reducing the number of data samples used for
training could greatly accelerate the process. To optimize plaintext datasets, methods like dataset
pruning are commonly employed, where the model trainer has access to both the dataset and model.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

