NeuralSteiner: Learning Steiner Tree for
Overflow-avoiding Global Routing in Chip Design

Ruizhi Liu1,2,4

Zhisheng Zeng1,2,5 Shizhe Ding1,2
Xingquan Li5,6 Dongbo Bu1,2,3∗

Jingyan Sui1,2

1

SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
{liuruizhi19s, dingshizhe19s, suijingyan18b, dbu}@ict.ac.cn
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China
3
Central China Artificial Intelligence Research Institute,
Henan Academy of Sciences, Zhengzhou 450046, Henan, China
4
Beijing Institute of Open Source Chip, Beijing 100089, China
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000, Guangdong, China
{zengzhsh, lixq01}@pcl.ac.cn
6
School of Mathematics and Statistics,
Minnan Normal University, Zhangzhou 363000, Fujian, China

Abstract
Global routing plays a critical role in modern chip design. The routing paths generated by global routers often form a rectilinear Steiner tree (RST). Recent advances
from the machine learning community have shown the power of learning-based
route generation; however, the yielded routing paths by the existing approaches
often suffer from considerable overflow, thus greatly hindering their application in
practice. We propose NeuralSteiner, an accurate approach to overflow-avoiding
global routing in chip design. The key idea of NeuralSteiner approach is to learn
Steiner trees: we first predict the locations of highly likely Steiner points by adopting a neural network considering full-net spatial and overflow information, then
select appropriate points by running a graph-based post-processing algorithm, and
finally connect these points with the input pins to yield overflow-avoiding RSTs.
NeuralSteiner offers two advantages over previous learning-based models. First,
by using the learning scheme, NeuralSteiner ensures the connectivity of generated routes while significantly reducing congestion. Second, NeuralSteiner can
effectively scale to large nets and transfer to unseen chip designs without any
modifications or fine-tuning. Extensive experiments over public large-scale benchmarks reveal that, compared with the state-of-the-art deep generative methods,
NeuralSteiner achieves up to a 99.8% reduction in overflow while speeding up the
generation and maintaining a slight wirelength loss within only 1.8%.

1

Introduction

In the modern design flow of Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI), global routing has become one
of the most complex and time-consuming steps. Given the complexity of VLSI netlist [17] that
contains millions or even billions of nets requiring routing, global routers must interconnect pins of
nets, minimize the total wirelength of the routes while avoiding overflow (or congestion) in a strictly
limited area of chip[2, 24]. Overflow occurs when the number of routes in a particular area of the
* Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

