Towards Understanding the Working Mechanism of
Text-to-Image Diffusion Model

Mingyang Yi1∗ , Aoxue Li2∗ , Yi Xin3∗ , Zhenguo Li2
1
Renmin University of China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Nanjing University
{yimingyang@ruc.edu.cn}
{liaoxue2,li.zhenguo}@huawei.com
xinyi@smail.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, the strong latent Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DPM) has been applied
to high-quality Text-to-Image (T2I) generation (e.g., Stable Diffusion), by injecting
the encoded target text prompt into the gradually denoised diffusion image generator. Despite the success of DPM in practice, the mechanism behind it remains to be
explored. To fill this blank, we begin by examining the intermediate statuses during
the gradual denoising generation process in DPM. The empirical observations
indicate, the shape of image is reconstructed after the first few denoising steps, and
then the image is filled with details (e.g., texture). The phenomenon is because the
low-frequency signal (shape relevant) of the noisy image is not corrupted until the
final stage in the forward process (initial stage of generation) of adding noise in
DPM. Inspired by the observations, we proceed to explore the influence of each
token in the text prompt during the two stages. After a series of experiments of T2I
generations conditioned on a set of text prompts. We conclude that in the earlier
generation stage, the image is mostly decided by the special token [EOS] in the
text prompt, and the information in the text prompt is already conveyed in this
stage. After that, the diffusion model completes the details of generated images
by information from themselves. Finally, we propose to apply this observation
to accelerate the process of T2I generation by properly removing text guidance,
which finally accelerates the sampling up to 25%+.

1

Introduction

In real-world application, the Text-to-Image (T2I) generation has long been explored owing to its
wide applications [47, 31, 32, 2, 15], whereas the Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DPM) [12, 37, 32]
stands out as a promising approach, thanks to its impressive image synthesis capability. Technically,
the DPM is a hierarchical denoising model, which gradually purifies noisy data from a standard
Gaussian to generate an image. In the existing literature [31, 34, 28, 6], the framework of (latent)
Stable Diffusion model [31] is a backbone technique in T2I generation via DPM. In this approach,
the text prompt is encoded by a CLIP text encoder [30], and injected into the diffusion image decoder
as a condition to generate a target image (latent encoded by VQ-GAN in [31]) that is consistent with
the text prompt. Though this framework works well in practice, the working mechanism behind it,
especially for the text prompt, remains to be explored. Therefore, in this paper, we systematically
explore the working mechanism of stable diffusion.
*
†

equal contribution
corresponding to Mingyang Yi: yimingyang@ruc.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

