QuaRot: Outlier-Free 4-Bit Inference in Rotated LLMs

Saleh Ashkboos
ETH Zurich
saleh.ashkboos@inf.ethz.ch
Maximilian L. Croci
Microsoft Research
mcroci@microsoft.com

Amirkeivan Mohtashami
EPFL
amirkeivan.mohtashami@epfl.ch

Bo Li
ETH Zurich
bolibo@ethz.ch

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Pashmina Cameron
Microsoft
pcameron@microsoft.com

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria & NeuralMagic
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Torsten Hoefler
ETH Zurich
torsten.hoefler@inf.ethz.ch

James Hensman
Microsoft Research
jameshensman@microsoft.com

Abstract
We introduce QuaRot, a new Quantization scheme based on Rotations, which is
able to quantize LLMs end-to-end, including all weights, activations, and KV cache
in 4 bits. QuaRot rotates LLMs in a way that removes outliers from the hidden
state without changing the output, making quantization easier. This computational
invariance is applied to the hidden state (residual) of the LLM, as well as to the activations of the feed-forward components, aspects of the attention mechanism, and to
the KV cache. The result is a quantized model where all matrix multiplications are
performed in 4 bits, without any channels identified for retention in higher precision.
Our 4-bit quantized L LAMA 2-70B model has losses of at most 0.47 WikiText-2 perplexity and retains 99% of the zero-shot performance. We also show that QuaRot
can provide lossless 6 and 8 bit L LAMA - 2 models without any calibration data using
round-to-nearest quantization. Code is available at github.com/spcl/QuaRot.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have become increasingly important due to their countless applications. However, using these models in practice, known as inference, requires a significant amount
of computation, memory, and energy, specifically during the prefill phase, in which the model is
supposed to process large prompts and cache them in each layer. Quantization is among the most
important techniques to improve both memory and compute issues by keeping the data types at lower
precision during the forward pass.
As the prefill stage is known to be compute-bound [Ashkboos et al., 2023], joint quantization aims to
reduce the precision of parameters and KV cache (which results in lower memory usage) as well as
inputs (known as activations) and compute the forward pass in low precision. However, quantizing
the activations is hard as they have large outlier elements (see Figure 1 for an illustrative example)
with much larger values, making activation quantization more difficult than weight quantization,
especially for the 4-bit case. Previous work relies on using a calibration set to characterize the outlier
features and keeping them in higher precision for inference [Zhao et al., 2023, Ashkboos et al., 2023].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

