RSA: Resolving Scale Ambiguities in Monocular
Depth Estimators through Language Descriptions
Ziyao Zeng1 Yangchao Wu2 Hyoungseob Park1 Daniel Wang1 Fengyu Yang1
Stefano Soatto2 Dong Lao2 Byung-Woo Hong3 Alex Wong1
1

Yale University

2

University of California, Los Angeles

3

Chung-Ang University

1

{ziyao.zeng, hyoungseob.park, daniel.wang.dhw33}@yale.edu
1
{fengyu.yang, alex.wong}@yale.edu
2
wuyangchao1997@g.ucla.edu 2 {soatto,lao}@cs.ucla.edu 3 hong@cau.ac.kr

How to describe
those scenes?
1

2

“Small bathroom sink area
with soap, towel, mirror, and
shower.”

1

What’s the
scale of those
scenes?
1

Tiny
“Classroom with desks, chairs,
and shelves ﬁlled with
2
organized books.”

2

Small

3

“Narrow cobblestone street
with parked cars and
residential buildings.”

3
3

Medium
4

4

“Wide street with lanes, trees,
parked cars, and pedestrians
in the distance.“

Large
4

Figure 1: Can we infer the scale of 3D scenes from their descriptions? Consider the description above, one
may observe that the scale of the 3D scene is closely related to the objects (and their typical sizes) populating it.

Abstract
We propose a method for metric-scale monocular depth estimation. Inferring depth
from a single image is an ill-posed problem due to the loss of scale from perspective
projection during the image formation process. Any scale chosen is a bias, typically
stemming from training on a dataset; hence, existing works have instead opted
to use relative (normalized, inverse) depth. Our goal is to recover metric-scaled
depth maps through a linear transformation. The crux of our method lies in
the observation that certain objects (e.g., cars, trees, street signs) are typically
found or associated with certain types of scenes (e.g., outdoor). We explore
whether language descriptions can be used to transform relative depth predictions
to those in metric scale. Our method, RSA, takes as input a text caption describing
objects present in an image and outputs the parameters of a linear transformation
which can be applied globally to a relative depth map to yield metric-scaled depth
predictions. We demonstrate our method on recent general-purpose monocular
depth models on indoors (NYUv2, VOID) and outdoors (KITTI). When trained
on multiple datasets, RSA can serve as a general alignment module in zero-shot
settings. Our method improves over common practices in aligning relative to metric
depth and results in predictions that are comparable to an upper bound of fitting
relative depth to ground truth via a linear transformation. Code is available at:
https://github.com/Adonis-galaxy/RSA

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

