Paralinguistics-Aware Speech-Empowered Large
Language Models for Natural Conversation

Heeseung Kim1
Jungwhan Kim2

Soonshin Seo2 Kyeongseok Jeong2 Ohsung Kwon2 Soyoon Kim2
Jaehong Lee2 Eunwoo Song2,4 Myungwoo Oh2 Jung-Woo Ha2,3
Sungroh Yoon1,4,5∗ Kang Min Yoo2,3,4∗

1

Data Science and AI Lab, Department of ECE, Seoul National University
2
NAVER Cloud 3 NAVER AI Lab
4
Artificial Intelligence Institute, Seoul National University
5
ASRI, INMC, ISRC, and Interdisciplinary Program in AI, Seoul National University

Abstract
Recent work shows promising results in expanding the capabilities of large language models (LLM) to directly understand and synthesize speech. However, an
LLM-based strategy for modeling spoken dialogs remains elusive, calling for further investigation. This paper introduces an extensive speech-text LLM framework,
the Unified Spoken Dialog Model (USDM), designed to generate coherent spoken
responses with naturally occurring prosodic features relevant to the given input
speech without relying on explicit automatic speech recognition (ASR) or text-tospeech (TTS) systems. We have verified the inclusion of prosody in speech tokens
that predominantly contain semantic information and have used this foundation to
construct a prosody-infused speech-text model. Additionally, we propose a generalized speech-text pretraining scheme that enhances the capture of cross-modal
semantics. To construct USDM, we fine-tune our speech-text model on spoken
dialog data using a multi-step spoken dialog template that stimulates the chain-ofreasoning capabilities exhibited by the underlying LLM. Automatic and human
evaluations on the DailyTalk dataset demonstrate that our approach effectively
generates natural-sounding spoken responses, surpassing previous and cascaded
baselines. Our code and checkpoints are available at https://github.com/naverai/usdm.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have gained significant traction thanks to emergent capabilities [1–5],
such as few-shot in-context learning, complex reasoning [6, 7], and instruction-following [8]. These
remarkable discoveries led to chat-enabled LLMs and generative personal assistants [9]. However,
text-based agents are limited in usability due to their medium of interaction. Ideally, speech-enabled
LLMs would recognize the user’s emotional state or subtle nuance and generate spoken responses
with prosody most appropriate to the user’s context. Although automatic speech recognition (ASR)
and text-to-speech (TTS) systems can be easily employed, the linguistic discrepancy between speech
and text causes dialog inefficiencies and result in sub-optimal user experience [10, 11]. As such,
systematically integrating the speech modality into LLMs can unlock speech interactivity while
retaining LLMs’ powerful capabilities.
∗

Corresponding authors:
<sryoon@snu.ac.kr>

Kang

Min

Yoo

<kangmin.yoo@navercorp.com>,

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

Sungroh

Yoon

