Multi-Stage Predict+Optimize
for (Mixed Integer) Linear Programs

Xinyi Hu1 , Jasper C.H. Lee2 , Jimmy H.M. Lee1 , Peter J. Stuckey3
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
2
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis, USA
3
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Clayton, Australia
{xyhu,jlee}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jasperlee@ucdavis.edu, peter.stuckey@monash.edu

Abstract
The recently-proposed framework of Predict+Optimize tackles optimization problems with parameters that are unknown at solving time, in a supervised learning
setting. Prior frameworks consider only the scenario where all unknown parameters
are (eventually) revealed at the same time. In this work, we propose Multi-Stage
Predict+Optimize, a novel extension catering to applications where unknown parameters are instead revealed in sequential stages, with optimization decisions made
in between. We further develop three training algorithms for neural networks (NNs)
for our framework as proof of concept, all of which can handle mixed integer linear
programs. The first baseline algorithm is a natural extension of prior work, training
a single NN which makes a single prediction of unknown parameters. The second
and third algorithms instead leverage the possibility of updating parameter predictions between stages, and trains one NN per stage. To handle the interdependency
between the NNs, we adopt a sequential and parallelized versions of coordinate descent for training. Experimentation on three benchmarks demonstrates the superior
learning performance of our methods over classical approaches.

1

Introduction

Constrained optimization problems can frequently model applications in everyday life, yet, the
parameters of the problem are unknown at the time of solving. Consider, for example, a real-world
application where hospital administrators need to schedule shifts for nurses, so as to minimize the
total costs for hiring nurses while meeting the patient load. Here, the shifts need to be decided before
the (real-time) patient demand is known, which requires predicting the demand when scheduling.
In the present work, we focus on the supervised learning setting, where unknown parameters can be
predicted using relevant features, and historical (features, parameters) pairs serve as training data for
the prediction model. The goal is to estimate the unknown parameters based on the related features,
such that when we solve the optimization problem using the estimated parameters, the resulting
solution is good even under the later-revealed true parameters.
Classic approaches, for example by learning predictors using (regularized) ℓ2 loss, do not necessarily work well — low prediction error in parameter space does not guarantee good performance
of the estimated solution according to the optimization objective. The influential framework of
Predict+Optimize proposed by Elmachtoub and Grigas [9] instead uses the more effective regret
loss, which incorporates information about the optimization problem. However, the framework limits
the unknown parameters to appear only in the objective and not the constraints — if uncertainty
in constraints is mis-predicted, the resulting estimated solution might not even be feasible under
the true parameters. Recent works by Hu et al. [15, 16] thus propose a Two-Stage adaptation of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

