Segmenting Watermarked Texts From Language
Models
Xingchi Li∗
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
anthony.li@stat.tamu.edu

Guanxun Li∗
Department of Statistics
Beijing Normal University at Zhuhai
Zhuhai, Guangdong 519087
guanxun@bnu.edu.cn

Xianyang Zhang†
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
zhangxiany@stat.tamu.edu

Abstract
Watermarking is a technique that involves embedding nearly unnoticeable statistical
signals within generated content to help trace its source. This work focuses on a
scenario where an untrusted third-party user sends prompts to a trusted language
model (LLM) provider, who then generates a text from their LLM with a watermark.
This setup makes it possible for a detector to later identify the source of the text
if the user publishes it. The user can modify the generated text by substitutions,
insertions, or deletions. Our objective is to develop a statistical method to detect if
a published text is LLM-generated from the perspective of a detector. We further
propose a methodology to segment the published text into watermarked and nonwatermarked sub-strings. The proposed approach is built upon randomization
tests and change point detection techniques. We demonstrate that our method
ensures Type I and Type II error control and can accurately identify watermarked
sub-strings by finding the corresponding change point locations. To validate our
technique, we apply it to texts generated by several language models with prompts
extracted from Google’s C4 dataset and obtain encouraging numerical results.1

1

Introduction

With the increasing use of large language models in recent years, it has become essential to differentiate between text generated by these models and text written by humans. Some of the most advanced
LLMs, such as GPT-4, Llama 3, and Gemini, are very good at producing human-like texts, which
could be challenging to distinguish from human-generated texts, even for humans. However, it is
crucial to distinguish between human-produced texts and machine-produced texts to prevent the
spread of misleading information, improper use of LLM-based tools in education, model extraction
attacks through distillation, and the contamination of training datasets for future language models.
Watermarking is a principled method for embedding nearly unnoticeable statistical signals into text
generated by LLMs, enabling provable detection of LLM-generated content from its human-written
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
1
We release all code publicly at https://github.com/doccstat/llm-watermark-cpd.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

