Learning with Fitzpatrick Losses

Seta Rakotomandimby
Ecole des Ponts
seta.rakotomandimby@enpc.fr

Jean-Philippe Chancelier
Ecole des Ponts
jean-philippe.chancelier@enpc.fr

Michel De Lara
Ecole des Ponts
michel.delara@enpc.fr

Mathieu Blondel
Google DeepMind
mblondel@google.com

Abstract
Fenchel-Young losses are a family of loss functions, encompassing the squared,
logistic and sparsemax losses, among others. They are convex w.r.t. the model
output and the target, separately. Each Fenchel-Young loss is implicitly associated
with a link function, that maps model outputs to predictions. For instance, the
logistic loss is associated with the soft argmax link function. Can we build new
loss functions associated with the same link function as Fenchel-Young losses?
In this paper, we introduce Fitzpatrick losses, a new family of separately convex
loss functions based on the Fitzpatrick function. A well-known theoretical tool in
maximal monotone operator theory, the Fitzpatrick function naturally leads to a
refined Fenchel-Young inequality, making Fitzpatrick losses tighter than FenchelYoung losses, while maintaining the same link function for prediction. As an
example, we introduce the Fitzpatrick logistic loss and the Fitzpatrick sparsemax
loss, counterparts of the logistic and the sparsemax losses. This yields two new
tighter losses associated with the soft argmax and the sparse argmax, two of the
most ubiquitous output layers used in machine learning. We study in details the
properties of Fitzpatrick losses and, in particular, we show that they can be seen as
Fenchel-Young losses using a modified, target-dependent generating function. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of Fitzpatrick losses for label proportion estimation.

1

Introduction

Loss functions are a cornerstone of statistics and machine learning: they measure the difference, or
“loss,” between a ground-truth target and a model prediction. As such, they have attracted a wealth of
research. Proper losses (a.k.a. proper scoring rules) [17, 16] measure the discrepancy between a target
distribution and a probability forecast. They are essentially primal-primal Bregman divergences,
with both the target and the prediction belonging to the same primal space. They are typically
explicitly composed with a link function [26, 30], in order to map the model output to a prediction. A
disadvantage of this explicit composition is that it often makes the resulting composite loss function
non-convex. A related family of loss functions are Fenchel-Young losses [7, 8], which encompass
many commonly-used loss functions in machine learning including the squared, logistic, sparsemax
and perceptron losses. Fenchel-Young losses can be seen as primal-dual Bregman divergences [1],
with the target belonging to the primal space and the model output belonging to the dual space. In
contrast to proper losses, each Fenchel-Young loss is implicitly associated with a given link function,
mapping the dual-space model output to a primal-space prediction (for instance, the soft argmax is the
link function associated with the logistic loss). This crucial difference makes Fenchel-Young losses
always convex w.r.t. the model output and w.r.t. the target, separately. Can we build new (separately)
convex losses associated with the same link function as Fenchel-Young losses?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

