Learning in Markov Games with Adaptive
Adversaries: Policy Regret, Fundamental Barriers,
and Efficient Algorithms

Thanh Nguyen-Tang
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
nguyent@cs.jhu.edu

Raman Arora
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
We study learning in a dynamically evolving environment modeled as a Markov
game between a learner and a strategic opponent that can adapt to the learner’s
strategies. While most existing works in Markov games focus on external regret as
the learning objective, external regret becomes inadequate when the adversaries are
adaptive. In this work, we focus on policy regret – a counterfactual notion that aims
to compete with the return that would have been attained if the learner had followed
the best fixed sequence of policy, in hindsight. We show that if the opponent has
unbounded memory or if it is non-stationary, then sample-efficient learning is
not possible. For memory-bounded and stationary, we show that learning is still
statistically hard if the set of feasible strategies for the learner is exponentially
large. To guarantee learnability, we introduce a new notion of consistent adaptive
adversaries, wherein, the adversary responds similarly
to similar strategies of the
√
learner. We provide algorithms that achieve T policy regret against memorybounded, stationary, and consistent adversaries.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed tremendous advances in reinforcement learning for various challenging
domains in AI, from the game of Go [Silver et al., 2016, 2017, 2018], real-time strategy games such as
StarCraft II [Vinyals et al., 2019] and Dota [Berner et al., 2019], autonomous driving [Shalev-Shwartz
et al., 2016], to socially complex games such as hide-and-seek [Baker et al., 2019], capture-the-flag
[Jaderberg et al., 2019], and highly tactical games such as poker game Texas hold’ em [Moravčík et al.,
2017, Brown and Sandholm, 2018]. Notably, most challenging RL applications can be systematically
framed as multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) wherein multiple strategic agents learn to act
in a shared environment [Yang and Wang, 2020, Zhang et al., 2021].
Despite the empirical successes, the theoretical foundations of MARL are underdeveloped, especially
in settings where the learner faces adaptive opponents who can strategically adapt and react to
the learner’s policies. Consider for example the optimal taxation problem in the AI economist
[Zheng et al., 2020], a game that simulates dynamic economies that involve multiple actors (e.g., the
government and its citizens) who strategically contribute to the game dynamics. The government
agent learns to set a tax rate that optimizes for the economic equality and productivity of its citizens,
whereas the citizens who perhaps have their own interests, respond adaptively to tax policies of the
government agent (e.g., relocating to states that offer generous tax rates). Such adaptive behavior
of participating agents is a crucial component in other applications as well, e.g., mechanism design
[Conitzer and Sandholm, 2002, Balcan et al., 2005], optimal auctions [Cole and Roughgarden, 2014,
Dütting et al., 2019].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

