Universality of AdaGrad Stepsizes for Stochastic
Optimization: Inexact Oracle, Acceleration and
Variance Reduction
Anton Rodomanov
CISPA∗
anton.rodomanov@cispa.de

Xiaowen Jiang
Saarland University and CISPA∗
xiaowen.jiang@cispa.de

Sebastian Stich
CISPA∗
stich@cispa.de

Abstract
We present adaptive gradient methods (both basic and accelerated) for solving
convex composite optimization problems in which the main part is approximately
smooth (a.k.a. (δ, L)-smooth) and can be accessed only via a (potentially biased)
stochastic gradient oracle. This setting covers many interesting examples including
Hölder smooth problems and various inexact computations of the stochastic gradient. Our methods use AdaGrad stepsizes and are adaptive in the sense that they do
not require knowing any problem-dependent constants except an estimate of the
diameter of the feasible set but nevertheless achieve the best possible convergence
rates as if they knew the corresponding constants. We demonstrate that AdaGrad
stepsizes work in a variety of situations by proving, in a unified manner, three
types of new results. First, we establish efficiency guarantees for our methods in
the classical setting where the oracle’s variance is uniformly bounded. We then
show that, under more refined assumptions on the variance, the same methods
without any modifications enjoy implicit variance reduction properties allowing us
to express their complexity estimates in terms of the variance only at the minimizer.
Finally, we show how to incorporate explicit SVRG-type variance reduction into
our methods and obtain even faster algorithms. In all three cases, we present both
basic and accelerated algorithms achieving state-of-the-art complexity bounds. As
a direct corollary of our results, we obtain universal stochastic gradient methods
for Hölder smooth problems which can be used in all situations.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Gradient methods are among the most popular and efficient optimization algorithms
for solving machine learning problems. To achieve the best convergence speed for these algorithms,
their stepsizes needs to be chosen properly. While there exist various theoretical recommendations,
dictated by the convergence analysis, on how to select stepsizes based on various problem-dependent
parameters, they are usually impractical because the corresponding constants may be unknown or their
worst-case estimates might be too pessimistic. Furthermore, every applied problem usually belongs
to multiple problem classes at the same time, and it is not always evident in advance which of them
better suits the concrete problem instance one works with. For classical optimization algorithms, this
problem is typically resolved by using a line search. This is a simple yet powerful mechanism which
automatically chooses the best stepsize by checking at each iteration a certain condition involving the
objective value, its gradient, etc.
However, the line-search approach is usually unsuitable for problems of stochastic optimization,
where gradients are observed with random noise (unless some extra assumptions are made, see [57]).
For these problems, it is common instead to apply so-called adaptive methods which set up their
∗

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

