Efficient Reinforcement Learning by Discovering
Neural Pathways

Samin Yeasar Arnob
Department of Computer Science
McGill University
Mila Quebec AI Institute
samin.arnob@mail.mcgill.ca

Riyasat Ohib
Georgia Institute of Technology

Sergey Plis
Georgia State University

Amy Zhang
University of Texas, Austin

Alessandro Sordoni
Microsoft Research

Doina Precup
McGill University
Mila Quebec AI Institute

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have been very successful at tackling
complex control problems, such as AlphaGo or fusion control. However, current
research mainly emphasizes solution quality, often achieved by using large models
trained on large amounts of data, and does not account for the financial, environmental, and societal costs associated with developing and deploying such models.
Modern neural networks are often overparameterized and a significant number of
parameters can be pruned without meaningful loss in performance, resulting in
more efficient use of the model’s capacity. We present a methodology for identifying sparse sub-networks within a larger network in reinforcement learning (RL).
We call such sub-networks neural pathways. We show empirically that even very
small learned sub-networks, using less than 5% of the large network’s parameters,
can provide very good quality solutions. We also demonstrate the training of
multiple pathways within the same networks in a multi-task setup, where each
pathway tackles a separate task. We evaluate empirically our approach on several
continuous control tasks, in both online and offline settings.

1

Introduction

Scaling large neural-network models [4, 73, 33, 9, 12, 76, 64] has led to state of the art in machine
learning benchmarks. While the utility of these large models in a variety of applications makes
them compelling for widespread use, it also requires very expensive training with a large carbon
footprint [78, 71, 87, 20, 88, 79, 87]. While the human brain serves as an inspiration for deep learning
techniques, the current deep learning architectures do not exhibit the same level of energy efficiency.
The brain continuously learns new skills without catastrophic forgetting due to its plasticity [100,
13, 69, 66], i.e., its ability to continually strengthen more frequently used synaptic connections and
eliminate synaptic connections that are rarely used, a phenomenon called synaptic pruning [15]. This
way, the brain generates neural pathways to efficiently transmit information and are used to complete
different tasks [68, 60, 32, 26].
In the past, several studies have explored to mimic this behaviour by training sub-networks of a neural
network for each task [91, 45, 8, 44]. This approach consists of reserving specific subsets of weights
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

