FOOGD: Federated Collaboration for Both
Out-of-distribution Generalization and Detection
Xinting Liao1 , Weiming Liu1 , Pengyang Zhou1 , Fengyuan Yu1 , Jiahe Xu1 ,
Jun Wang2 , Wenjie Wang3 , Chaochao Chen1 , Xiaolin Zheng1∗
1

Zhejiang University, 2 OPPO Research Institute, 3 National University of Singapore
{xintingliao, 21831010, zhoupy, zjuccc, xlzheng}@zju.edu.cn,
junwang.lu@gmail.com, wenjiewang96@gmail.com

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a promising machine learning paradigm that collaborates
with client models to capture global knowledge. However, deploying FL models in
real-world scenarios remains unreliable due to the coexistence of in-distribution
data and unexpected out-of-distribution (OOD) data, such as covariate-shift and
semantic-shift data. Current FL researches typically address either covariate-shift
data through OOD generalization or semantic-shift data via OOD detection, overlooking the simultaneous occurrence of various OOD shifts. In this work, we
propose FOOGD, a method that estimates the probability density of each client
and obtains reliable global distribution as guidance for the subsequent FL process. Firstly, SM3 D in FOOGD estimates score model for arbitrary distributions
without prior constraints, and detects semantic-shift data powerfully. Then SAG in
FOOGD provides invariant yet diverse knowledge for both local covariate-shift
generalization and client performance generalization. In empirical validations,
FOOGD significantly enjoys three main advantages: (1) reliably estimating nonnormalized decentralized distributions, (2) detecting semantic shift data via score
values, and (3) generalizing to covariate-shift data by regularizing feature extractor.
The prejoct is open in https://github.com/XeniaLLL/FOOGD-main.git.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [56] provides a distributed machine learning paradigm, which collaboratively
models decentralized data resources. Specifically, each client models its data locally and server
improves model performance by aggregating client models, which indirectly shares knowledge among
clients and preserves privacy. FL further makes efforts to adapt real-world scenarios, i.e., adapting
non-independent and identical distribution (non-IID) [39, 30].
Beyond non-IID issues, deploying FL models in real-world also encounters different tasks of out-ofdistribution (OOD) shift [69, 26, 6], e.g., tackling covariate shifts (OOD generalization) and handling
semantic shifts (OOD detection). In FL, OOD generalization task is devised to capture the invariant
data-label relationships of covariate-shift data intra- and inter-client, which offers the potential of
adapting unseen clients [17, 60, 70, 84]. The OOD detection task in FL aims to find semantic-shift
data samples that do not belong to any known categories of all client data during FL training [83].
Both OOD generalization and detection simultaneously exist in FL, hindering the deployment of
FL methods. Nevertheless, the existing work only tackles each OOD task in isolation. SCONE [3]
proposes a unified margin-based framework to realize OOD generalization and OOD detection tasks
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

