Chain of Preference Optimization:
Improving Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in LLMs

Xuan Zhang∗12 , Chao Du†1 , Tianyu Pang1 , Qian Liu1 , Wei Gao2 , Min Lin1
1
Sea AI Lab, Singapore
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
xuanzhang.2020@phdcs.smu.edu.sg; weigao@smu.edu.sg;
{duchao, liuqian, tianyupang, linmin}@sea.com

Abstract
The recent development of chain-of-thought (CoT) decoding has enabled large
language models (LLMs) to generate explicit logical reasoning paths for complex
problem-solving. However, research indicates that these paths are not always
deliberate and optimal. The tree-of-thought (ToT) method employs tree-searching
to extensively explore the reasoning space and find better reasoning paths that
CoT decoding might overlook. This deliberation, however, comes at the cost of
significantly increased inference complexity. In this work, we demonstrate that
fine-tuning LLMs leveraging the search tree constructed by ToT allows CoT to
achieve similar or better performance, thereby avoiding the substantial inference
burden. This is achieved through Chain of Preference Optimization (CPO), where
LLMs are fine-tuned to align each step of the CoT reasoning paths with those of
ToT using the inherent preference information in the tree-search process. Extensive
experimental results show that CPO significantly improves LLM performance
in solving a variety of complex problems, including question answering, fact
verification, and arithmetic reasoning, demonstrating its effectiveness. Our code is
available at https://github.com/sail-sg/CPO.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have shown that constructing reasoning chains
is critical to improving their problem-solving capabilities [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. A representative
method is chain-of-thought (CoT) [1], which prompts LLMs to generate intermediate reasoning
steps, i.e., thoughts, thereby constructing explicit reasoning paths (as depicted in Figure 1(a)). While
straightforward and intuitive, recent research observes that CoT can often overlook optimal reasoning
paths and exhibit an unconscious style of answering due to its single-path focus [8, 9]. To foster a
more deliberate and conscious reasoning style, Yao et al. [8] propose tree-of-thought (ToT), which
generates multiple branching thoughts at each step of the reasoning process and conducts selfevaluation for pruning and planning to search for reasoning paths (as shown in Figure 1(b)). However,
despite improving reasoning quality, ToT significantly increases computational complexity, which
limits its practical application. This raises the question: Can the strategic depth of ToT be integrated
into CoT to enhance its effectiveness while maintaining efficiency?
Existing research has initially provided a positive answer to the above question [10, 11, 12]. A natural
strategy is to treat the reasoning path discovered by ToT for each instance as a target for supervision,
and then fine-tune LLMs to improve their CoT reasoning abilities [11, 12]. Several methods have
been proposed to improve this approach, including using advanced tree-search techniques like Monte
∗

Work done during Xuan Zhang’s associate membership at Sea AI Lab. † Correspondence to Chao Du.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

