One Sample Fits All: Approximating All Probabilistic
Values Simultaneously and Efficiently

Weida Li
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
vidaslee@gmail.com

Yaoliang Yu
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
The concept of probabilistic values, such as Beta Shapley values and weighted
Banzhaf values, has gained recent attention in applications like feature attribution
and data valuation. However, exact computation of these values is often exponentially expensive, necessitating approximation techniques. Prior research has
shown that the choice of probabilistic values significantly impacts downstream
performance, with no universally superior option. Consequently, one may have
to approximate multiple candidates and select the best-performing one. Although
there have been many efforts to develop efficient estimators, none are intended to
approximate all probabilistic values both simultaneously and efficiently. In this
work, we embark on the first exploration of achieving this goal. Adhering to the
principle of maximum sample reuse and avoiding amplifying factors, we propose a
one-sample-fits-all framework parameterized by a sampling vector to approximate
intermediate terms that can be converted to any probabilistic value. Leveraging
the concept of (ϵ, δ)-approximation, we theoretically identify a key formula that
effectively determines the convergence rate of our framework. By optimizing
the sampling vector using this formula, we obtain i) a one-for-all estimator that
achieves the currently best time complexity for all probabilistic values on average,
and ii) a faster generic estimator with the sampling vector optimally tuned for
each probabilistic value. Particularly, our one-for-all estimator achieves the fastest
convergence rate on Beta Shapley values, including the well-known Shapley value,
both theoretically and empirically. Finally, we establish a connection between probabilistic values and the least square regression used in (regularized) datamodels,
showing that our one-for-all estimator can solve a family of datamodels simultaneously. Our code is available at https://github.com/watml/one-for-all.

1

Introduction

The problem of attribution is central in many aspects of machine learning (Rozemberczki et al. 2022).
Examples include data valuation (Ghorbani and Zou 2019), feature attribution (Lundberg and Lee
2017), multi-agent reinforcement learning (Wang et al. 2022), data attribution (Ilyas et al. 2022), and
the list goes on. One popular methodology is to leverage the concept of probabilistic values, which is
uniquely characterized by the axioms of linearity, null, monotonicity and symmetry in cooperative
game theory (Weber 1988). Recent studies demonstrate that downstream performance employing
this concept relies on the choice of probabilistic values, and the best one varies (Kwon and Zou
2022b; Li and Yu 2023). Therefore, practitioners may resort to approximating multiple candidates of
probabilistic values and then select the best-performing one (Kwon and Zou 2022b).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

