Aggregate-and-Adapt Natural Language Prompts
for Downstream Generalization of CLIP
Chen Huang, Skyler Seto, Samira Abnar, David Grangier, Navdeep Jaitly & Josh Susskind
Apple
{chen-huang,sseto,abnar,grangier,njaitly,jsusskind}@apple.com

Abstract
Large pretrained vision-language models like CLIP have shown promising generalization capability, but may struggle in specialized domains (e.g., satellite imagery)
or fine-grained classification (e.g., car models) where the visual concepts are unseen or under-represented during pretraining. Prompt learning offers a parameterefficient finetuning framework that can adapt CLIP to downstream tasks even when
limited annotation data are available. In this paper, we improve prompt learning
by distilling the textual knowledge from natural language prompts (either humanor LLM-generated) to provide rich priors for those under-represented concepts.
We first obtain a prompt “summary” aligned to each input image via a learned
prompt aggregator. Then we jointly train a prompt generator, optimized to produce
a prompt embedding that stays close to the aggregated summary while minimizing
task loss at the same time. We dub such prompt embedding as Aggregate-andAdapted Prompt Embedding (AAPE). AAPE is shown to be able to generalize to
different downstream data distributions and tasks, including vision-language understanding tasks (e.g., few-shot classification, VQA) and generation tasks (image
captioning) where AAPE achieves competitive performance. We also show AAPE
is particularly helpful to handle non-canonical and OOD examples. Furthermore,
AAPE learning eliminates LLM-based inference cost as required by baselines, and
scales better with data and LLM model size.

1

Introduction

Most existing vision-language tasks rely on large pretrained models like CLIP [40], which are often
adapted to downstream tasks using a small amount of labeled data (as compared to the web-scale
pretraining data). This is shown by many studies ([67, 68]) to be likely to obtain poor generalization
performance in special domains, such as satellite imagery and fine-grained classification of car models
or flower species. Such overfitting behavior is a result of limited data for those tail class concepts in
both pretraining and downstream tasks. The domain gap between pretraining and downstream data
further compounds the generalization problem. For instance, CLIP may not see enough image-text
pairs to identify different car models during pretraining. This makes downstream generalization to
fine-grained car models difficult, especially in low-data scenarios.
In this paper, we investigate using pure text-based knowledge to boost the downstream generalization
of CLIP over different data distributions and tasks, with a special focus on few-shot and OOD tasks.
Note similar ideas have been explored in recent works that leverage the implicit textual knowledge in
Large Language Models (LLMs) to aid vision-language tasks. For example in [48, 56], GPT-2/3 [5]
is used to generate image descriptions for the tasks of Visual Question Answering (VQA) and image
captioning. While for CLIP-based image classification, [34, 39, 55] use GPT-3 to generate natural
language attributes or captions for each class, and then classify images based on such information.
Despite the success of these methods, they all suffer from large inference cost due to the use of LLM
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

