UAV3D: A Large-scale 3D Perception Benchmark for
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
Hui Ye
Dept. of Computer Science
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
hye2@student.gsu.edu

Rajshekhar Sunderraman
Dept. of Computer Science
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
rsunderraman@gsu.edu

Shihao Ji∗
School of Computing
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269
shihao.ji@uconn.edu

Abstract
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), equipped with cameras, are employed in numerous applications, including aerial photography, surveillance, and agriculture.
In these applications, robust object detection and tracking are essential for the
effective deployment of UAVs. However, existing benchmarks for UAV applications are mainly designed for traditional 2D perception tasks, restricting the
development of real-world applications that require a 3D understanding of the
environment. Furthermore, despite recent advancements in single-UAV perception,
limited views of a single UAV platform significantly constrain its perception capabilities over long distances or in occluded areas. To address these challenges,
we introduce UAV3D – a benchmark designed to advance research in both 3D and
collaborative 3D perception tasks with UAVs. UAV3D comprises 1,000 scenes,
each of which has 20 frames with fully annotated 3D bounding boxes on vehicles.
We provide the benchmark for four 3D perception tasks: single-UAV 3D object
detection, single-UAV object tracking, collaborative-UAV 3D object detection,
and collaborative-UAV object tracking. Our dataset and code are available at
https://huiyegit.github.io/UAV3D_Benchmark/.

1

Introduction

Due to their superior mobility, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are widely deployed and crucially important in advancing numerous applications of computer vision, such as traffic monitoring,
precision agriculture, disaster management, and wildlife surveillance, offering more efficiency and
adaptability than traditional surveillance cameras with fixed perspectives. On the other hand, the
availability of large-scale public datasets and benchmarks, such as ImageNet [2] and MSCOCO [11],
has significantly accelerated progress of various computer vision tasks, including image classification,
object detection, object tracking, semantic segmentation, and instance segmentation.
3D perception plays an essential role in vision-based robotic systems, enabling them to handle
complex tasks beyond the capabilities of 2D perception. While still a relatively new technology
for UAVs, 3D vision offers the ability to capture complete dimensional data of objects in a 3D
environment. Currently, most UAV datasets [4, 31] are mainly designed for 2D perception, limiting the
development of real-world applications that require 3D understanding of the surrounding environment.
To bridge this gap, we introduce UAV3D to advance the research in 3D perception with UAVs.
Furthermore, despite recent advancements in single-UAV perception, limited views of a single UAV
platform significantly constrain its perception capabilities over long distances or in occluded areas. A
promising solution lies in UAV-to-UAV communication, a cutting-edge technology that facilitates
∗

Part of the work was done while the author was affiliated with Georgia State University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

