TPR: Topology-Preserving Reservoirs for Generalized
Zero-Shot Learning

Hui Chen1∗, Yanbin Liu2 , Yongqiang Ma1 , Nanning Zheng1†, Xin Yu3
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
2
Auckland University of Technology,
3
The University of Queensland

1

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) such as CLIP have shown excellent
performance for zero-shot classification. Based on CLIP, recent methods design
various learnable prompts to evaluate the zero-shot generalization capability on
a base-to-novel setting. This setting assumes test samples are already divided
into either base or novel classes, limiting its application to realistic scenarios. In
this paper, we focus on a more challenging and practical setting: generalized
zero-shot learning (GZSL), i.e., testing with no information about the base/novel
division. To address this challenging zero-shot problem, we introduce two unique
designs that enable us to classify an image without the need of knowing whether
it comes from seen or unseen classes. Firstly, most existing methods only adopt
a single latent space to align visual and linguistic features, which has a limited
ability to represent complex visual-linguistic patterns, especially for fine-grained
tasks. Instead, we propose a dual-space feature alignment module that effectively
augments the latent space with a novel attribute space induced by a well-devised
attribute reservoir. In particular, the attribute reservoir consists of a static vocabulary
and learnable tokens complementing each other for flexible control over feature
granularity. Secondly, finetuning CLIP models (e.g., prompt learning) on seen
base classes usually sacrifices the model’s original generalization capability on
unseen novel classes. To mitigate this issue, we present a new topology-preserving
objective that can enforce feature topology structures of the combined base and
novel classes to resemble the topology of CLIP. In this manner, our model will
inherit the generalization ability of CLIP through maintaining the pairwise class
angles in the attribute space. Extensive experiments on twelve object recognition
datasets demonstrate that our model, termed Topology-Preserving Reservoir (TPR),
outperforms strong baselines including both prompt learning and conventional
generative-based zero-shot methods.

1

Introduction

Young children often exhibit a remarkable capacity to identify novel visual objects only based on
verbal descriptions provided by their caregivers. This phenomenon has spurred considerable interest
in developing learning models with similar feats, known as zero-shot learning (ZSL). Early ZSL
works [1, 2] trained a model on the seen base classes and evaluated the generalization performance
on novel unseen classes. This can be done by aligning the visual features and textual descriptors
∗
†

Work done while visiting The University of Queensland.
Corresponding author: nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

