A two-scale Complexity Measure for Deep Learning
Models
Massimiliano Datres1,2 , Gian Paolo Leonardi1 , Alessio Figalli3 , David Sutter4
1

Department of Mathematics, University of Trento, Trento
2
DSH, Bruno Kessler Fondation, Trento
3
Department of Mathematics, ETH, Zurich
4
IBM Quantum, IBM Research Europe, Zurich

Abstract
We introduce a novel capacity measure 2sED for statistical models based on the
effective dimension. The new quantity provably bounds the generalization error
under mild assumptions on the model. Furthermore, simulations on standard data
sets and popular model architectures show that 2sED correlates well with the
training error. For Markovian models, we show how to efficiently approximate
2sED from below through a layerwise iterative approach, which allows us to tackle
deep learning models with a large number of parameters. Simulation results suggest
that the approximation is good for different prominent models and data sets.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are achieving outstanding performances in solving several complex tasks
such as image classification problems, object detection [19, 21] and natural language processing [8].
Over-parametrized regimes make DNNs able to extract valuable information from data [33]. Quite
surprisingly DNNs typically exhibit impressive generalization capabilities after training [25, 33]
without suffering of the expected overfitting. Finding appropriate complexity measures for deep
learning models can help in understanding and quantifying their generalization capabilities. Hereafter
we propose some essential features that, ideally, should characterize a complexity measure for
parametric models:
(P1) it should provide pre-training information consistent with post-training performances;
(P2) its computation should be more efficient and scalable in comparison with a full training &
validation process;
(P3) in the case of a feedforward-type model, it should be “modular”, i.e., computable in some
iterative fashion1 .
Properties (P1)-(P3) are motivated by the goal of finding an efficient tool for model selection in the
context of feedforward (stochastic) neural networks.
Notions of complexity measures have appeared in the context of machine learning, with early studies
focusing, e.g., on the complexity of decision tree models [7] and logistic regression models [10, 15, 9].
From the perspective of statistical learning theory, the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension, commonly
called VC dimension [31], is an established complexity measure defined in term of the largest number
of points that can be shattered by a class of functions [13]. This complexity dimension has been used
1
Here we are referring to the typical structure of a feedforward-type model, which is a composition of
parametric layer maps.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

