A SSEMBLAGE: Automatic Binary Dataset
Construction for Machine Learning

Chang Liu1∗, Rebecca Saul2∗, Yihao Sun1 , Edward Raff2,3 ,
Maya Fuchs2 , Townsend Southard Pantano1 , James Holt4 , Kristopher Micinski1
1
Syracuse University,2 Booz Allen Hamilton,
3
University of Maryland, Baltimore County, 4 Laboratory for Physical Sciences
cliu57@syr.edu, Saul_Rebecca@bah.com, ysun@syr.edu, Raff_Edward@bah.com,
fuchs_maya@bah.com, tgsoutha@syr.edu, holt@lps.umd.edu, kkmicins@syr.edu

Abstract
Binary code is pervasive, and binary analysis is a key task in reverse engineering,
malware classification, and vulnerability discovery. Unfortunately, while there
exist large corpora of malicious binaries, obtaining high-quality corpora of benign
binaries for modern systems has proven challenging (e.g., due to licensing issues).
Consequently, machine learning based pipelines for binary analysis utilize either
costly commercial corpora (e.g., VirusTotal) or open-source binaries (e.g., coreutils)
available in limited quantities. To address these issues, we present A SSEMBLAGE:
an extensible distributed system that crawls, configures, and builds Windows PE
binaries to obtain high-quality binary corpora suitable for training state-of-the-art
models in binary analysis. We have run A SSEMBLAGE on AWS over the past year,
producing 890k Windows PE and 428k Linux ELF binaries across 29 configurations.
A SSEMBLAGE is designed to be both reproducible and extensible, enabling users
to publish “recipes” for their datasets, and facilitating the extraction of a wide
array of features. We evaluated A SSEMBLAGE by using its data to train modern
learning-based pipelines for compiler provenance and binary function similarity.
Our results illustrate the practical need for robust corpora of high-quality Windows
PE binaries in training modern learning-based binary analyses. A SSEMBLAGE
code is open sourced under the MIT license, and the dataset can be downloaded
from https://assemblage-dataset.net/.

1

Introduction

Binary analysis, the task of understanding and analyzing an executable binary program, is extraordinarily labor-intensive. Practitioners often spend hours to weeks manually analyzing a single
program [57]. The development of automated binary analysis tools has also proven to be extremely
labor-intensive. Historically, such tools have relied on careful and judicious software engineering
efforts to handle all corner cases, or used SAT solvers and similar data structures to resolve as
many conditions as possible [45]. Given this high human effort, it is unsurprising that an increasing
number of binary analysis methods use machine learning to help automate such efforts. This includes
low-level tasks such as function disassembly [70], and high-level tasks like malware detection [59] or
variable name identification [14, 39] which leverage these lower-level results.
However, significant issues in data availability have hampered the development of machine learningbased binary analysis for decades [1, 56]. Disassembly and decompilation require a mapping between
the original true source or assembly code and the corresponding bytes of binary instructions, but
∗

Equal contributions

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

