Synthetic Programming Elicitation
for Text-to-Code in Very Low-Resource
Programming and Formal Languages

Federico Mora1 Justin Wong1 Haley Lepe2 Sahil Bhatia1 Karim Elmaaroufi1
George Varghese3 Joseph E. González1 Elizabeth Polgreen4 Sanjit A. Seshia1
1
UC Berkeley 2 Stanford University 3 UCLA 4 University of Edinburgh
{fmora, justin.wong, sahilbhatia, k.e, jegonzal, sseshia}@berkeley.edu
halepe@stanford.edu, varghese@cs.ucla.edu, elizabeth.polgreen@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) for code applications have
demonstrated remarkable zero-shot fluency and instruction following on challenging code related tasks ranging from test case generation to self-repair. Unsurprisingly, however, models struggle to compose syntactically valid programs in
programming languages unrepresented in pre-training, referred to as very lowresource Programming Languages (VLPLs). VLPLs appear in crucial settings,
including domain-specific languages for internal tools, tool-chains for legacy languages, and formal verification frameworks. Inspired by a technique called natural
programming elicitation, we propose designing an intermediate language that
LLMs “naturally” know how to use and which can be automatically compiled to
a target VLPL. When LLMs generate code that lies outside of this intermediate
language, we use compiler techniques to repair the code into programs in the intermediate language. Overall, we introduce synthetic programming elicitation and
compilation (SPEAC), an approach that enables LLMs to generate syntactically
valid code even for VLPLs. We empirically evaluate the performance of SPEAC
in a case study for the UCLID5 formal verification language and find that, compared to existing retrieval and fine-tuning baselines, SPEAC produces syntactically
correct programs more frequently and without sacrificing semantic correctness.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated an exceptional ability to generate code from natural language prompts for popular programming languages, like Python and Java [13]. Unfortunately,
these same language models struggle to generate code for low-resource programming languages, like
many domain-specific languages (e.g., CUDA [40]). These challenges are even more pronounced
for very low-resource programming languages (VLPLs) (e.g., formal verification languages like
UCLID5 [34, 37]). Existing work has attempted to remedy this issue through prompting, constrained
decoding, and fine-tuning strategies. Unfortunately, these approaches fail to capture the intricacies of
real VLPLs and so success remains limited. To see why, consider the following three exemplars.
First, Wang at el. [42] include context-free grammars in text-to-code prompts to guide LLMs toward
syntactically correct answers. This approach works well for simple languages but cannot capture
many programming languages that are context-sensitive. Second, Agrawal et al. [1] use static analysis
techniques to reject tokens that lead to syntactically incorrect output programs. This technique can go
beyond context-free languages but assumes a linear programming process. Unfortunately, it is well
known that the root cause of a programming error need not surface as it is written [32], necessitating
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

