Identifiable Shared Component Analysis of Unpaired
Multimodal Mixtures
Sagar Shrestha
School of EECS
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
shressag@oregonstate.edu

Subash Timilsina
School of EECS
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
timilsis@oregonstate.edu

Xiao Fu
School of EECS
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
A core task in multi-modal learning is to integrate information from multiple
feature spaces (e.g., text and audio), offering modality-invariant essential representations of data. Recent research showed that, classical tools such as canonical
correlation analysis (CCA) provably identify the shared components up to minor
ambiguities, when samples in each modality are generated from a linear mixture of
shared and private components. Such identifiability results were obtained under
the condition that the cross-modality samples are aligned/paired according to their
shared information. This work takes a step further, investigating shared component
identifiability from multi-modal linear mixtures where cross-modality samples
are unaligned. A distribution divergence minimization-based loss is proposed,
under which a suite of sufficient conditions ensuring identifiability of the shared
components are derived. Our conditions are based on cross-modality distribution
discrepancy characterization and density-preserving transform removal, which
are much milder than existing studies relying on independent component analysis. More relaxed conditions are also provided via adding reasonable structural
constraints, motivated by available side information in various applications. The
identifiability claims are thoroughly validated using synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

The same data entities can often be represented in different feature spaces (e.g., audio, text and image),
due to the variety of sensing modalities or domains. Learning common latent components of data
from multiple modalities is well-motivated in representation learning. The shared components are
considered modality-invariant essential representations of data, which can often enhance performance
of downstream tasks by shedding modality-specific noise [1–4] and avoiding over-fitting [5–7].
A prominent theoretical aspect of shared component learning lies in identifiability of the components
of interest. The literature posed an intriguing theoretical question [1, 2, 8]: If every modality of
data is represented by a linear mixture of shared and private components with an unknown mixing
system, are the shared components identifiable (up to acceptable ambiguities)? Such component
identification problems are often nontrivial due to the ill-posed nature of any linear mixture model
(see, e.g., [9–14]). Interestingly, the work [1] showed that using the classical canonical correlation
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

