Bandits with Ranking Feedback

Davide Maran∗
Politecnico di Milano
davide.maran@polimi.it

Francesco Bacchiocchi∗
Politecnico di Milano
francesco.bacchiocchi@polimi.it

Francesco Emanuele Stradi∗
Politecnico di Milano
francescoemanuele.stradi@polimi.it
Matteo Castiglioni
Politecnico di Milano
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it

Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel variation of multi-armed bandits called bandits
with ranking feedback. Unlike traditional bandits, this variation provides feedback
to the learner that allows them to rank the arms based on previous pulls, without
quantifying numerically the difference in performance. This type of feedback is
well-suited for scenarios where the arms’ values cannot be precisely measured
using metrics such as monetary scores, probabilities, or occurrences. Common
examples include human preferences in matchmaking problems. Furthermore,
its investigation answers the theoretical question on how numerical rewards are
crucial in bandit settings. In particular, we study the problem of designing no-regret
algorithms with ranking feedback both in the stochastic and adversarial settings.
We show that, with stochastic rewards, differently from what happens with nonranking feedback, no algorithm can suffer a logarithmic regret in the time horizon T
in the instance-dependent case. Furthermore, we provide two algorithms. The first,
namely DREE, guarantees a superlogarithmic regret in T in the instance-dependent
case thus matching
√ our lower bound, while the second, namely R-LPE, guarantees
a regret of e
O( T ) in the instance-independent case. Remarkably, we show that
no algorithm can have an optimal regret bound in both instance-dependent and
instance-independent cases. Finally, we prove that no algorithm can achieve a
sublinear regret when the rewards are adversarial.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandits are well-known sequential decision-making problems where a learner is given a
number of arms whose reward is unknown [Lattimore and Szepesvari, 2017]. At every round, the
learner can pull an arm and observe a realization of the reward associated with that arm, which can be
generated stochastically [Auer et al., 2002] or adversarially [Auer et al., 1995]. The central question
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

