A Theory of Optimistically Universal Online
Learnability for General Concept Classes

Steve Hanneke
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Hongao Wang
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
wang5270@purdue.edu

Abstract
We provide a full characterization of the concept classes that are optimistically universally online learnable with {0, 1} labels. The notion of optimistically universal
online learning was defined in [Hanneke, 2021] in order to understand learnability
under minimal assumptions. In this paper, following the philosophy behind that
work, we investigate two questions, namely, for every concept class: (1) What are
the minimal assumptions on the data process admitting online learnability? (2) Is
there a learning algorithm which succeeds under every data process satisfying the
minimal assumptions? Such an algorithm is said to be optimistically universal for
the given concept class. We resolve both of these questions for all concept classes,
and moreover, as part of our solution we design general learning algorithms for
each case. Finally, we extend these algorithms and results to the agnostic case,
showing an equivalence between the minimal assumptions on the data process for
learnability in the agnostic and realizable cases, for every concept class, as well as
the equivalence of optimistically universal learnability.

1

Introduction

Just as computability is a core question in computation theory, learnability is now a core question in
learning theory. Intuitively, learnability is trying to ask whether we can predict the future correctly
with high probability by observing enough examples. In order to describe this intuition formally, we
need to define learning models, such as, Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) learning (Vapnik
and Chervonenkis [1974] and Valiant [1984]), online learning (Littlestone and Warmuth [1986])
and query learning (Angluin [1988]). In this paper, we focus on a variant of online learning: online
learning under data processes. In this setting, the learning is sequential: in round t, an instance
Xt is given to the algorithm, and then the algorithm makes the prediction, Ŷt , based on the history
(X≤t−1 , Y≤t−1 ) and the input Xt , i.e., Ŷt = ft (X≤t−1 , Y≤t−1 , Xt ). Next, the target value Yt will be
revealed to the learner such that it can be used to inform future predictions. We model this sequence
as a general stochastic process (X, Y) = {(Xt , Yt )}t∈N (possibly with dependencies across times
t). We say that the algorithm is strongly
consistent
under (X, Y) if the long-run average error is
h
i
Pn
1
guaranteed to be low, i.e., n t=1 I Ŷt ̸= Yt → 0 almost surely, when n → ∞.
In our setting, any theory of learning must be expressed based on the properties of, or restriction on,
the data process, as the mistake bound is based on the data process. Thus, following an approach
found in much of the learning theory literature, such as the PAC model of Valiant [1984] and Vapnik
and Chervonenkis [1971] and the online learning model of Littlestone [1988], we introduce the
restriction by an additional component, concept class H ⊆ Y X . The role of the concept class is
to restrict the processes we need to face, such that they all are realizable under that concept class.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

