On the Impact of Feature Heterophily on Link
Prediction with Graph Neural Networks

Jiong Zhu∗†
University of Michigan
jiongzhu@umich.edu

Gaotang Li∗
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign
gaotang3@illinois.edu

Yao-An Yang
University of Michigan
ayayang@umich.edu

Jing Zhu
University of Michigan
jingzhuu@umich.edu

Xuehao Cui
University of Michigan
credus@umich.edu

Danai Koutra
University of Michigan
dkoutra@umich.edu

Abstract
Heterophily, or the tendency of connected nodes in networks to have different class
labels or dissimilar features, has been identified as challenging for many Graph
Neural Network (GNN) models. While the challenges of applying GNNs for node
classification when class labels display strong heterophily are well understood,
it is unclear how heterophily affects GNN performance in other important graph
learning tasks where class labels are not available. In this work, we focus on the
link prediction task and systematically analyze the impact of heterophily in node
features on GNN performance. We first introduce formal definitions of homophilic
and heterophilic link prediction tasks, and present a theoretical framework that
highlights the different optimizations needed for the respective tasks. We then
analyze how different link prediction encoders and decoders adapt to varying levels
of feature homophily and introduce designs for improved performance. Based
on our definitions, we identify and analyze six real-world benchmarks spanning
from homophilic to heterophilic link prediction settings, with graphs containing
up to 30M edges. Our empirical analysis on a variety of synthetic and realworld datasets confirms our theoretical insights and highlights the importance of
adopting learnable decoders and GNN encoders with ego- and neighbor-embedding
separation in message passing for link prediction tasks beyond homophily.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data are powerful and widely used in the real world, representing relationships
beyond those in Euclidean data through links. Link prediction, which aims to predict missing edges
in a graph, is an important task with applications spanning from recommendation systems [41]
to knowledge graphs [38], and social networks [8]. Traditional algorithms for link prediction are
heuristic-based and impose strong assumptions on the link generation process. To alleviate the reliance
on handcrafted features, recent link prediction approaches are transformed by Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs), which can effectively learn node representations in an end-to-end fashion. Vanilla GNN for
link prediction (GNN4LP) methods keep the original GNN model for encoding node embeddings,
followed by a decoder acting on pairwise node embeddings, e.g. dot product [20]. However,
these methods are not effective at capturing pairwise structural proximity information [54, 24],
i.e. neighborhood heuristics such as the number of common neighbors. To further enhance model
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Work done prior to the author’s affiliation with Amazon.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

