SPO: Sequential Monte Carlo Policy Optimisation

Matthew V Macfarlane ∗
University of Amsterdam
m.v.macfarlane@uva.nl
Donal Byrne
InstaDeep

Edan Toledo
InstaDeep

Paul Duckworth
InstaDeep
Alexandre Laterre
InstaDeep

Abstract
Leveraging planning during learning and decision-making is central to the longterm development of intelligent agents. Recent works have successfully combined
tree-based search methods and self-play learning mechanisms to this end. However,
these methods typically face scaling challenges due to the sequential nature of
their search. While practical engineering solutions can partly overcome this, they
often result in a negative impact on performance. In this paper, we introduce SPO:
Sequential Monte Carlo Policy Optimisation, a model-based reinforcement learning
algorithm grounded within the Expectation Maximisation (EM) framework. We
show that SPO provides robust policy improvement and efficient scaling properties.
The sample-based search makes it directly applicable to both discrete and continuous action spaces without modifications. We demonstrate statistically significant
improvements in performance relative to model-free and model-based baselines
across both continuous and discrete environments. Furthermore, the parallel nature
of SPO’s search enables effective utilisation of hardware accelerators, yielding
favourable scaling laws.

1

Introduction

The integration of reinforcement learning (RL) and neural-guided planning methods has recently
achieved considerable success. Such methods effectively leverage planning during training via
iterative imitation learning [7, 68, 18, 8]. Applying additional computation via planning generates
improved policies which is then amortised [4] into a neural network policy. Using this policy as
part of planning itself creates a powerful self-improvement cycle. They have demonstrated state
of the art performance in applications ranging from chess [75] and matrix multiplication [24], to
language modelling [61]. However, one of the most commonly-used search-based policy improvement
operators, MCTS [16]: i) performs poorly on low budgets [33], ii) is inherently sequential limiting its
scalability [51, 73], and iii) requires modifications to adapt to large or continuous action spaces [57,
41]. These limitations underscore the need for more scalable, efficient and generally applicable
algorithms.
In this work, we introduce SPO: Sequential Monte Carlo Policy Optimisation, a model-based
RL algorithm that utilises scalable sampled-based Sequential Monte Carlo planning for policy
improvement. We formalise SPO as an approximate policy iteration algorithm, and show that it is
formally grounded within the Expectation Maximisation (EM) framework.
∗

Work done during internship at InstaDeep

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

