G2D: From Global to Dense Radiography
Representation Learning via Vision-Language
Pre-training

Che Liu1,2 , Cheng Ouyang3,8,9 Sibo Cheng10
Anand Shah6,7 Wenjia Bai2,3,4 Rossella Arcucci1,2
1
Department of Earth Science and Engineering, Imperial College London, UK
2
Data Science Institute, Imperial College London, UK
3
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
4
Department of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, UK
6
Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, UK
7
Royal Brompton and Harefield Hospitals, UK
8
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
9
Institute of Clinical Sciences, Imperial College London, UK
10
CEREA, École des Ponts and EDF R&D, Île-de-France, France.
che.liu21@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Medical imaging tasks require an understanding of subtle and localized visual
features due to the inherently detailed and area-specific nature of pathological
patterns, which are crucial for clinical diagnosis. Although recent advances in
medical vision-language pre-training (VLP) enable models to learn clinically relevant visual features by leveraging both medical images and their associated radiology reports, current medical VLP methods primarily focus on aligning images
with entire reports. This focus hinders the learning of dense (pixel-level) visual
features and is suboptimal for dense prediction tasks (e.g., medical image segmentation). To address this challenge, we propose a novel medical VLP framework,
named Global to Dense level representation learning (G2D), which aims to learn
global and dense visual features simultaneously using only image-text pairs without extra annotations. In particular, G2D designs a Pseudo Segmentation (PS)
task, which enables the model to learn dense visual features during VLP. Notably,
generating PS masks can be performed on the fly during VLP, which does not incur
extra trainable parameters. With this simple yet effective idea, G2D achieves superior performance across 5 medical imaging tasks and 25 diseases. Particularly,
in the segmentation task which requires dense visual features, G2D surpasses existing models even with just 1% of the training data for finetuning, compared to
100% used by other models. The code can be found in https://github.com/cheliucomputation/G2D-NeurIPS24/tree/main.

1

Introduction

In medical image analysis, learning global and dense visual representations typically requires laborintensive and costly image and pixel-level annotations [1, 2]. Vision-language pre-training (VLP)
attempts addressing this by aligning vision and language content using paired datasets [3, 4, 5, 6].
Although existing medical VLP methods excel at learning global visual features [7], they face challenges with dense visual features because the level of detail in text reports does not offer sufficient
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

