Is Cross-Validation the Gold Standard to Estimate
Out-of-sample Model Performance?

Garud Iyengar, Henry Lam, Tianyu Wang∗
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
{gi10,khl2114,tw2837}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Cross-Validation (CV) is the default choice for estimate the out-of-sample performance of machine learning models. Despite its wide usage, their statistical
benefits have remained half-understood, especially in challenging nonparametric
regimes. In this paper we fill in this gap and show that, in terms of estimating
the out-of-sample performances, for a wide spectrum of models, CV does not
statistically outperform the simple “plug-in” approach where one reuses training
data for testing evaluation. Specifically, in terms of both the asymptotic bias and
coverage accuracy of the associated interval for out-of-sample evaluation, K-fold
CV provably cannot outperform plug-in regardless of the rate at which the parametric or nonparametric models converge. Leave-one-out CV can have a smaller bias
as compared to plug-in; however, this bias improvement is negligible compared to
the variability of the evaluation, and in some important cases leave-one-out again
does not outperform plug-in once this variability is taken into account. We obtain
our theoretical comparisons via a novel higher-order Taylor analysis that dissects
the limit theorems of testing evaluations, which applies to model classes that are
not amenable to previously known sufficient conditions. Our numerical results
demonstrate that plug-in performs indeed no worse than CV in estimating model
performance across a wide range of examples.

1

Introduction

Cross-validation (CV) is considered the default choice for estimating the out-of-sample performance
of machine learning models [54, 31, 4] and more general data-driven optimization models [13]. Its
main rationale is to evaluate models using a testing set that is different from training, so as to provide
a reliable estimate of the model generalization ability. Leave-one-out CV (LOOCV) [5, 7], which
repeatedly evaluates models trained using all but one observation on the left-out observation, is a
prime approach; however, it is computationally demanding as it requires model re-training for the
same number of times as the sample size. Because of this, K-fold CV, which reduces the number
of model re-training down to K times (where K is typically 5–10), becomes a popular substitute
[34, 42].
Despite their wide usage, the statistical benefits of CV have remained understood mostly for parametric models. In nonparametric regimes, especially those involving slow model convergence rates,
their general performances as well as comparisons with the naive “plug-in” approach, i.e., simply
reuses all the same training data for model evaluation, stay essentially open. Part of the challenge
comes from the subtle inter-dependence of model convergence rates and other characteristics with
∗
Authors ordered alphabetically. More information on the data and code are available at https://github.
com/wangtianyu61/CV_GoldStandard.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

