What Makes CLIP More Robust to
Long-Tailed Pre-Training Data?
A Controlled Study for Transferable Insights

Xin Wen1 Bingchen Zhao2 Yilun Chen3 Jiangmiao Pang3† Xiaojuan Qi1†
The University of Hong Kong 2 University of Edinburgh 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wenxin, xjqi}@eee.hku.hk pangjiangmiao@pjlab.org.cn

1

Abstract
Severe data imbalance naturally exists among web-scale vision-language datasets.
Despite this, we find CLIP pre-trained thereupon exhibits notable robustness to
the data imbalance compared to supervised learning, and demonstrates significant
effectiveness in learning generalizable representations. With an aim to investigate
the reasons behind this finding, we conduct controlled experiments to study various
underlying factors, and reveal that CLIP’s pretext task forms a dynamic classification problem wherein only a subset of classes is present in training. This isolates
the bias from dominant classes and implicitly balances the learning signal. Furthermore, the robustness and discriminability of CLIP improve with more descriptive
language supervision, larger data scale, and broader open-world concepts, which
are inaccessible to supervised learning. Our study not only uncovers the mechanisms behind CLIP’s generalizability beyond data imbalance but also provides
transferable insights for the research community. The findings are validated in both
supervised and self-supervised learning, enabling models trained on imbalanced
data to achieve CLIP-level performance on diverse recognition tasks. Code and
data are available at: https://github.com/CVMI-Lab/clip-beyond-tail.

1

Introduction

The development of contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP) [36, 44, 57, 68, 93] has demonstrated unprecedented success in learning generalizable representations, empowering zero-shot vision
tasks and robustness to natural distributional shifts. This success can be primarily attributed to the
effective use of large-scale uncurated image captioning datasets collected from the web. A recent
trend involves delving into the distribution of these datasets and explicitly introducing interventions
to the curation process to create better data for training [29, 91]. However, limited research has been
conducted on analyzing the distribution of concepts/classes in these datasets and the behavior of
CLIP under varying distributions. This work thus starts by presenting a concept-centric analysis of
existing web-scale image-text datasets and models pre-trained accordingly (Fig. 1).
Motivation. Our motivation for this study arises from an intriguing observation of CLIP’s zero-shot
performance on ImageNet: CLIP is notably more robust to pre-trained data imbalance than supervised
learning. We examine various vision-language datasets at different scales, and analyze their distribution with respect to ImageNet classes. We find that image-text datasets share an extremely imbalanced
class distribution (Fig. 1a). Interestingly, we find that the zero-shot classification performance of
trained CLIP models is more robust to this imbalance, especially compared to models obtained by
supervised learning. This is evidenced by a weaker correlation between a class’s performance and its
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

