Perception of Knowledge Boundary for
Large Language Models through Semi-open-ended
Question Answering

Zhihua Wen1†, Zhiliang Tian1∗, Zexin Jian1 , Zhen Huang1 ,
Pei Ke2 , Yifu Gao1 , Minlie Huang2 , Dongsheng Li1∗
1
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Hunan, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{zhwen, tianzhiliang, jianzexin21, gaoyifu, huangzhen, dsli}@nudt.edu.cn
kepei1106@outlook.com, aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely used for knowledge-seeking purposes
yet suffer from hallucinations. The knowledge boundary of an LLM limits its
factual understanding, beyond which it may begin to hallucinate. Investigating the
perception of LLMs’ knowledge boundary is crucial for detecting hallucinations and
LLMs’ reliable generation. Current studies perceive LLMs’ knowledge boundary
on questions with concrete answers (close-ended questions) while paying limited
attention to semi-open-ended questions that correspond to many potential answers.
Some researchers achieve it by judging whether the question is answerable or not.
However, this paradigm is not so suitable for semi-open-ended questions, which
are usually “partially answerable questions” containing both answerable answers
and ambiguous (unanswerable) answers. Ambiguous answers are essential for
knowledge-seeking, but they may go beyond the knowledge boundary of LLMs.
In this paper, we perceive the LLMs’ knowledge boundary with semi-open-ended
questions by discovering more ambiguous answers. First, we apply an LLM-based
approach to construct semi-open-ended questions and obtain answers from a target
LLM. Unfortunately, the output probabilities of mainstream black-box LLMs are
inaccessible to sample for low-probability ambiguous answers. Therefore, we
apply an open-sourced auxiliary model to explore ambiguous answers for the target
LLM. We calculate the nearest semantic representation for existing answers to
estimate their probabilities, with which we reduce the generation probability of
high-probability existing answers to achieve a more effective generation. Finally,
we compare the results from the RAG-based evaluation and LLM self-evaluation
to categorize four types of ambiguous answers that are beyond the knowledge
boundary of the target LLM. Following our method, we construct a dataset to
perceive the knowledge boundary for GPT-4. We find that GPT-4 performs poorly
on semi-open-ended questions and is often unaware of its knowledge boundary.
Besides, our auxiliary model, LLaMA-2-13B, is effective in discovering many
ambiguous answers, including correct answers neglected by GPT-4 and delusive
wrong answers GPT-4 struggles to identify.

†
∗

Work done during internship at the CoAI Group.
Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

