Optimal Hypothesis Selection in (Almost) Linear Time

Mark Bun
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
mbun@bu.edu

Maryam Aliakbarpour
Department of Computer Science
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
maryama@rice.edu

Adam Smith
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
ads22@bu.edu

Abstract
Hypothesis selection, also known as density estimation, is a fundamental problem
in statistics and learning theory. Given a sample set from an unknown distribution
P and a finite class of candidate distributions (hypotheses) H := H1 , H2 , . . . , Hn ,
the goal is to design an algorithm that selects a distribution Ĥ from H that best
describes P . The accuracy of the algorithm is measured by the distance between
Ĥ and P , compared to the distance between the closest distribution in H and P
(denoted by OPT). Specifically, we aim for ∥Ĥ − P ∥TV to be at most α · OPT + ϵ
for some small ϵ and α.
While the value of ϵ can be reduced with an increasing number of samples, α is
an inherent characteristic of the algorithm. Achieving α < 3 is impossible, even
with only two candidate hypotheses, unless the number of samples is proportional
to the domain size of P [Bousquet, Kane, Moran ’19]. Finding a computationally
efficient algorithm that achieves the optimal α has been a primary focus of research
since the early work of [Devroye, Lugosi ’01]. Before our work, the algorithms
achieving α < 5 required time Ω(n2 ). We present the first algorithm that operates
in almost linear time (Õ(n/ϵ3 )) and achieves α = 3. This result improves upon
a long line of hypothesis selection research. Previously known algorithms had
either worse time complexity, a larger α factor, or additional assumptions about the
problem setting. Additionally, we provide another (almost) linear-time algorithm
with better dependency on the additive accuracy parameter ϵ, albeit with a slightly
worse accuracy parameter of α = 4.

1

Introduction

Hypothesis selection, also known as density estimation, is a fundamental problem in statistics and
learning theory. This problem involves identifying a density function that accurately represents
the distribution of a given dataset. Suppose we are given a dataset of samples drawn from an
unknown distribution P and a finite class of known distributions, representing different hypotheses:
H := {H1 , H2 , . . . , Hn }. The goal is to select a distribution in H that is close to P in total variation
(TV) distance.
Typically, learning a distribution over a domain X with an ϵ error in TV distance requires Ω(|X |/ϵ2 )
samples, which presents a substantial lower bound in sample complexity for distributions over large
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

