Masked Hard-Attention Transformers Recognize
Exactly the Star-Free Languages

Andy Yang
University of Notre Dame

David Chiang
University of Notre Dame

Dana Angluin
Yale University

Abstract
The expressive power of transformers over inputs of unbounded size can be studied
through their ability to recognize classes of formal languages. In this paper, we
establish exact characterizations of transformers with hard attention (in which all
attention is focused on exactly one position) and attention masking (in which each
position only attends to positions on one side). With strict masking (each position
cannot attend to itself) and without position embeddings, these transformers are
expressively equivalent to linear temporal logic (LTL), which defines exactly the
star-free languages. A key technique is the use of Boolean RASP as a convenient
intermediate language between transformers and LTL. We then take numerous
results known for LTL and apply them to transformers, showing how position
embeddings, strict masking, and depth all increase expressive power.

1

Introduction

Significant progress has been made in the last few years on characterizing the expressivity of
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) in terms of well-understood classes of formal languages (Strobl
et al., 2024b). Results have been obtained for a wide range of variants of transformers, and nearly
all take the form of either upper bounds (transformers recognize only languages in class 𝐶) or
lower bounds (transformers recognize all languages in class 𝐶). In this paper, we establish exact
characterizations of transformers with hard attention (in which all attention is focused on exactly one
position) and attention masking (in which each position 𝑖 only attends to positions on one side of 𝑖).
With strict masking (in which each position cannot attend to itself) and without position embeddings,
these transformers recognize exactly the class of star-free regular languages. The left side of Figure 1
summarizes our results relating masked hard-attention transformers and linear temporal logic (LTL),
which defines exactly the star-free regular languages.
A key technique in these proofs is the use of B-RASP, which, like RASP (Weiss et al., 2021), is
a small programming language that compiles into transformers. B-RASP is restricted to Boolean
values and compiles to masked hard-attention transformers. Additionally, a masked hard-attention
transformer can be decompiled back to a B-RASP program. We use B-RASP as an intermediate
language between transformers and LTL.
The equivalence of masked hard-attention transformers with LTL (and other equivalent characterizations, like counter-free automata and first-order logic) enables us to take numerous results known for
LTL and apply them to transformers, as shown on the right side of Figure 1:
• Strict future-masked rightmost-hard attention is sufficient; adding past-masked, non-masked,
and/or leftmost-hard attention does not increase expressivity (Section 5.1).
• Strict masking is important (Section 5.2); without it, masked hard-attention transformers are
less expressive, recognizing only the stutter-invariant star-free languages.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

