Few-Shot Adversarial Prompt Learning on
Vision-Language Models

Yiwei Zhou
School of Automation
Beijing Institute of Technology
zhouyiwei@bit.edu.cn

Xiaobo Xia
Sydney AI Centre
University of Sydney
xiaoboxia.uni@gmail.com

Zhiwei Lin∗
School of Automation
Beijing Institute of Technology
linzhiwei@bit.edu.cn

Bo Han
Department of Computer Science
Hong Kong Baptist University
bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Tongliang Liu∗
Sydney AI Centre
University of Sydney
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
The vulnerability of deep neural networks to imperceptible adversarial perturbations
has attracted widespread attention. Inspired by the success of vision-language
foundation models, previous efforts achieved zero-shot adversarial robustness by
aligning adversarial visual features with text supervision. However, in practice,
they are still unsatisfactory due to several issues, including heavy adaptation cost,
suboptimal text supervision, and uncontrolled natural generalization capacity. In
this paper, to address these issues, we propose a few-shot adversarial prompt
framework where adapting input sequences with limited data makes significant
adversarial robustness improvement. Specifically, we achieve this by providing
adversarially correlated text supervision that is end-to-end learned from adversarial
examples. We also propose a novel training objective that enhances the consistency
of multi-modal features while encourages differentiated uni-modal features between
natural and adversarial examples. The proposed framework gives access to learn
adversarial text supervision, which provides superior cross-modal adversarial
alignment and matches state-of-the-art zero-shot adversarial robustness with only
1% training data. Code is available at: https://github.com/lionel-w2/FAP.

1

Introduction

The seminal works [1, 2] reveal that adversarial examples [2], consisting of malicious perturbations
imperceptible to humans, can easily mislead state-of-the-art deep neural networks (DNNs) [3–6] into
making incorrect predictions. This vulnerability limits the application of DNNs in safety-critical
areas, such as medicine [7], healthcare [8], and autonomous driving [9].
Human cognition is immune to the distribution variations induced by adversarial attacks, reflecting a
fundamental difference between human and machine cognitive understanding. Humans primarily
∗

Corresponding author: Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au) and Zhiwei Lin (linzhiwei@bit.edu.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

