Optimized Feature Generation for Tabular Data via
LLMs with Decision Tree Reasoning

Jaehyun Nam∗1 , Kyuyoung Kim∗1 , Seunghyuk Oh1
Jihoon Tack1 , Jaehyung Kim2 , Jinwoo Shin1
1
KAIST, 2 Yonsei University
{jaehyun.nam,kykim,jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In tabular prediction tasks, tree-based models combined with automated feature engineering methods often outperform deep learning approaches that rely on learned
representations. While these feature engineering techniques are effective, they
typically depend on a pre-defined search space and primarily use validation scores
for feature selection, thereby missing valuable insights from previous experiments.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel tabular learning framework that
utilizes large language models (LLMs), termed Optimizing Column feature generator with decision Tree reasoning (OCTree). Our key idea is to leverage the
reasoning capabilities of LLMs to identify effective feature generation rules without manually specifying the search space and provide language-based reasoning
information highlighting past experiments as feedback for iterative rule improvements. We use decision trees to convey this reasoning information, as they can
be easily represented in natural language, effectively providing knowledge from
prior experiments (i.e., the impact of the generated features on performance) to
the LLMs. Our empirical results demonstrate that OCTree consistently enhances
the performance of various prediction models across diverse benchmarks, outperforming competing automated feature engineering methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/jaehyun513/OCTree.

1

Introduction

Learning useful representations from raw data is key to the success of deep learning algorithms,
and their effectiveness has been demonstrated across multiple domains, e.g., vision [1, 2, 3, 4] and
language [5, 6]. However, in the tabular domain, deep learning approaches are often perceived as less
effective [7, 8, 9, 10]. For instance, tree-based approaches utilizing raw column features of tabular
data [11, 12] often outperform deep learning models in tabular prediction tasks such as classification
and regression [13, 14, 15]. As a result, practitioners commonly resort to using tree-based methods
coupled with manual feature engineering, such as computing the product of two column features [16].
Generating suitable column features, even with domain knowledge, can be challenging and costly.
For instance, manual validation to identify useful features is infeasible due to the exponentially
many possible combinations to explore [17]. To address this issue, existing feature engineering
methods [17, 18, 19] use additional filtering schemes [20, 21, 22] to evaluate and select useful
features automatically. While these approaches reduce manual effort and improve feature quality,
they still present several challenges. First, practitioners often rely on manually defined search
spaces to generate candidate features due to the inherent ambiguity of what constitutes informative
features [17, 23]. However, this still requires substantial computation for validating candidate features,
*

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

