Coevolving with the Other You: Fine-Tuning LLM
with Sequential Cooperative Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Hao Ma1,2∗ Tianyi Hu1,2∗ Zhiqiang Pu1,2† Boyin Liu3
Xiaolin Ai2 Yanyan Liang4 Min Chen2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba (China) Co., Ltd.
4
Macau University of Science and Technology
{mahao2021, hutianyi2021, zhiqiang.pu, xiaolin.ai, chenmin2020}@ia.ac.cn
liuboyin.lby@alibaba-inc.com
yyliang@must.edu.mo

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a pivotal technique for fine-tuning
large language models (LLMs) on specific tasks. However, prevailing RL finetuning methods predominantly rely on PPO and its variants. Though these algorithms are effective in general RL settings, they often exhibit suboptimal performance and vulnerability to distribution collapse when applied to the fine-tuning of
LLMs. In this paper, we propose CORY, extending the RL fine-tuning of LLMs to
a sequential cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning framework, to leverage
the inherent coevolution and emergent capabilities of multi-agent systems. In
CORY, the LLM to be fine-tuned is initially duplicated into two autonomous agents:
a pioneer and an observer. The pioneer generates responses based on queries, while
the observer generates responses using both the queries and the pioneer’s responses.
The two agents are trained together. During training, the agents exchange roles
periodically, fostering cooperation and coevolution between them. Experiments
evaluate CORY’s performance by fine-tuning GPT-2 and Llama-2 under subjective
and objective reward functions on the IMDB Review and GSM8K datasets, respectively. Results show that CORY outperforms PPO in terms of policy optimality,
resistance to distribution collapse, and training robustness, thereby underscoring its
potential as a superior methodology for refining LLMs in real-world applications.
The code can be found at: https://github.com/Harry67Hu/CORY.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive success across diverse downstream tasks,
including dialogue systems [Ouyang et al., 2022, Touvron et al., 2023], code generation [Roziere
et al., 2023], and robotic control [Driess et al., 2023, Brohan et al., 2023]. However, as the capabilities
of LLMs advance, the challenges associated with further performance gains become increasingly
intricate. Fine-tuning LLMs for specific tasks presents a significant challenge, prompting recent
exploration of LLM fine-tuning paradigm such as supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [Wu et al., 2021],
reinforcement learning (RL) fine-tuning [Shojaee et al., 2023], and direct preference optimization
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author: zhiqiang.pu@ia.ac.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

