CAT: Coordinating Anatomical-Textual Prompts for
Multi-Organ and Tumor Segmentation

Zhongzhen Huang1,2 , Yankai Jiang2 , Rongzhao Zhang2 ,
Shaoting Zhang1,2 , Xiaofan Zhang1,2
1
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{huangzhongzhen,xiaofan.zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{jiangyankai, zhangrongzhao, zhangshaoting}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Existing promptable segmentation methods in the medical imaging field primarily
consider either textual or visual prompts to segment relevant objects, yet they often
fall short when addressing anomalies in medical images, like tumors, which may
vary greatly in shape, size, and appearance. Recognizing the complexity of medical
scenarios and the limitations of textual or visual prompts, we propose a novel dualprompt schema that leverages the complementary strengths of visual and textual
prompts for segmenting various organs and tumors. Specifically, we introduce
CAT, an innovative model that Coordinates Anatomical prompts derived from 3D
cropped images with Textual prompts enriched by medical domain knowledge.
The model architecture adopts a general query-based design, where prompt queries
facilitate segmentation queries for mask prediction. To synergize two types of
prompts within a unified framework, we implement a ShareRefiner, which refines
both segmentation and prompt queries while disentangling the two types of prompts.
Trained on a consortium of 10 public CT datasets, CAT demonstrates superior
performance in multiple segmentation tasks. Further validation on a specialized inhouse dataset reveals the remarkable capacity of segmenting tumors across multiple
cancer stages. This approach confirms that coordinating multimodal prompts is a
promising avenue for addressing complex scenarios in the medical domain. Codes
are available at https://github.com/zongzi3zz/CAT.

1

Introduction

Advanced prompt engineering [1, 2] has augmented large language models [3, 4, 5] with emerging
capabilities. However, these paradigms have not yet been successfully applied to vision tasks,
primarily due to the ever-changing and unpredictable natures of computer vision [6, 7]. This is
particularly evident in medical domains, where variations in imaging protocols, noise/artifacts, and
patient-specific pathologies pose significant challenges [8, 9, 10]. To tackle these challenges, there
have been some efforts within the community to develop promptable models for segmenting objects
in medical images: 1) One type of such effort focuses on textual-prompted models [11, 12, 13], which
show profound competencies in segmenting a specific organ or tumor referenced by arbitrary text
phrases. These approaches involve distilling knowledge from language models like CLIP [14] or
BERT [15] to facilitate the alignment between visual and textual representations; 2) Another direction
in promptable segmentation research aims to visual-prompted models [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21], which
rely on visual examples or visual landmarks (e.g., boxes and points). Recently, the trend toward
visual-prompted segmentation models in the medical domain mainly focuses on fine-tuning SAM [22]
with lightweight, plug-and-play adapters or modifying SAM into 3D-based architecture.
Corresponding authors.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

