Non-asymptotic Convergence of Training
Transformers for Next-token Prediction
Ruiquan Huang
Penn State University
State College, PA, 16801
rzh5514@psu.edu

Yingbin Liang
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, 43210
liang.889@osu.edu

Jing Yang
Penn State Univeristy
State College, PA, 16801
yangjing@psu.edu

Abstract
Transformers have achieved extraordinary success in modern machine learning due
to their excellent ability to handle sequential data, especially in next-token prediction (NTP) tasks. However, the theoretical understanding of their performance in
NTP is limited, with existing studies focusing mainly on asymptotic performance.
This paper provides a fine-grained non-asymptotic analysis of the training dynamics of a one-layer transformer consisting of a self-attention module followed by
a feed-forward layer. We first characterize the essential structural properties of
training datasets for NTP using a mathematical framework based on partial orders.
Then, we design a two-stage training algorithm, where the pre-processing stage
for training the feed-forward layer and the main stage for training the attention
layer exhibit fast convergence performance. Specifically, both layers converge
sub-linearly to the direction of their corresponding max-margin solutions. We also
show that the cross-entropy loss enjoys a linear convergence rate. Furthermore,
we show that the trained transformer presents non-trivial prediction ability with
dataset shift, which sheds light on the remarkable generalization performance of
transformers. Our analysis technique involves the development of novel properties
on the attention gradient and further in-depth analysis of how these properties
contribute to the convergence of the training process. Our experiments further
validate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has revolutionized the field of machine learning,
establishing itself as a foundation model for numerous applications, including natural language
processing (NLP) (Devlin et al., 2018), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), and multi-modal
signal processing (Tsai et al., 2019). In particular, transformers achieve tremendous empirical success
in large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020). Despite the empirical success,
limited theoretical understanding of transformers have caused a series of critical concerns about their
robustness, interpretability, and bias issues (Bommasani et al., 2021; Belkin, 2024).
To overcome these issues, recent advances in transformer theory have investigated the convergence of
training transformers under theoretically amenable setting such as linear regression (Mahankali et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023) and binary classification (Tarzanagh et al., 2023b,a;
Vasudeva et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023). Nevertheless, one of the fundamental task in LLMs and other
generative models is next-token prediction (NTP), which involves predicting the next word or token
in a sequence, given the previous tokens. In NTP, a few recent theoretical studies have started to
investigate the training dynamics of transformers (Tian et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2024). However, those
works lack of fine-grained non-asymptotic convergence analysis of the training process, posing the
following open questions for further investigation:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

