At dusk

SimGen: Simulator-conditioned Driving Scene
Generation
Yunsong Zhou1,2∗ Michael Simon1 Zhenghao Peng1 Sicheng Mo1
Hongzi Zhu2 Minyi Guo2 Bolei Zhou1
1

University of California, Los Angeles

2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

https://metadriverse.github.io/simgen/

Christmas night

Street in Tokyo

Snowy road

At dusk

London

Rainy day

Control Conditions

Rear-end Cutting
collision
in

Simulator

Figure 1: SimGen is a controllable scene generation paradigm conditioned on a simulator. It
learns from real-world and simulated data and then can generate diverse driving scenes based on the
simulator’s control conditions and text prompt.

Abstract
Controllable synthetic data generation can substantially lower the annotation cost
of training data. Prior works use diffusion models to generate driving images
conditioned on the 3D object layout. However, those models are trained on smallscale datasets like nuScenes, which lack appearance and layout diversity. Moreover,
overfitting often happens, where the trained models can only generate images based
on the layout data from the validation set of the same dataset. In this work, we
introduce a simulator-conditioned scene generation framework called SimGen that
can learn to generate diverse driving scenes by mixing data from the simulator and
the real world. It uses a novel cascade diffusion pipeline to address challenging
sim-to-real gaps and multi-condition conflicts. A driving video dataset DIVA is
collected to enhance the generative diversity of SimGen, which contains over 147.5
hours of real-world driving videos from 73 locations worldwide and simulated
driving data from the MetaDrive simulator. SimGen achieves superior generation
quality and diversity while preserving controllability based on the text prompt
and the layout pulled from a simulator. We further demonstrate the improvements
brought by SimGen for synthetic data augmentation on the BEV detection and
segmentation task and showcase its capability in safety-critical data generation.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

Street in Tokyo

Snow

London

Rain

