Toxicity Detection for Free

Zhanhao Hu

Julien Piet
Geng Zhao
Jiantao Jiao
University of California, Berkeley

David Wagner

{huzhanhao,julien.piet,gengzhao,jiantao,daw}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Current LLMs are generally aligned to follow safety requirements and tend to refuse
toxic prompts. However, LLMs can fail to refuse toxic prompts or be overcautious
and refuse benign examples. In addition, state-of-the-art toxicity detectors have
low TPRs at low FPR, incurring high costs in real-world applications where toxic
examples are rare. In this paper, we introduce Moderation Using LLM Introspection
(MULI), which detects toxic prompts using the information extracted directly from
LLMs themselves. We found we can distinguish between benign and toxic prompts
from the distribution of the first response token’s logits. Using this idea, we build a
robust detector of toxic prompts using a sparse logistic regression model on the first
response token logits. Our scheme outperforms SOTA detectors under multiple
metrics.

1

Introduction

Significant progress has been made in recent large language models. LLMs acquire substantial
knowledge from wide text corpora, demonstrating a remarkable ability to provide high-quality
responses to various prompts. They are widely used in downstream tasks such as chatbots [18, 4] and
general tool use [23, 6]. However, LLMs raise serious safety concerns. For instance, malicious users
could ask LLMs to write phishing emails or provide instructions on how to commit a crime [29, 10].
Current LLMs have incorporated safety alignment [27, 24] in their training phase to alleviate safety
concerns. Consequently, they are generally tuned to decline to answer toxic prompts. However,
alignment is not perfect, and many models can be either overcautious (which is frustrating for
benign users) or too-easily deceived (e.g., by jailbreak attacks) [28, 15, 21, 16]. One approach is
to supplement alignment tuning with a toxicity detector [12, 2, 1, 3], a classifier that is designed
to detect toxic, harmful, or inappropriate prompts to the LLM. By querying the detector for every
prompt, LLM vendors can immediately stop generating responses whenever they detect toxic content.
These detectors are usually based on an additional LLM that is finetuned on toxic and benign data.
Current detectors are imperfect and make mistakes. In real-world applications, toxic examples are
rare and most prompts are benign, so test data exhibits high class imbalance: even small False Positive
Rates (FPR) can cause many false alarms in this scenario [5]. Unfortunately, state-of-the-art content
moderation classifiers and toxicity detectors are not able to achieve high True Positive Rates (TPR)
and very low FPRs, and they struggle with some inputs.
Existing detectors also impose extra costs. At training time, one must collect a comprehensive dataset
of toxic and benign examples for fine-tuning such a model. At test time, LLM providers must also
query a separate toxicity detection model, which increases the cost of LLM serving and can incur
additional latency. Some detectors require seeing both the entire input to the LLM and the entire
output, which is incompatible with providing streaming responses; in practice, providers deal with
this by applying the detector only to the input (which in current schemes leads to missing some
toxic responses) or applying the detector once the entire output has been generated and attempting to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

