PGN: The RNN’s New Successor is Effective
for Long-Range Time Series Forecasting

Yuxin Jia1,2 Youfang Lin1,2 Jing Yu1,2 Shuo Wang1,2 Tianhao Liu3 Huaiyu Wan1,2,∗
1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
{yuxinjia, yflin, jingyu1, shuo.wang, leolth, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to the recurrent structure of RNN, the long information propagation path
poses limitations in capturing long-term dependencies, gradient explosion/vanishing issues, and inefficient sequential execution. Based on this, we propose a
novel paradigm called Parallel Gated Network (PGN) as the new successor to
RNN. PGN directly captures information from previous time steps through the
designed Historical Information Extraction (HIE) layer and leverages gated mechanisms to select and fuse it with the current time step information. This reduces
the information propagation path to O(1), effectively addressing the limitations
of RNN. To enhance PGN’s performance in long-range time series forecasting
tasks, we propose a novel temporal modeling framework called Temporal PGN
(TPGN). TPGN incorporates two branches to comprehensively capture the semantic information of time series. One branch utilizes PGN to capture long-term
periodic patterns while preserving their local characteristics. The other branch
employs patches to capture short-term information and aggregate the global√representation of the series. TPGN achieves a theoretical complexity of O( L),
ensuring efficiency in its operations. Experimental results on five benchmark
datasets demonstrate the state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance and high efficiency
of TPGN, further confirming the effectiveness of PGN as the new successor to
RNN in long-range time series forecasting. The code is available in this repository:
https://github.com/Water2sea/TPGN.

1

Introduction

Under the premise of accurate time series forecasting, long-range forecasting tasks offer an advantage
over short-range forecasting tasks as they provide more comprehensive information for individuals
and organizations to thoroughly assess future changes and make well-informed decisions. Due to its
practical applicability across various fields (i.e., energy [Zhou et al., 2021], climate [Angryk et al.,
2020], traffic [Yin and Shang, 2016], etc), long-range forecasting has attracted significant attention
from researchers in recent years.
Long-range time series forecasting tasks can be broadly classified into two categories. One task is to
utilize abundant inputs to forecast future outputs [Liu et al., 2022a, Jia et al., 2023], while another
task is to predict longer-range futures with fewer historical inputs [Zhou et al., 2021, 2022a, Wang
et al., 2023]. Although existing studies have shown that ample historical inputs can introduce more
information to improve prediction performance [Jia et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2024], considering factors
such as the load capacity of training devices and data collection, the utilization of limited historical
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

