Frozen-DETR: Enhancing DETR with Image
Understanding from Frozen Foundation Models

Shenghao Fu1,3,4 , Junkai Yan1,3,4 , Qize Yang3† , Xihan Wei3 ,
Xiaohua Xie1,4,5∗, Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,4,6∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China;
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China;
3
Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group;
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China;
5
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China;
6
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong 510555, China
{fushh7,yanjk3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xiexiaoh6@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org
https://github.com/iSEE-Laboratory/Frozen-DETR

Abstract
Recent vision foundation models can extract universal representations and show
impressive abilities in various tasks. However, their application on object detection
is largely overlooked, especially without fine-tuning them. In this work, we show
that frozen foundation models can be a versatile feature enhancer, even though
they are not pre-trained for object detection. Specifically, we explore directly
transferring the high-level image understanding of foundation models to detectors
in the following two ways. First, the class token in foundation models provides an
in-depth understanding of the complex scene, which facilitates decoding object
queries in the detector’s decoder by providing a compact context. Additionally, the
patch tokens in foundation models can enrich the features in the detector’s encoder
by providing semantic details. Utilizing frozen foundation models as plug-and-play
modules rather than the commonly used backbone can significantly enhance the
detector’s performance while preventing the problems caused by the architecture
discrepancy between the detector’s backbone and the foundation model. With such
a novel paradigm, we boost the SOTA query-based detector DINO from 49.0% AP
to 51.9% AP (+2.9% AP) and further to 53.8% AP (+4.8% AP) by integrating one
or two foundation models respectively, on the COCO validation set after training
for 12 epochs with R50 as the detector’s backbone.

1

Introduction

Understanding an image at both global and local levels is a key factor for a wide range of vision
perception tasks. Typically, in object detection, an in-depth understanding of the image can assist
model reasoning under many challenging situations. First, the conflict between detecting the whole
object and parts of it always exists in object detection since parts of the object are also annotated in
many scenarios, e.g., objects under occlusion. With a global understanding of the image, detectors
can recognize different parts of the same object and detect the objects as completely as possible,
as shown in Figure 1 (a). Second, the co-occurrence of objects can facilitate finding some missing
objects. In Figure 1 (b), a man is sitting on something, from which we can infer that it is a bench with
a strange appearance. And the bottle aside the man may help us find the bottle in his hand. Moreover,
∗
: Corresponding authors are Xiaohua Xie and Wei-Shi Zheng. † : Project Lead. This work was done when
Shenghao Fu and Junkai Yan were interns at Alibaba.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

