Off-Policy Selection for Initiating Human-Centric
Experimental Design

Ge Gao∗§

Xi Yang†

Qitong Gao‡

Song Ju§

Miroslav Pajic‡

Min Chi§

Abstract
In human-centric tasks such as healthcare and education, the heterogeneity among
patients and students necessitates personalized treatments and instructional interventions. While reinforcement learning (RL) has been utilized in those tasks,
off-policy selection (OPS) is pivotal to close the loop by offline evaluating and
selecting policies without online interactions, yet current OPS methods often overlook the heterogeneity among participants. Our work is centered on resolving
a pivotal challenge in human-centric systems (HCSs): how to select a policy to
deploy when a new participant joining the cohort, without having access to any
prior offline data collected over the participant? We introduce First-Glance OffPolicy Selection (FPS), a novel approach that systematically addresses participant
heterogeneity through sub-group segmentation and tailored OPS criteria to each
sub-group. By grouping individuals with similar traits, FPS facilitates personalized
policy selection aligned with unique characteristics of each participant or group
of participants. FPS is evaluated via two important but challenging applications,
intelligent tutoring systems and a healthcare application for sepsis treatment and
intervention. FPS presents significant advancement in enhancing learning outcomes
of students and in-hospital care outcomes.

1

Introduction

Human-centric systems (HCSs), e.g., used in healthcare facilities [53, 45, 16] and intelligent education
(IE) [5, 26, 68], have widely employed reinforcement learning (RL) to enhance user experience by
improving outcomes of disease treatment, knowledge gaining, etc. Specifically, RL has been used
in healthcare to automate treatment procedures [53], or in IE that can induce policies automatically
adapting difficulties of course materials and helping students to setup and refine study plans to improve
learning outcomes [34, 84]. Though various existing offline RL methods can be adopted [19, 29, 4]
for policy optimization, validation of policies’ performance is often conducted by online testing [61,
74, 69, 10]. Given the long testing horizon (e.g., several years, or semesters, in healthcare, and IE,
respectively) and the high cost of recruiting participants, online testing is considered exceedingly
time- and resource-consuming, and sometimes could even be hindered by protocols overseeing human
involved experiments, e.g., performance and safety justifications need to be provided before new
medical device controllers can be tested on patients [51].
Recently, off-policy evaluation (OPE) methods have been proposed to tackle such challenges by
estimating the performance of target (evaluation) RL policies with offline data, which only requires
the trajectories collected over behavioral polices given a priori; similarly, off-policy selection (OPS)
targets to determine the most promising policies, out of the ones trained with different algorithms
or hyper-parameter sets, that can be used for online deployment [3, 9, 46, 76, 81]. However, most
existing OPS and OPE methods are designed in the context of homogenic agents, such as in robotics
∗
Stanford University.
The work was done at North Carolina State University.
gegao@stanford.edu, mchi@ncsu.edu.
†
IBM Research
‡
Duke University
§
North Carolina State University

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

Contact:

