HairFastGAN: Realistic and Robust Hair Transfer
with a Fast Encoder-Based Approach

Maxim Nikolaev1,3 , Mikhail Kuznetsov1,2,3 , Dmitry Vetrov4 , Aibek Alanov1,3
1
HSE University, 2 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 3 AIRI
{m.nikolaev, m.k.kuznetsov, alanov}@airi.net
4
Constructor University, Bremen
dvetrov@constructor.university

Figure 1: HairFastGAN: Realistic and Robust Hair Transfer with a Fast Encoder-Based Approach. Our method takes as input a photo of the face, desired shape and hair color and then
performs the transfer of the selected attributes. You can also see a comparison of our model with the
others in the right plot. We were able to achieve excellent image realism while working in near real
time.

Abstract
Our paper addresses the complex task of transferring a hairstyle from a reference
image to an input photo for virtual hair try-on. This task is challenging due to
the need to adapt to various photo poses, the sensitivity of hairstyles, and the
lack of objective metrics. The current state of the art hairstyle transfer methods
use an optimization process for different parts of the approach, making them
inexcusably slow. At the same time, faster encoder-based models are of very
low quality because they either operate in StyleGAN’s W+ space or use other
low-dimensional image generators. Additionally, both approaches have a problem
with hairstyle transfer when the source pose is very different from the target pose,
because they either don’t consider the pose at all or deal with it inefficiently. In our
paper, we present the HairFast model, which uniquely solves these problems and
achieves high resolution, near real-time performance, and superior reconstruction
compared to optimization problem-based methods. Our solution includes a new
architecture operating in the FS latent space of StyleGAN, an enhanced inpainting
approach, and improved encoders for better alignment, color transfer, and a new
encoder for post-processing. The effectiveness of our approach is demonstrated
on realism metrics after random hairstyle transfer and reconstruction when the
original hairstyle is transferred. In the most difficult scenario of transferring both
shape and color of a hairstyle from different images, our method performs in less
than a second on the Nvidia V100.

1

Introduction

Advances in the generation of face images using GANs [5, 12–14, 9, 31, 19, 11, 20, 26, 28] have
made it possible to apply them to semantic face editing [10, 21, 34, 35]. One of the most challenging
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

