A Non-parametric Direct Learning Approach to
Heterogeneous Treatment Effect Estimation under
Unmeasured Confounding

Xinhai Zhang∗
xzhan222@binghamton.edu

Xingye Qiao∗
xqiao@binghamton.edu

Abstract
In many social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences, treatment effect estimation
is a crucial step in understanding the impact of an intervention, policy, or treatment. In recent years, an increasing emphasis has been placed on heterogeneity in
treatment effects, leading to the development of various methods for estimating
Conditional Average Treatment Effects (CATE). These approaches hinge on a
crucial identifying condition of no unmeasured confounding, an assumption that is
not always guaranteed in observational studies or randomized control trials with
non-compliance. In this paper, we proposed a general framework for estimating
CATE with a possible unmeasured confounder using Instrumental Variables. We
also construct estimators that exhibit greater efficiency and robustness against various scenarios of model misspecification. The efficacy of the proposed framework
is demonstrated through simulation studies and a real data example.

1

Introduction

In various domains, different subjects may exhibit different responses to the same set of treatments.
The exploration of this heterogeneity in the effects resulting from exposure has gained substantial
interest in recent years. For instance, inferring the heterogeneous effect of a medical treatment on
clinical outcome can contribute to the development of personalized treatment (Cai et al., 2011).
A similar concept has found application in personalized marketing as well (Chandra et al., 2022).
The heterogeneity among subjects can be measured by the disparity in conditional mean outcomes
given other covariates, typically referred to as the Conditional Average Treatment Effect (CATE).
Another problem closely related to the heterogeneity in treatment effects is the optimal Individualized
Treatment Regime (ITR), which is a decision rule that selects treatments for individuals to maximize
the expected outcome.
There has been significant development in the literature regarding the estimation of CATE and the
optimal ITR in the case of no unmeasured confounding. For example, Q-learning (Qian and Murphy,
2011) models the conditional mean outcome under each treatment separately and the estimated CATE
is constructed using the difference between the estimated conditional mean outcomes. The success of
this method relies on the correct specification of the outcome models. To address this issue, direct
learning (DL) (Tian et al., 2014; Qi and Liu, 2018) and robust direct learning (RD) (Meng and Qiao,
2022) models the conditional contrast between treatments directly, which has been shown to be more
robust to model misspecification. Another strand of work approaches with tree-based or forest-based
methods. Hill (2011) and Green and Kern (2012) extended the Bayesian Additive Regression Tree
(BART) method of Chipman et al. (2010) for estimating heterogeneous treatment effect. Athey and
Imbens (2016) proposed Causal Trees with an “honest” splitting approach, wherein the partitioning is
∗
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, NY,
13902, USA.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

