OneActor: Consistent Subject Generation via
Cluster-Conditioned Guidance
Jiahao Wang1,2 , Caixia Yan1,∗ , Haonan Lin1 , Weizhan Zhang1,∗ , Mengmeng Wang3,4 ,
Tieliang Gong1 , Guang Dai4 , Hao Sun5
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, MOEKLINNS, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
4
SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation of China
5
China Telecom Artificial Intelligence Technology Co.Ltd
uguisu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

{yancaixia,zhangwzh}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models benefit artists with high-quality image generation. Yet their stochastic nature hinders artists from creating consistent images
of the same subject. Existing methods try to tackle this challenge and generate
consistent content in various ways. However, they either depend on external restricted data or require expensive tuning of the diffusion model. For this issue,
we propose a novel one-shot tuning paradigm, termed OneActor. It efficiently
performs consistent subject generation solely driven by prompts via a learned
semantic guidance to bypass the laborious backbone tuning. We lead the way
to formalize the objective of consistent subject generation from a clustering perspective, and thus design a cluster-conditioned model. To mitigate the overfitting
challenge shared by one-shot tuning pipelines, we augment the tuning with auxiliary samples and devise two inference strategies: semantic interpolation and
cluster guidance. These techniques are later verified to significantly improve
the generation quality. Comprehensive experiments show that our method outperforms a variety of baselines with satisfactory subject consistency, superior
prompt conformity as well as high image quality. Our method is capable of multisubject generation and compatible with popular diffusion extensions. Besides,
we achieve a 4× faster tuning speed than tuning-based baselines and, if desired,
avoid increasing the inference time. Furthermore, our method can be naturally
utilized to pre-train a consistent subject generation network from scratch, which
will implement this research task into more practical applications. Project page:
https://johnneywang.github.io/OneActor-webpage/.

1

Introduction

Diffusion probabilistic models [13, 31, 34] have shown great success in image generation. As a
prominent subset of them, text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [14, 28] significantly improve artistic
productivity. Designers can simply describe a subject (e.g. a character, an object, an art style) that
they desire and then obtain high-quality images of the subject. However, relying on the random
sampling, diffusion models fail to maintain a consistent appearance of the subject across the generated
images. Taking Fig. 1(a) as an example, ordinary diffusion models denoise a random noise from the
noise space to a clean latent code guided by the given prompt, where the clean code corresponds to a
∗

Corresponding authors.
This work was completed during the internship at SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation of China.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

