GTA: Generative Trajectory Augmentation with
Guidance for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Jaewoo Lee1 ∗ Sujin Yun1 ∗ Taeyoung Yun1 Jinkyoo Park1 2
1
KAIST 2 Omelet
{jaewoo, yunsj0625, 99yty, jinkyoo.park}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Offline Reinforcement Learning (Offline RL) presents challenges of learning effective decision-making policies from static datasets without any online interactions.
Data augmentation techniques, such as noise injection and data synthesizing, aim
to improve Q-function approximation by smoothing the learned state-action region.
However, these methods often fall short of directly improving the quality of offline
datasets, leading to suboptimal results. In response, we introduce GTA, Generative
Trajectory Augmentation, a novel generative data augmentation approach designed
to enrich offline data by augmenting trajectories to be both high-rewarding and
dynamically plausible. GTA applies a diffusion model within the data augmentation framework. GTA partially noises original trajectories and then denoises
them with classifier-free guidance via conditioning on amplified return value. Our
results show that GTA, as a general data augmentation strategy, enhances the performance of widely used offline RL algorithms across various tasks with unique
challenges. Furthermore, we conduct a quality analysis of data augmented by GTA
and demonstrate that GTA improves the quality of the data. Our code is available
at https://github.com/Jaewoopudding/GTA

1

Introduction

Learning a decision-making policy through continual interaction with real environments is challenging
when online interaction is costly or risky. Offline Reinforcement Learning [Offline RL, 1] emerges
as a solution, focusing on training effective decision-making policies with static dataset gathered
through an unknown policy [2]. However, offline data often does not provide enough coverage of
state-action space, resulting in extrapolation error addressed as overestimation of Q-value [3, 4]. To
mitigate extrapolation error, many previous works rely on adding explicit regularization terms [3–10]
and have shown significant progress.
Moving beyond these mainstream methodologies, there exists an underexplored approach, data
augmentation methods: traditional data augmentation and generative data augmentation. Traditional
augmentation methods [11, 12] inject minimal noise to the state, preserving environment dynamics.
Generative data augmentation [13, 14] builds a data synthesizer with a generative model to upsample
offline data. Employing generative data augmentation approaches broadens the support of the data,
thereby improving Q-function approximation [12].
While previously proposed data augmentation methods enhance the performance of offline RL, they
still have limitations. As illustrated in Figure 1, traditional augmentation methods have difficulties
in discovering novel states or actions beyond the existing offline data, limiting their role only to
smoothing small local regions of the observed state. In the case of generative data augmentation, the
reward distribution of generated data is constrained by the support of offline data, resulting in the
∗

Equal contribution authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

