An Improved Empirical Fisher Approximation for
Natural Gradient Descent

1

Xiaodong Wu1∗ Wenyi Yu2∗ Chao Zhang2 Philip Woodland1
Dept. of Engineering, University of Cambridge 2 Dept. of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
{xw338,pw117}@cam.ac.uk {ywy22@mails,cz277@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Approximate Natural Gradient Descent (NGD) methods are an important family of
optimisers for deep learning models, which use approximate Fisher information
matrices to pre-condition gradients during training. The empirical Fisher (EF)
method approximates the Fisher information matrix empirically by reusing the
per-sample gradients collected during back-propagation. Despite its ease of implementation, the EF approximation has its theoretical and practical limitations. This
paper investigates the inversely-scaled projection issue of EF, which is shown to be
a major cause of its poor empirical approximation quality. An improved empirical
Fisher (iEF) method is proposed to address this issue, which is motivated as a
generalised NGD method from a loss reduction perspective, meanwhile retaining
the practical convenience of EF. The exact iEF and EF methods are experimentally
evaluated using practical deep learning setups, including widely-used setups for
parameter-efficient fine-tuning of pre-trained models (T5-base with LoRA and
Prompt-Tuning on GLUE tasks, and ViT with LoRA for CIFAR100). Optimisation
experiments show that applying exact iEF directly as an optimiser provides strong
convergence and generalisation. It achieves the best test performance and the lowest training loss for the majority of the tasks, even when compared to well-tuned
AdamW/Adafactor baselines. Additionally, under a novel empirical evaluation
framework, the proposed iEF method shows consistently better approximation
quality to exact Natural Gradient updates than both the EF and the more expensive
sampled Fisher methods, meanwhile demonstrating the superior property of being
robust to the choice of damping across tasks and training stages. Improving existing
approximate NGD optimisers with iEF is expected to lead to better convergence
and robustness. Furthermore, the iEF method also serves as a better approximation
method to the Fisher information matrix itself, which enables the improvement of
a variety of Fisher-based methods, not limited to the scope of optimisation.

1

Introduction

Parameter optimisation is a crucial research area in the field of deep learning, where stochastic
optimisers are commonly used which update the model parameters iteratively to minimise a target
loss function. Approximate Natural Gradient Descent (NGD) [1] methods are an important family of
approximate second-order optimisers, which pre-condition the gradient with the (approximate) Fisher
information matrix (also called the Fisher matrix) to accelerate training or improve generalisation.
Although there are many successful optimisers based on approximate NGD, many of them in fact
use the empirical Fisher (EF) as a pre-conditioner. These methods are referred to as approximate
empirical NGD methods [52]. The EF method constructs an approximation to the exact Fisher
matrix directly from the gradients of training samples, which are usually readily computed during the
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

