A Cat Is A Cat (Not A Dog!): Unraveling Information
Mix-ups in Text-to-Image Encoders through Causal
Analysis and Embedding Optimization

Chieh-Yun Chen

Chiang Tseng

Li-Wu Tsao

Hong-Han Shuai

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University Georgia Institute of Technology
cchen859@gatech.edu

{chiang.ee11,lwtsao.ee09,hhshuai}@nycu.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper analyzes the impact of causal manner in the text encoder of text-to-image
(T2I) diffusion models, which can lead to information bias and loss. Previous works
have focused on addressing the issues through the denoising process. However,
there is no research discussing how text embedding contributes to T2I models, especially when generating more than one object. In this paper, we share a comprehensive analysis of text embedding: i) how text embedding contributes to the generated
images and ii) why information gets lost and biases towards the first-mentioned
object. Accordingly, we propose a simple but effective text embedding balance
optimization method, which is training-free, with an improvement of 125.42% on
information balance in stable diffusion. Furthermore, we propose a new automatic
evaluation metric that quantifies information loss more accurately than existing
methods, achieving 81% concordance with human assessments. This metric effectively measures the presence and accuracy of objects, addressing the limitations of
current distribution scores like CLIP’s text-image similarities. The code is available:
https://github.com/basiclab/Unraveling-Information-Mix-ups.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [11, 12,
14, 17, 18] have recently captured significant
attention. Subsequent research [4, 9, 13, 16,
1, 20, 3] has extensively explored the roles of
cross-attention and self-attention mechanisms
in the denoising process to enhance image control. Despite these advancements, there remains
a critical gap in understanding the role of text
embedding within T2I models, particularly in
scenarios involving the generation of multiple
objects. For instance, Fig. 1 illustrates that when
prompted with "a lion and an elephant," models like Stable Diffusion often generate an ambiguous creature that blends features of both (or
object missing on the right), highlighting issues Figure 1: Visualization of cross-attention maps
of semantic interpretation and token embedding. when object mixture and missing occur.
This paper delves into how text embeddings influence the semantic outcomes of generated images, identifying specific problems of information
bias and loss due to the causal nature of the self-attention mechanism in text encoders.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

