Progressive Entropic Optimal Transport Solvers

Parnian Kassraie
ETH Zurich, Apple
pkassraie@ethz.ch

Aram-Alexandre Pooladian
New York University
aram-alexandre.pooladian@nyu.edu

James Thornton
Apple
jamesthornton@apple.com

Jonathan Niles-Weed
New York University
jnw@cims.nyu.edu

Michal Klein
Apple
michalk@apple.com
Marco Cuturi
Apple
cuturi@apple.com

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) has profoundly impacted machine learning by providing theoretical and computational tools to realign datasets. In this context, given two large
point clouds of sizes n and m in Rd , entropic OT (EOT) solvers have emerged as the
most reliable tool to either solve the Kantorovitch problem and output a n × m coupling matrix, or to solve the Monge problem and learn a vector-valued push-forward
map. While the robustness of EOT couplings/maps makes them a go-to choice in
practical applications, EOT solvers remain difficult to tune because of a small but
influential set of hyperparameters, notably the omnipresent entropic regularization
strength ε. Setting ε can be difficult, as it simultaneously impacts various performance metrics, such as compute speed, statistical performance, generalization, and
bias. In this work, we propose a new class of EOT solvers (P ROG OT), that can estimate both plans and transport maps. We take advantage of several opportunities to
optimize the computation of EOT solutions by dividing mass displacement using a
time discretization, borrowing inspiration from dynamic OT formulations [McCann,
1997], and conquering each of these steps using EOT with properly scheduled
parameters. We provide experimental evidence demonstrating that P ROG OT is a
faster and more robust alternative to EOT solvers when computing couplings and
maps at large scales, even outperforming neural network-based approaches. We
also prove the statistical consistency of P ROG OT when estimating OT maps.

1

Introduction

Many problems in generative machine learning and natural sciences—notably biology [Schiebinger
et al., 2019, Bunne et al., 2023], astronomy [Métivier et al., 2016] or quantum chemistry [Buttazzo
et al., 2012]—require aligning datasets or learning to map data points from a source to a target
distribution. These problems stand at the core of optimal transport theory [Santambrogio, 2015] and
have spurred the proposal of various solvers [Peyré et al., 2019] to perform these tasks reliably. In
these tasks, we are given n and m points respectively sampled from source and target probability
distributions on Rd , with the goal of either returning a coupling matrix of size n × m (which solves
the so-called Kantorovitch problem), or a vector-valued map estimator that extends to out-of-sample
data (solving the Monge problem).
In modern applications, where n, m ≳ 104 , a popular approach to estimating either coupling or maps
is to rely on a regularization of the original Kantorovitch linear OT formulation using neg-entropy.
This technique, referred to as entropic OT, can be traced back to Schrödinger and was popularized
for ML applications in [Cuturi, 2013] (see Section 2). Crucially, EOT can be solved efficiently
with Sinkhorn’s algorithm (Algorithm 1), with favorable computational [Altschuler et al., 2017, Lin
et al., 2022] and statistical properties [Genevay, 2019, Mena and Niles-Weed, 2019] compared to
linear programs. Most couplings computed nowadays on large point clouds within ML applications
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

