Untrained Neural Nets for Snapshot Compressive
Imaging: Theory and Algorithms

Mengyu Zhao1 , Xi Chen1 , Xin Yuan2 , Shirin Jalali1∗
ECE Department, Rutgers University, New Brunswick
2
School of Engineering, Westlake University

1

Abstract
Snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) recovers high-dimensional (3D) data cubes
from a single 2D measurement, enabling diverse applications like video and hyperspectral imaging to go beyond standard techniques in terms of acquisition speed
and efficiency. In this paper, we focus on SCI recovery algorithms that employ
untrained neural networks (UNNs), such as deep image prior (DIP), to model
source structure. Such UNN-based methods are appealing as they have the potential of avoiding the computationally intensive retraining required for different
source models and different measurement scenarios. We first develop a theoretical
framework for characterizing the performance of such UNN-based methods. The
theoretical framework, on the one hand, enables us to optimize the parameters of
data-modulating masks, and on the other hand, provides a fundamental connection
between the number of data frames that can be recovered from a single measurement to the parameters of the untrained NN. We also employ the recently proposed
bagged-deep-image-prior (bagged-DIP) idea to develop SCI Bagged Deep Video
Prior (SCI-BDVP) algorithms that address the common challenges faced by standard UNN solutions. Our experimental results show that in video SCI our proposed
solution achieves state-of-the-art among UNN methods, and in the case of noisy
measurements, it even outperforms supervised solutions. Code is publicly available
at https://github.com/Computational-Imaging-RU/SCI-BDVP.

1

Introduction

Snapshot Compressive Imaging (SCI) refers to imaging systems that optically encode a threedimensional (3D) data cube into a two-dimensional (2D) image and computationally recover the 3D
data cube from the 2D projection. As a novel approach in computational imaging, SCI has attracted
significant attention in recent years. Initially proposed for spectral imaging [1], its application has
since expanded to various fields, including video recording [2], depth imaging [3], and coherence
tomography [4] (Refer to [5] for a comprehensive review).
The key advantage of SCI systems lies in significantly accelerating the data acquisition process.
Traditional hyperspectral imaging methods, for example, often encounter bottlenecks due to their
reliance on spatial or wavelength scanning, leading to time-consuming operations. In contrast,
hyperspectral SCI systems capture measurements across multiple pixels and wavelengths in a single
snapshot, effectively bypassing this limitation [6].
The optical encoding process in SCI systems can be mathematically modeled as a linear measurement
system, characterized by a sparse and structured sensing matrix, commonly referred to as a ‘mask’.
Consequently, SCI recovery algorithms aim to reconstruct high-dimensional (HD) 3D data from a
∗

Shirin Jalali is the corresponding authors <shirin.jalali@rutgers.edu>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

