Transforming Vision Transformer: Towards Efficient
Multi-Task Asynchronous Learning

Hanwen Zhong1,2 Jiaxin Chen1,2∗ Yutong Zhang1,2 Di Huang2 Yunhong Wang1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{hanwenzhong,jiaxinchen,ytzhang_mq,dhuang,yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) for Vision Transformer aims at enhancing the model
capability by tackling multiple tasks simultaneously. Most recent works have
predominantly focused on designing Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) structures and integrating Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) to efficiently perform multi-task learning.
However, their rigid combination hampers both the optimization of MoE and the effectiveness of reparameterization of LoRA, leading to sub-optimal performance and
low inference speed. In this work, we propose a novel approach dubbed Efficient
Multi-Task Learning (EMTAL) by transforming a pre-trained Vision Transformer
into an efficient multi-task learner during training, and reparameterizing the learned
structure for efficient inference. Specifically, we firstly develop the MoEfied LoRA
structure, which decomposes the pre-trained Transformer into a low-rank MoE
structure and employ LoRA to fine-tune the parameters. Subsequently, we take
into account the intrinsic asynchronous nature of multi-task learning and devise
a learning Quality Retaining (QR) optimization mechanism, by leveraging the
historical high-quality class logits to prevent a well-trained task from performance
degradation. Finally, we design a router fading strategy to integrate the learned
parameters into the original Transformer, archiving efficient inference. Extensive
experiments on public benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our method,
compared to the state-of-the-art multi-task learning approaches. The project page
is available at https://github.com/Yewen1486/EMTAL.

1

Introduction

Multi-task learning (MTL) [1, 2, 3] for Vision Transformer (ViT) aims at simultaneously learning
multiple tasks, which has gained popularity in the computer vision community recently. It solves
multiple relevant problems through sharing feature representations and forming a unified multi-task
learner, thus enhancing the training and inference efficiency, and reducing the storage overhead.
Moreover, by virtue of a well-designed MTL framework, the performance of each task can be further
improved. Due to these merits, MTL has been used in a wide range of applications, such as the scene
understanding [4, 5] and the erudite fine-grained recognition [6].
Despite both theoretical [7] and practical [8, 9] validations of their potential on enhancing the model
generalizability, conventional MTL approaches [6, 10] often suffer performance degradation when
compared to training tasks independently, which is primarily due to two reasons. Firstly, they adopt
suboptimal learning strategies leading to conflicting task gradients and varying loss scales [11], which
increase competitive interference during task optimization. Secondly, their model structures often fail
to extract representative features for each task when utilizing a shared backbone network [12, 4, 6, 5].
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

