Provably Safe Neural Network Controllers
via Differential Dynamic Logic

1

Samuel Teuber1 Stefan Mitsch 2 André Platzer 1,3
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 2 DePaul University 3 Carnegie Mellon University
teuber@kit.edu smitsch@depaul.edu platzer@kit.edu

Abstract
While neural networks (NNs) have a large potential as autonomous controllers for
Cyber-Physical Systems, verifying the safety of neural network based control systems (NNCSs) poses significant challenges for the practical use of NNs—especially
when safety is needed for unbounded time horizons. One reason for this is the intractability of analyzing NNs, ODEs and hybrid systems. To this end, we introduce
VerSAILLE (Verifiably Safe AI via Logically Linked Envelopes): The first general
approach that allows reusing control theory literature for NNCS verification. By
joining forces, we can exploit the efficiency of NN verification tools while retaining
the rigor of differential dynamic logic (dL). Based on a provably safe control
envelope in dL, we derive a specification for the NN which is proven with NN
verification tools. We show that a proof of the NN’s adherence to the specification
is then mirrored by a dL proof on the infinite-time safety of the NNCS.
The NN verification properties resulting from hybrid systems typically contain
nonlinear arithmetic over formulas with arbitrary logical structure while efficient
NN verification tools merely support linear constraints. To overcome this divide,
we present Mosaic: An efficient, sound and complete verification approach for
polynomial real arithmetic properties on piece-wise linear NNs. Mosaic partitions
complex NN verification queries into simple queries and lifts off-the-shelf linear
constraint tools to the nonlinear setting in a completeness-preserving manner by
combining approximation with exact reasoning for counterexample regions. In our
evaluation we demonstrate the versatility of VerSAILLE and Mosaic: We prove
infinite-time safety on the classical Vertical Airborne Collision Avoidance NNCS
verification benchmark for some scenarios while (exhaustively) enumerating
counterexample regions in unsafe scenarios. We also show that our approach
significantly outperforms the State-of-the-Art tools in closed-loop NNV.

1

Introduction

For controllers of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs), the use of neural networks (NNs) is both a blessing
and a curse. On the one hand, using NNs allows the development of goal-oriented controllers that
optimize soft requirements such as passenger comfort, frequency of collision warnings or energy
efficiency. On the other hand, guaranteeing that all control decisions chosen by an NN are safe is
very difficult due to the complex feedback loop between the subsymbolic reasoning of an NN and the
intricate dynamics often encountered in physical systems. How can this curse be alleviated? Neural
Network Verification (NNV) techniques all have tried one of three strategies: Open-loop NNV entirely
omits the analysis of the physical system and only analyzes input-output properties of the NN [12, 23,
43, 44, 58, 59, 95, 98–100]. Open-loop analyses alone cannot justify the safety of an NNCS, because
they ignore its physical, feedback-loop dynamics. Closed-loop NNV performs a time-bounded
analysis of the feedback loop between the NN and its physical environment [5, 18, 34, 37, 47–49, 85,
88, 93, 94, 97]. Unfortunately, a safety guarantee that comes with a time-bound (measured in seconds
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

