DiffusionPDE: Generative PDE-Solving
Under Partial Observation
Jiahe Huang1

Guandao Yang2 Zichen Wang1 Jeong Joon Park1
1
University of Michigan
2
Stanford University
{chloehjh, zzzichen, jjparkcv}@umich.edu
guandao@stanford.edu

Abstract
We introduce a general framework for solving partial differential equations (PDEs)
using generative diffusion models. In particular, we focus on the scenarios where
we do not have the full knowledge of the scene necessary to apply classical solvers.
Most existing forward or inverse PDE approaches perform poorly when the observations on the data or the underlying coefficients are incomplete, which is a
common assumption for real-world measurements. In this work, we propose DiffusionPDE that can simultaneously fill in the missing information and solve a PDE by
modeling the joint distribution of the solution and coefficient spaces. We show that
the learned generative priors lead to a versatile framework for accurately solving
a wide range of PDEs under partial observation, significantly outperforming the
state-of-the-art methods for both forward and inverse directions. See our project
page for results: jhhuangchloe.github.io/Diffusion-PDE/.

1

Introduction

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are a cornerstone of modern science, underpinning many
contemporary physical theories that explain natural phenomena. The ability to solve PDEs grants
us the power to predict future states of a system (forward process) and estimate underlying physical
properties from state measurements (inverse process).
To date, numerous methods [1, 2] have been proposed to numerically solve PDEs for both the
forward and inverse directions. However, the classical methods can be prohibitively slow, prompting
the development of data-driven, learning-based solvers that are significantly faster and capable of
handling a family of PDEs. These learning-based approaches [3–6] typically learn a deterministic
mapping between input coefficients and their solutions using deep neural networks.
Despite the progress, existing learning-based approaches, much like classical solvers, rely on complete
observations of the coefficients to map solutions. However, complete information on the underlying
physical properties or the state of a system is rarely accessible; in reality, most measurements are
sparse in space and time. Both classical solvers and the state-of-the-art data-driven models often
overlook these scenarios and consequently fail when confronted with partial observations. This
limitation confines their use primarily to synthetic simulations, where full scene configurations are
available by design, making their application to real-world cases challenging.
We present a comprehensive framework, DiffusionPDE, for solving PDEs in both forward and
inverse directions under conditions of highly partial observations—typically just 1~3% of the total
information. This task is particularly challenging due to the numerous possible ways to complete
missing data and find subsequent solutions. Our approach uses a generative model to formulate the
joint distribution of the coefficient and solution spaces, effectively managing the uncertainty and
simultaneously reconstructing both spaces. During inference, we sample random noise and iteratively
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

