Causal language modeling can elicit search and
reasoning capabilities on logic puzzles

Kulin Shah ∗
UT Austin
kulinshah@utexas.edu

Nishanth Dikkala
Google Research
nishanthd@google.com

Xin Wang
Google Research
wanxin@google.com

Rina Panigrahy
Google Research
rinap@google.com

Abstract
Causal language modeling using the Transformer architecture has yielded remarkable capabilities in Large Language Models (LLMs) over the last few years. However, the extent to which fundamental search and reasoning capabilities emerged
within LLMs remains a topic of ongoing debate. In this work, we study if causal
language modeling can learn a complex task such as solving Sudoku puzzles. To
solve a Sudoku, the model is first required to search over all empty cells of the
puzzle to decide on a cell to fill and then apply an appropriate strategy to fill the
decided cell. Sometimes, the application of a strategy only results in thinning
down the possible values in a cell rather than concluding the exact value of the
cell. In such cases, multiple strategies are applied one after the other to fill a single
cell. We observe that Transformer models trained on this synthetic task can indeed
learn to solve Sudokus (our model solves 94.21% of the puzzles fully correctly)
when trained on a logical sequence of steps taken by a solver. We find that training
Transformers with the logical sequence of steps is necessary and without such
training, they fail to learn Sudoku. We also extend our analysis to Zebra puzzles
(known as Einstein puzzles) and show that the model solves 92.04% of the puzzles
fully correctly. In addition, we study the internal representations of the trained
Transformer and find that through linear probing, we can decode information about
the set of possible values in any given cell from them, pointing to the presence of a
strong reasoning engine implicit in the Transformer weights 2 .

1

Introduction

Language models using the Transformer architecture [VSP+ 17] have displayed remarkable abilities
on a variety of Machine Learning tasks over the last few years [BMR+ 20, RWC+ 19]. Trained
with simply the task of predicting the next token on huge amounts of text, these models display
highly performant and deep language understanding skills. In order to make progress on achieving a
human-like artificial intelligence, one of the most important ability is the ability to perform humanlike reasoning and planning. Although LLMs have displayed a seemingly remarkable ability to
excel at reasoning and planning tasks as well, it is a ongoing debate as to whether this ability
comes from a true understanding and reasoning of the underlying problem or some other process
which simulates reasoning but can be highly brittle. For instance, although LLMs show remarkable
∗
2

Work done during an internship at Google Research.
The code is available at https://github.com/kulinshah98/llm-reasoning-logic-puzzles

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

