Benchmarking PtO and PnO Methods in the
Predictive Combinatorial Optimization Regime

Haoyu Geng1† , Hang Ruan1† , Runzhong Wang2 , Yang Li1 , Yang Wang3 , Lei Chen3 , Junchi Yan1∗
1
Dept. of CSE & School of AI & Moe Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Finvolution Group
{genghaoyu98, zzrh01, yanglily, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
runzhong@mit.edu, {wangyang09, chenlei04}@xinye.com

Abstract
Predictive combinatorial optimization, where the parameters of combinatorial optimization (CO) are unknown at the decision-making time, is the precise modeling of
many real-world applications, including energy cost-aware scheduling and budget
allocation on advertising. Tackling such a problem usually involves a prediction
model and a CO solver. These two modules are integrated into the predictive CO
pipeline following two design principles: “Predict-then-Optimize (PtO)”, which
learns predictions by supervised training and subsequently solves CO using predicted coefficients, while the other, named “Predict-and-Optimize (PnO)”, directly
optimizes towards the ultimate decision quality and claims to yield better decisions
than traditional PtO approaches. However, there lacks a systematic benchmark of
both approaches, including the specific design choices at the module level, as well
as an evaluation dataset that covers representative real-world scenarios. To this end,
we develop a modular framework to benchmark 11 existing PtO/PnO methods on 8
problems, including a new industrial dataset for combinatorial advertising that will
be released. Our study shows that PnO approaches are better than PtO on 7 out of
8 benchmarks, but there is no silver bullet found for the specific design choices of
PnO. A comprehensive categorization of current approaches and integration of typical scenarios are provided under a unified benchmark. Therefore, this paper could
serve as a comprehensive benchmark for future PnO approach development and also
offer fast prototyping for application-focused development. The code is available
at https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/PredictiveCO-Benchmark.

1

Introduction

Predictive combinatorial optimization is a family of Combinatorial Optimization (CO) problems
where the problem parameters are unknown during decision-making. Predictive CO models a
wide range of real-world settings, including energy cost-aware scheduling [67], budget allocation
for website information dissemination [72], portfolio optimization [47]. In predictive CO, the
optimization itself could be solved by readily available solvers (e.g. Gurobi [28]) once the problem
parameters are predicted. However, due to the inherent uncertainty and noise from the real world, the
prediction is never perfect, resulting in potentially misleading problem parameters. Even the optimal
solution under these parameters could be a bad decision in the real world. As shown in Fig 1(a~b), job
scheduling without considering energy price fluctuations may result in energy waste and higher costs.
∗

Correspondence author. † denotes equal contribution. This work was in part supported by NSFC 92370201,
72342023.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

