R EP L I QA: A Question-Answering Dataset for
Benchmarking LLMs on Unseen Reference Content

João Monteiro†,3 , Pierre-André Noël†,1 , Étienne Marcotte†,1 , Sai Rajeswar†,1 ,
Valentina Zantedeschi†,1 , David Vázquez1 , Nicolas Chapados1,2 , Christopher Pal1,2 , Perouz Taslakian†,1
1
ServiceNow Research
2
Mila – Québec Artifical Intelligence Institute
3
Autodesk – Work done while at ServiceNow
†
Core contributors

RepLiQA*0

Reference Document

D
Topic Selection

RepLiQA1

Peer Review

Anonymization /
Creative Writing
Fake name generation
Answer

RepLiQA2

A

document

Expert Review
Automatic
document
summary

Metadata cleanup
pdf conversion
Data splits

RepLiQA3

Question
summary

Q

Automated
Checks

RepLiQA4

Figure 1: Creating R EP L I QA. R EP L I QA0 was exposed to the web in May 2024 through LLM inference. See
Table 1 for the release schedule of the remaining splits.

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are trained on vast amounts of data, most of
which is automatically scraped from the internet. This data includes encyclopedic
documents that harbor a vast amount of general knowledge (e.g., Wikipedia)
but also potentially overlap with benchmark datasets used for evaluating LLMs.
Consequently, evaluating models on test splits that might have leaked into the
training set is prone to misleading conclusions. To foster sound evaluation of
language models, we introduce a new test dataset named R EP L I QA, suited for
question-answering and topic retrieval tasks. R EP L I QA is a collection of five splits
of test sets, four of which have not been released to the internet or exposed to
LLM APIs prior to this publication. Each sample in R EP L I QA comprises (1) a
reference document crafted by a human annotator and depicting an imaginary
scenario (e.g., a news article) absent from the internet; (2) a question about the
document’s topic; (3) a ground-truth answer derived directly from the information
in the document; and (4) the paragraph extracted from the reference document
containing the answer. As such, accurate answers can only be generated if a model
can find relevant content within the provided document. We run a large-scale
benchmark comprising several state-of-the-art LLMs to uncover differences in
performance across models of various types and sizes in a context-conditional
language modeling setting. Released splits of R EP L I QA can be found here:
https://huggingface.co/datasets/ServiceNow/repliqa.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

