Learning the Latent Causal Structure for
Modeling Label Noise

Yexiong Lin

Yu Yao

Tongliang Liu†

Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney

Abstract
In label-noise learning, the noise transition matrix reveals how an instance transitions from its clean label to its noisy label. Accurately estimating an instance’s
noise transition matrix is crucial for estimating its clean label. However, when
only a noisy dataset is available, noise transition matrices can be estimated only for
some “special” instances. To leverage these estimated transition matrices to help
estimate the transition matrices of other instances, it is essential to explore relations
between the matrices of these “special” instances and those of others. Existing
studies typically build the relation by explicitly defining the similarity between
the estimated noise transition matrices of “special” instances and those of other
instances. However, these similarity-based assumptions are hard to validate and
may not align with real-world data. If these assumptions fail, both noise transition
matrices and clean labels cannot be accurately estimated. In this paper, we found
that by learning the latent causal structure governing the generating process of noisy
data, we can estimate noise transition matrices without the need for similarity-based
assumptions. Unlike previous generative label-noise learning methods, we consider
causal relations between latent causal variables and model them with a learnable
graphical model. Utilizing only noisy data, our method can effectively learn the
latent causal structure. Experimental results on various noisy datasets demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in estimating noise transition
matrices, which leads to improved classification accuracy. The code is available at:
https://github.com/tmllab/2024_NeurIPS_CSGN.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning relies on annotated large-scale datasets, which can be both time-consuming and
costly to create. Although several existing annotation methods offer cost-effective alternatives, such
as online queries [5], crowdsourcing [52], and image engines [31], the datasets obtained by these
methods are imperfect. The labels of these datasets usually contain errors. These noisy labels would
be harmful to deep neural networks because the network can memorize noisy labels easily [59, 13, 3]
and lead to the degradation of classification accuracy.
Modeling label noise using noise transition matrices plays an important role in label-noise learning
[36, 40, 30, 15]. Let Y , X, and Ỹ denote the variables for the clean label, the instance, and
the noisy label, respectively. The noise transition matrix for an instance x can be represented
by p(Ỹ |Y, X = x), which reveals the probability that, given an instance, its latent clean label is
transited to the observed noisy label. Given these transition matrices, a classifier trained on noisy
data by leveraging these matrices can be consistent with the optimal classifier trained on clean
data [36, 40, 50].
†

Correspondence to Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

