Measuring Mutual Policy Divergence for Multi-Agent
Sequential Exploration

Haowen Dou1,2,3

Lujuan Dang1,2,3,⋆

Zhirong Luan4

Badong Chen1,2,3,⋆
1

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
4
School of Electrical Engineering, Xi’an University of Technology
douhaowen@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, danglj@xjtu.edu.cn, luanzhirong@xaut.edu.cn
chenbd@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Despite the success of Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) algorithms in
cooperative tasks, previous works, unfortunately, face challenges in heterogeneous
scenarios since they simply disable parameter sharing for agent specialization.
Sequential updating scheme was thus proposed, naturally diversifying agents by encouraging agents to learn from preceding ones. However, the exploration strategy in
sequential scheme has not been investigated. Benefiting from updating one-by-one,
agents have the access to the information from preceding agents. Thus, in this work,
we propose to exploit the preceding information to enhance exploration and heterogeneity sequentially. We present Multi-Agent Divergence Policy Optimization
(MADPO), equipped with mutual policy divergence maximization framework. We
quantify the discrepancies between episodes to enhance exploration and between
agents to heterogenize agents, termed intra-agent divergence and inter-agent divergence. To address the issue that traditional divergence measurements lack stability
and directionality, we propose to employ the conditional Cauchy-Schwarz divergence to provide entropy-guided exploration incentives. Extensive experiments
show that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art sequential updating approaches in two challenging multi-agent tasks with various heterogeneous scenarios.
Source code is available at https://github.com/hwdou6677/MADPO.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) plays an increasingly important role in numerous
real-world cooperative problems, such as smart grid management [Zhang et al., 2022b], autonomous
driving [Wang et al., 2023b], unmanned system control [Feng et al., 2023b] and games [Zhang
et al., 2022a]. Centralized and decentralized MARL methods have been investigated as the first two
extensions from single-agent to multi-agent systems. However, challenges have arisen regarding
the curse of dimensionality and non-stationary training as the number of agents increasing [Mao
et al., 2022]. To address this issue, Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) was
developed to disentangle training and execution phases [Foerster et al., 2018]. In the CTDE scheme,
⋆

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

