Scaling laws for learning with real and surrogate data

Ayush Jain1
ayush.jain@granica.ai

Andrea Montanari1,2
andrea.montanari@granica.ai

Eren Sasoglu1
eren.sasoglu@granica.ai
1

Granica Computing Inc. — granica.ai
2
Stanford University

Abstract
Collecting large quantities of high-quality data can be prohibitively expensive
or impractical, and a bottleneck in machine learning. One may instead augment
a small set of n data points from the target distribution with data from more
accessible sources, e.g. data collected under different circumstances or synthesized
by generative models. We refer to such data as ‘surrogate data’. We study a
weighted empirical risk minimization (ERM) approach for integrating surrogate
data into training. We analyze mathematically this method under several classical
statistical models, and validate our findings empirically on datasets from different
domains. Our main findings are: (i) Integrating surrogate data can significantly
reduce the test error on the original distribution. Surprisingly, this can happen
even when the surrogate data is unrelated to the original ones. We trace back
this behavior to the classical Stein’s paradox. (ii) In order to reap the benefit of
surrogate data, it is crucial to use optimally weighted ERM. (iii) The test error of
models trained on mixtures of real and surrogate data is approximately described
by a scaling law. This scaling law can be used to predict the optimal weighting
scheme, and to choose the amount of surrogate data to add.

1

Introduction and overview

1.1

Motivation and formulation

Consider a standard learning setting where we are given n i.i.d. points z i from a target distribution
D. Given a family of parametric models governed by the parameters’ vector θ, the goal is to find θ
that minimizes the expected test loss Rtest (θ) incurred by the model predictions, where expectation is
taken over the distribution D. In many application domains, the available data Z = (z i )i≤n from the
target distribution, referred to as either real or original data, may be difficult or expensive to acquire.
One may then attempt to supplement these data with a different, cheaper source. Examples of such
cheaper sources are (i) publicly available datasets; (ii) datasets owned by the same research group
or company but acquired in different circumstances, e.g. in a different location; (iii) synthetic data
produced by a generative model.
We will denote the data points obtained from this source by z si , and assume we have m of them.
We assume the ‘surrogate’ data Z s = (z si )i≤m to be i.i.d. samples with distribution Ds . In general,
we will not assume the distribution Ds of synthetic data to be close to the original data distribution
D. However we assume that these distributions are over the same domain. A number of questions
arise: (i) How should we use the surrogate data in training? (ii) How many surrogate samples should
we add to the original data? (iii) Can we predict the improvement in test error achieved by adding
surrogate samples to the training?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

