Attention boosted Individualized Regression

Guang Yang
Department of Data Science
College of Computing
City University of Hong Kong
guang.yang@my.cityu.edu.hk

Yuan Cao
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
School of Computing and Data Science
The University of Hong Kong
yuancao@hku.hk

Long Feng∗
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
School of Computing and Data Science
The University of Hong Kong
lfeng@hku.hk

Abstract
Different from classical one-model-fits-all strategy, individualized models allow
parameters to vary across samples and are gaining popularity in various fields,
particularly in personalized medicine. Motivated by medical imaging analysis, this
paper introduces a novel individualized modeling framework for matrix-valued
data that does not require additional information on sample similarity for the
individualized coefficients. Under our framework, the model individualization
stems from an optimal internal relation map within the samples themselves. We
refer to the proposed method as Attention boosted Individualized Regression, due
to its close connections with the self-attention mechanism. Therefore, our approach
provides a new interpretation for attention from the perspective of individualized
modeling. Comprehensive numerical experiments and real brain MRI analysis
using an ADNI dataset demonstrated the superior performance of our model.

1

Introduction

Model-based machine learning methods have advanced significantly and become essential in modern
data analysis. From linear regression to deep neural networks, most approaches fundamentally follow
an one-model-fits-all strategy, meaning that parameters of a well-trained model are fixed and do
not change for different samples. However, in fields like medical diagnosis and treatment design, it
is important to explore and apply individualized models with parameters tailored to each sample,
adapting to their unique features. Due to the heterogeneity among instances, individualized models
are expected to provide more accurate predictions and personalized interpretations, which are their
main advantages.
Individualized modeling has been extensively investigated in research, with the earliest example
possibly being the varying coefficient models [10, 6] in statistics community. A varying coefficient
model usually includes an additional variable and represents the varying coefficient as a function of
this extra variable. These models have been applied and adapted in various contexts. For instance,
[8] explored spatial modeling using a spatially varying coefficient process. In a similar vein, [26]
considered varying coefficient models in image response regression and proposed using deep neural
networks to estimate the varying coefficients.
∗

Long Feng is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

