Online Weighted Paging with Unknown Weights

Orin Levy∗
Tel-Aviv University
orinlevy@mail.tau.ac.il

Noam Touitou
Amazon Science
noamtwx@gmail.com

Aviv Rosenberg†
Google Research
avivros007@gmail.com

Abstract
Online paging is a fundamental problem in the field of online algorithms, in which
one maintains a cache of 𝑘 slots as requests for fetching pages arrive online. In the
weighted variant of this problem, each page has its own fetching cost; a substantial
line of work on this problem culminated in an (optimal) 𝑂 (log 𝑘)-competitive
randomized algorithm, due to Bansal, Buchbinder and Naor (FOCS’07).
Existing work for weighted paging assumes that page weights are known in advance,
which is not always the case in practice. For example, in multi-level caching
architectures, the expected cost of fetching a memory block is a function of its
probability of being in a mid-level cache rather than the main memory. This
complex property cannot be predicted in advance; over time, however, one may
glean information about page weights through sampling their fetching cost multiple
times. We present the first algorithm for online weighted paging that does not
know page weights in advance, but rather learns from weight samples. In terms
of techniques, this requires providing (integral) samples to a fractional solver,
requiring a delicate interface between this solver and the randomized rounding
scheme; we believe that our work can inspire online algorithms to other problems
that involve cost sampling.

1

Introduction

Online weighted paging. In the online weighted paging problem, or OWP, one is given a cache of
𝑘 slots, and requests for pages arrive online. Upon each requested page, the algorithm must ensure
that the page is in the cache, possibly evicting existing pages in the process. Each page 𝑝 also has a
weight 𝑤 𝑝 , which represents the cost of fetching the page into the cache; the goal of the algorithm
is to minimize the total cost of fetching pages. Assuming that the page weights are known, this
problem admits an 𝑂 (log 𝑘)-competitive randomized online algorithm, due to Bansal, Buchbinder,
and Naor [2010, 2012]; This is optimal, as there exists an Ω(log 𝑘)-competitiveness lower bound for
randomized algorithms due to Fiat et al. [1991] (that holds even for the unweighted case).
However, all previous work on paging assumes that the page weights are known in advance. This
assumption is not always justified; for example, the following scenario, reminiscent of real-world
architectures, naturally gives rise to unknown page weights. Consider a multi-core architecture, in
which data can be stored in one of the following: a local “L1” cache, unique to each core; a global
“L2” cache, shared between the cores; and the (large but slow) main memory. As a specific core
requests memory blocks, managing its L1 cache can be seen as an OWP instance. Suppose the costs
∗ Research conducted while the author was an intern at Amazon Science.
† Research conducted while the author was at Amazon Science.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

