JailbreakBench: An Open Robustness Benchmark
for Jailbreaking Large Language Models

Patrick Chao∗1 , Edoardo Debenedetti∗2 , Alexander Robey∗1 , Maksym Andriushchenko∗3 ,
Francesco Croce3 , Vikash Sehwag4 , Edgar Dobriban1 , Nicolas Flammarion3 ,
George J. Pappas1 , Florian Tramèr2 , Hamed Hassani1 , Eric Wong1

Abstract
Jailbreak attacks cause large language models (LLMs) to generate harmful, unethical, or otherwise objectionable content. Evaluating these attacks presents a
number of challenges, which the current collection of benchmarks and evaluation techniques do not adequately address. First, there is no clear standard of
practice regarding jailbreaking evaluation. Second, existing works compute costs
and success rates in incomparable ways. And third, numerous works are not reproducible, as they withhold adversarial prompts, involve closed-source code, or
rely on evolving proprietary APIs. To address these challenges, we introduce
JailbreakBench, an open-sourced benchmark with the following components:
(1) an evolving repository of state-of-the-art adversarial prompts, which we refer to as jailbreak artifacts; (2) a jailbreaking dataset comprising 100 behaviors—
both original and sourced from prior work (Zou et al., 2023; Mazeika et al., 2023,
2024)—which align with OpenAI’s usage policies; (3) a standardized evaluation
framework at https://github.com/JailbreakBench/jailbreakbench that
includes a clearly defined threat model, system prompts, chat templates, and scoring functions; and (4) a leaderboard at https://jailbreakbench.github.io/
that tracks the performance of attacks and defenses for various LLMs. We have
carefully considered the potential ethical implications of releasing this benchmark,
and believe that it will be a net positive for the community.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are often trained to align with human values, thereby refusing to
generate harmful or toxic content (Ouyang et al., 2022). However, a growing body of work has
shown that even the most performant LLMs are not adversarially aligned: it is often possible to
elicit undesirable content by using so-called jailbreaking attacks (Mowshowitz, 2022; Carlini et al.,
2024). Concerningly, researchers have shown that such attacks can be generated in many different
ways, including hand-crafted prompts (Shen et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2023), automatic prompting via
auxiliary LLMs (Chao et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2024), and iterative optimization (Zou et al., 2023).
And while several defenses have been proposed to mitigate these threats (Robey et al., 2023; Jain
et al., 2023), LLMs remain highly vulnerable to jailbreaking attacks. For this reason, as LLMs are
deployed in safety-critical domains, it is of pronounced importance to effectively benchmark the
progress of jailbreaking attacks and defenses (Longpre et al., 2024).
To meet this need, this paper introduces the JailbreakBench benchmark. The design principles of
JailbreakBench revolve around standardizing a set of best practices in the evolving field of LLM
jailbreaking. Our core principles include complete reproducibility via a commitment to open-sourcing
jailbreak prompts corresponding to attacked and defended models, extensibility to incorporate new
∗

Equal contribution. 1 University of Pennsylvania, 2 ETH Zurich, 3 EPFL, 4 Sony AI

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

