PediatricsGPT: Large Language Models as
Chinese Medical Assistants for Pediatric Applications

Dingkang Yang1,3 † Jinjie Wei1,3† Dongling Xiao2† Shunli Wang1§ Tong Wu2§
Gang Li2§ Mingcheng Li1§ Shuaibing Wang1§ Jiawei Chen1§ Yue Jiang1§
Qingyao Xu1§ Ke Li2§ Peng Zhai1,3∗ Lihua Zhang1,3,4,5∗
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
3
Cognition and Intelligent Technology Laboratory, Shanghai, China
4
Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China
5
AI and Unmanned Systems Engineering Research Center of Jilin Province, Changchun, China
{dkyang20, pzhai, lihuazhang}@fudan.edu.cn
jjwei23@m.fudan.edu.cn, xdluestc@outlook.com
tristanli@tencent.com

Abstract
Developing intelligent pediatric consultation systems offers promising prospects
for improving diagnostic efficiency, especially in China, where healthcare resources are scarce. Despite recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs)
for Chinese medicine, their performance is sub-optimal in pediatric applications
due to inadequate instruction data and vulnerable training procedures. To address the above issues, this paper builds PedCorpus, a high-quality dataset of over
300,000 multi-task instructions from pediatric textbooks, guidelines, and knowledge graph resources to fulfil diverse diagnostic demands. Upon well-designed
PedCorpus, we propose PediatricsGPT, the first Chinese pediatric LLM assistant
built on a systematic and robust training pipeline. In the continuous pre-training
phase, we introduce a hybrid instruction pre-training mechanism to mitigate the
internal-injected knowledge inconsistency of LLMs for medical domain adaptation. Immediately, the full-parameter Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) is utilized to
incorporate the general medical knowledge schema into the models. After that,
we devise a direct following preference optimization to enhance the generation
of pediatrician-like humanistic responses. In the parameter-efficient secondary
SFT phase, a mixture of universal-specific experts strategy is presented to resolve the competency conflict between medical generalist and pediatric expertise mastery. Extensive results based on the metrics, GPT-4, and doctor evaluations on distinct downstream tasks show that PediatricsGPT consistently outperforms previous Chinese medical LLMs. The project and data will be released at
https://github.com/ydk122024/PediatricsGPT.

1

Introduction

As an essential component of medicine, pediatrics plays an indispensable role in ensuring children’s
health growth [22, 23]. The unbalanced distribution of healthcare resources [36] has resulted in a
massive shortage of pediatricians, especially in populous countries led by China [37, 19]. With the
†

Equal first contributions. § Equal second contributions. ∗ Corresponding authors. Project lead.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

