Attractor Memory for Long-Term Time Series
Forecasting: A Chaos Perspective

Jiaxi Hu1 , Yuehong Hu1 , Wei Chen1 , Ming Jin2 , Shirui Pan2 , Qingsong Wen3 , Yuxuan Liang1 ∗
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Griffith University 3 Squirrel Ai Learning, USA
{jhu110, yhu322, wchen110}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
{mingjinedu, qingsongedu}@gmail.com
s.pan@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
In long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) tasks, an increasing number of
works have acknowledged that discrete time series originate from continuous
dynamic systems and have attempted to model their underlying dynamics. Recognizing the chaotic nature of real-world data, our model, Attraos, incorporates
chaos theory into LTSF, perceiving real-world time series as low-dimensional
observations from unknown high-dimensional chaotic dynamical systems. Under the concept of attractor invariance, Attraos utilizes non-parametric Phase
Space Reconstruction embedding along with a novel multi-resolution dynamic
memory unit to memorize historical dynamical structures, and evolves by a
frequency-enhanced local evolution strategy. Detailed theoretical analysis and
abundant empirical evidence consistently show that Attraos outperforms various LTSF methods on mainstream LTSF datasets and chaotic datasets with
only one-twelfth of the parameters compared to PatchTST. Code is available
at https://github.com/CityMind-Lab/NeurIPS24-Attraos.

1

Introduction

In the intricate dance of time, time series unfold. Emerged from continuous dynamical systems [36,
11, 39] in the physical world, these series are meticulously collected at specific sampling frequencies.
Like musical notes in a composition, they harmonize, revealing patterns that resonate through the
symphony of temporal evolution. In this realm, Long-term Time Series Forecasting (LTSF) stands
as one of the enduring focal points within the machine learning community, achieving widespread
recognition in real-world applications, such as weather forecasting, financial risk assessment, and
traffic prediction [28, 22, 30, 27, 18].
Building on the success of various deep LTSF models [49, 54, 52, 50, 29, 22], which primarily
leverage neural networks to learn temporal dependencies from discretely sampled data. Currently,
researchers [46, 32] have been investigating the application of Koopman theory [48, 25] in recovering
continuous dynamical systems, which applies linear evolution operators to analyze dynamical system
characteristics in a sufficiently high-dimensional Koopman function space. Nevertheless, the existence
of Koopman space relies on the deterministic system, posing challenges given the chaotic nature of
real-world time series data, evidenced through the Maximal Lyapunov Exponent in Appendix E.2.
In this paper, inspired by chaos theory [8], we revisit LSTF tasks from a chaos perspective: Linear
or complex nonlinear dynamical systems exhibit stable patterns in their trajectories after sufficient
evolution, known as attractors. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), attractors can be classified into four
∗

Y. Liang is the corresponding author. Email: yuxliang@outlook.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

