Natural Counterfactuals With Necessary Backtracking

1

Guang-Yuan Hao1,5∗, Jiji Zhang1∗ , Biwei Huang2 , Hao Wang3 , Kun Zhang4,5
Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 University of California San Diego, 3 Rutgers University
4
Carnegie Mellon University, 5 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
guangyuanhao@outlook.com, jijizhang@cuhk.edu.hk
bih007@ucsd.edu, hw488@cs.rutgers.edu, kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Counterfactual reasoning is pivotal in human cognition and especially important
for providing explanations and making decisions. While Judea Pearl’s influential
approach is theoretically elegant, its generation of a counterfactual scenario often
requires too much deviation from the observed scenarios to be feasible, as we show
using simple examples. To mitigate this difficulty, we propose a framework of
natural counterfactuals and a method for generating counterfactuals that are more
feasible with respect to the actual data distribution. Our methodology incorporates
a certain amount of backtracking when needed, allowing changes in causally
preceding variables to minimize deviations from realistic scenarios. Specifically,
we introduce a novel optimization framework that permits but also controls the
extent of backtracking with a “naturalness” criterion. Empirical experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The code is available at https:
//github.com/GuangyuanHao/natural_counterfactuals.

1

Introduction

Counterfactual reasoning, which aims to answer what a feature of the world would have been if
some other features had been different, is often used in human cognition, to perform self-reflection,
provide explanations, and inform decisions [29, 6]. For AI systems to achieve human-like abilities
of reflection and decision-making, incorporating counterfactual reasoning is crucial. Judea Pearl’s
structural approach to counterfactual modeling and reasoning [26] has been especially influential in
recent decades. Within this framework, counterfactuals are conceptualized as being generated by
surgical interventions on the variables to be changed, while leaving its causally upstream variables
intact and all downstream causal mechanisms invariant. These counterfactuals are thoroughly nonbacktracking in that the desired change is supposed to happen without tracing back to changes in
causally preceding variables. Reasoning about these counterfactuals can yield valuable insights into
the consequences of hypothetical actions. Consider a scenario: a sudden brake of a high-speed bus
caused Tom to fall and injure Jerry. Non-backtracking counterfactuals would tell us that if Tom had
stood still (despite the sudden braking), then Jerry would not have been injured. Pearl’s approach
supplies a principled machinery to reason about conditionals of this sort, which are usually useful for
explanation, planning, and responsibility allocation.
However, such surgical interventions are sometimes so removed from what is or can be observed that
it is difficult or even impossible to learn from data the consequences of such interventions. In the
previous example, preventing Tom’s fall in a sudden braking scenario requires defying mechanisms
that are difficult or even physically impossible to disrupt. As a result, there are likely to be no data
points in the reservoir of observed scenarios that are consistent with a person standing still during a
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

