S2HPruner: Soft-to-Hard Distillation Bridges the
Discretization Gap in Pruning

1

Weihao Lin1† , Shengji Tang1† , Chong Yu2 , Peng Ye3 , Tao Chen1∗
School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China,
2
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China,
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
eetchen@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, differentiable mask pruning methods optimize the continuous relaxation
architecture (soft network) as the proxy of the pruned discrete network (hard network) for superior sub-architecture search. However, due to the agnostic impact
of the discretization process, the hard network struggles with the equivalent representational capacity as the soft network, namely discretization gap, which severely
spoils the pruning performance. In this paper, we first investigate the discretization
gap and propose a novel structural differentiable mask pruning framework named
S2HPruner to bridge the discretization gap in a one-stage manner. In the training
procedure, S2HPruner forwards both the soft network and its corresponding hard
network, then distills the hard network under the supervision of the soft network. To
optimize the mask and prevent performance degradation, we propose a decoupled
bidirectional knowledge distillation. It blocks the weight updating from the hard to
the soft network while maintaining the gradient corresponding to the mask. Compared with existing pruning arts, S2HPruner achieves surpassing pruning performance without fine-tuning on comprehensive benchmarks, including CIFAR-100,
Tiny ImageNet, and ImageNet with a variety of network architectures. Besides, investigation and analysis experiments explain the effectiveness of S2HPruner. Codes
are publicly available on GitHub: https://github.com/opposj/S2HPruner.

1

Introduction

As deep neural networks (DNN) have achieved success in substantial fields [20, 58, 35, 61, 49],
the increasing computation and storage cost of DNN impedes practical implementation. Model
pruning [39, 57, 62], which aims at removing the less informative in a cumbersome network, has
been a widespread technique for model compression. Pioneer pruning methods utilize regularization
terms [63, 43] to sparsify the network or introduce importance metrics [30, 19, 18] to remove
less important weights directly. However, due to the latent correlations between weights, simply
eliminating the weights in an over-parameter model will hinder the integrality of structure, especially
in structural pruning, where grouped filters are removed.
Recently, it has been pointed out that the structure of the pruned network is essential for the final
pruning performance [40]. Inspired by the differentiable architecture search (DARTS) [36, 67,
7], emerging works [15, 17, 16], namely differentiable mask pruning (DMP), introduce learnable
parameters to generate the weight mask and impose the task-aware gradient to guide the structure
search of the pruned network. In the training procedure, DMP introduces the learnable mask into the
gradient graph by coupling the mask with the activation feature or weights, e.g., directly multiplying
∗

Corresponding Author (eetchen@fudan.edu.cn).

†

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

