Mixture of Link Predictors on Graphs

Li Ma1*†‡ , Haoyu Han2* , Juanhui Li2 , Harry Shomer2 , Hui Liu2 ,
Xiaofeng Gao1† , Jiliang Tang2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Michigan State University
mali-cs@sjtu.edu.cn, gao-xf@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
{hanhaoy1,lijuanh1,shomerha,liuhui7,tangjili}@msu.edu

Abstract
Link prediction, which aims to forecast unseen connections in graphs, is a fundamental task in graph machine learning. Heuristic methods, leveraging a range of
different pairwise measures such as common neighbors and shortest paths, often
rival the performance of vanilla Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Therefore, recent
advancements in GNNs for link prediction (GNN4LP) have primarily focused on
integrating one or a few types of pairwise information. In this work, we reveal that
different node pairs within the same dataset necessitate varied pairwise information
for accurate prediction and models that only apply the same pairwise information
uniformly could achieve suboptimal performance. As a result, we propose a simple
mixture of experts model Link-MoE for link prediction. Link-MoE utilizes various
GNNs as experts and strategically selects the appropriate expert for each node
pair based on various types of pairwise information. Experimental results across
diverse real-world datasets demonstrate substantial performance improvement from
Link-MoE. Notably, Link-MoE achieves a relative improvement of 18.71% on
the MRR metric for the Pubmed dataset and 9.59% on the Hits@100 metric for
the ogbl-ppa dataset, compared to the best baselines. The code is available at
https://github.com/ml-ml/Link-MoE/.

1

Introduction

Link prediction (LP) is a central challenge in graph analysis with many real-world applications,
such as recommender systems [1, 2], drug discovery [3], and knowledge graph completion [4, 5].
Specifically, LP attempts to predict unseen edges in a graph. Unlike node-level tasks where Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) excel in modeling individual node representations [6], LP demands the
use of pairwise node representations to model the existence of a link where vanilla GNNs often
fall short [7, 8]. Traditionally, various heuristic methods [9] were used to identify new links by
encapsulating the pairwise relationship between two nodes. For instance, the Common Neighbors
(CN) heuristic [10] counts the number of shared neighbors between a node pair, postulating that
the number of common neighbors can indicate the likelihood of a connection. The Katz index [11]
considers the total number of paths between two nodes, assigning a higher weight to those shorter in
length. Node feature similarity-based methods [12] assumes that nodes with similar features tend
to connect. Despite their simplicity, these heuristic-based methods are still considered as strong
baselines in LP tasks.
To leverage both the representational power of GNNs and the effectiveness of heuristics, recent
GNN4LP works have sought to incorporate pairwise information into GNN frameworks, thereby
* Equal Contribution.
†
Li Ma and Xiaofeng Gao are in the MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
‡
This work is done when Li Ma is a visiting student at Michigan State University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

