No Regrets: Investigating and Improving Regret
Approximations for Curriculum Discovery

Timon Willi

Alex Rutherford∗ Michael Beukman∗
Bruno Lacerda Nick Hawes Jakob Foerster
University of Oxford

Abstract
What data or environments to use for training to improve downstream performance
is a longstanding and very topical question in reinforcement learning. In particular,
Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) methods have gained recent attention
as their adaptive curricula promise to enable agents to be robust to in- and outof-distribution tasks. This work investigates how existing UED methods select
training environments, focusing on task prioritisation metrics. Surprisingly, despite
methods aiming to maximise regret in theory, the practical approximations do not
correlate with regret but with success rate. As a result, a significant portion of an
agent’s experience comes from environments it has already mastered, offering little
to no contribution toward enhancing its abilities. Put differently, current methods
fail to predict intuitive measures of “learnability.” Specifically, they are unable to
consistently identify those scenarios that the agent can sometimes solve, but not
always. Based on our analysis, we develop a method that directly trains on scenarios
with high learnability. This simple and intuitive approach outperforms existing
UED methods in several binary-outcome environments, including the standard
domain of Minigrid and a novel setting closely inspired by a real-world robotics
problem. We further introduce a new adversarial evaluation procedure for directly
measuring robustness, closely mirroring the conditional value at risk (CVaR).
We open-source all our code and present visualisations of final policies here:
https://github.com/amacrutherford/sampling-for-learnability.

1

Introduction

Curriculum discovery—automatically generating environments for reinforcement learning (RL)
agents to train on—remains a longstanding and active area of research [1, 2]. Automated curriculum learning (ACL) methods offer the potential to generate diverse environments, leading to the
development of more general and robust agents. Recently, a class of methods under the umbrella of
Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) has gained popularity, owing to their theoretical guarantees
of robustness and empirical improvements in out-of-distribution generalisation [3–5].
Currently, the most popular and empirically successful subfield of UED develops methods that aim to
maximise regret—the difference in performance between an optimal agent and the current agent [3–8].
However, computing regret is intractable in all but the simplest tasks, forcing practical methods to
instead approximate it [4, 9]. While the prevailing assumption has been that these approximations
are faithful, we investigate this further and find that this is not the case: specifically, these scoring
functions correlate with success rate rather than regret. This means that these methods tend to
prioritise tasks that the agent can already solve, leading to much of the collected experience not
contributing to learning an improved policy.
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to arutherford@robots.ox.ac.uk.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

