DistillNeRF: Perceiving 3D Scenes from Single-Glance Images by
Distilling Neural Fields and Foundation Model Features

Letian Wang1,2

Seung Wook Kim1

Steven Waslander2

Yue Wang1,3

1

Jiawei Yang3

Sanja Fidler1,2

NVIDIA Research 2 University of Toronto
4
National University of Singapore

3

Cunjun Yu1,4

Boris Ivanovic1

Marco Pavone1,5

Peter Karkus1

University of Southern California
5
Stanford University

Abstract
We propose DistillNeRF, a self-supervised learning framework addressing the challenge of understanding 3D environments from limited 2D observations in outdoor
autonomous driving scenes. Our method is a generalizable feedforward model that
predicts a rich neural scene representation from sparse, single-frame multi-view
camera inputs with limited view overlap, and is trained self-supervised with differentiable rendering to reconstruct RGB, depth, or feature images. Our first insight
is to exploit per-scene optimized Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) by generating
dense depth and virtual camera targets from them, which helps our model to learn
enhanced 3D geometry from sparse non-overlapping image inputs. Second, to
learn a semantically rich 3D representation, we propose distilling features from pretrained 2D foundation models, such as CLIP or DINOv2, thereby enabling various
downstream tasks without the need for costly 3D human annotations. To leverage
these two insights, we introduce a novel model architecture with a two-stage liftsplat-shoot encoder and a parameterized sparse hierarchical voxel representation.
Experimental results on the NuScenes and Waymo NOTR datasets demonstrate
that DistillNeRF significantly outperforms existing comparable state-of-the-art
self-supervised methods for scene reconstruction, novel view synthesis, and depth
estimation; and it allows for competitive zero-shot 3D semantic occupancy prediction, as well as open-world scene understanding through distilled foundation
model features. Demos and code will be available at https://distillnerf.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Understanding and interpreting complex 3D environments from limited 2D observations is a fundamental challenge in autonomous driving and beyond. Many efforts have been made to tackle this
challenge by learning from labor-intensive and costly 3D annotations, such as 3D bounding boxes
[1, 2] and semantic occupancy labels [3, 4, 5, 6]. However, these approaches typically struggle with
scalability due to their excessive reliance on expensive annotations.
Neural scene representations, such as NeRFs [7, 8] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [9], have
recently emerged as a compelling paradigm for learning 3D representations from 2D signals in a selfsupervised manner. While these methods demonstrated strong capabilities in view synthesis for indoor
scenes [10], and more recently also for challenging dynamic outdoor scenes [11, 12, 13, 14], they
require delicately training a new representation for each new scene, leading to extensive computation
budget and time needs, typically in the order of hours or minutes. This falls short of the real-time
computational requirements for autonomous driving, which typically demand a processing speed of
2-10 Hz. Additionally, most works focus on view synthesis only [11, 12, 13], resulting in learned 3D
representations that lack semantics, sidestep downstream tasks, and do not fully exploit the potential
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

