CLIP in Mirror: Disentangling text from visual images
through reflection

Tiancheng Wang1

Yuguang Yang2 Linlin Yang4∗ Shaohui Lin5 Juan Zhang1,3
Guodong Guo6 Baochang Zhang1,3
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Electronic Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication,
Communication University of China, Beijing, China
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
6
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China

Abstract
The CLIP network excels in various tasks, but struggles with text-visual images
i.e., images that contain both text and visual objects; it risks confusing textual and
visual representations. To address this issue, we propose MirrorCLIP, a zero-shot
framework, which disentangles the image features of CLIP by exploiting the difference in the mirror effect between visual objects and text in the images. Specifically,
MirrorCLIP takes both original and flipped images as inputs, comparing their
features dimension-wise in the latent space to generate disentangling masks. With
disentangling masks, we further design filters to separate textual and visual factors
more precisely, and then get disentangled representations. Qualitative experiments
using stable diffusion models and class activation mapping (CAM) validate the
effectiveness of our disentanglement. Moreover, our proposed MirrorCLIP reduces
confusion when encountering text-visual images and achieves a substantial improvement on typographic defense, further demonstrating its superior ability of disentanglement. Our code is available at https://github.com/tcwangbuaa/MirrorCLIP.

1

Introduction

The CLIP network [19] has demonstrated remarkable success, leading to its widespread application
in real-world scenarios. However, it still struggles with text-visual images [7; 16; 11; 1], i.e., images
that contain both text and visual objects, where CLIP can become confused when processing an
image with misleading text in it. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, when asked to describe a visual
object, the model might mistake an image of a dog for a cat due to the presence of the “cat” text. In
contrast, when asked to recognize text in an image, the model might mistake the text of “eraser” for
“egg” due to the visual object of eggs. Can we disentangle the textual and visual1 factors within CLIP?
Achieving this disentanglement for CLIP can reduce confusion when encountering such images and
enhance its robustness against typographic attacks [1].
Existing work emphasizes extracting visual features from image features and exploring additional
structures [16] or training strategies [1; 11]. Specifically, Materzynska et al. [16] introduce a learnable
projection, Defense Prefix [1] introduces a learnable prefix in the prompt, and PAINT [11] introduces
fine-tuning with linearly interpolating neural network weights. However, these methods require
* Corresponding Author, lyang@cuc.edu.cn
1

For simplify, we refer to ‘visual’ as the opposite of ‘textual’, i.e., ‘non-textual’, for text-visual images.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

