GrounDiT: Grounding Diffusion Transformers
via Noisy Patch Transplantation

Phillip Y. Lee∗

Taehoon Yoon∗
KAIST

Minhyuk Sung

{phillip0701,taehoon,mhsung}@kaist.ac.kr
“A balloon and fireworks are in the
night sky, and below is a beautiful forest
with a car and a chair and a waterfall.”

“A car and a castle in a beautiful
landscape and a balloon
in the sunset sky.”

“A banana and an apple are
beneath a book and a flower is
lying on the book in a room”

“Aurora lights up
the sky and a horse
and a house are on
the grassy meadow
with a mountain in
the background.”

“A bear is in an antique
living room with a chair
and a chiffonier, while a
chandelier hanging from
the ceiling.”

Figure 1: Spatially grounded images generated by our G ROUN D I T. Each image is generated based
on a text prompt along with bounding boxes, which are displayed in the upper right corner of each
image. Compared to existing methods that often struggle to accurately place objects within their
designated bounding boxes, our G ROUN D I T enables more precise spatial control through a novel
noisy patch transplantation mechanism.

Abstract
We introduce G ROUN D I T, a novel training-free spatial grounding technique for
text-to-image generation using Diffusion Transformers (DiT). Spatial grounding
with bounding boxes has gained attention for its simplicity and versatility, allowing for enhanced user control in image generation. However, prior training-free
approaches often rely on updating the noisy image during the reverse diffusion process via backpropagation from custom loss functions, which frequently struggle to
provide precise control over individual bounding boxes. In this work, we leverage
the flexibility of the Transformer architecture, demonstrating that DiT can generate
noisy patches corresponding to each bounding box, fully encoding the target object
and allowing for fine-grained control over each region. Our approach builds on an
intriguing property of DiT, which we refer to as semantic sharing. Due to semantic
sharing, when a smaller patch is jointly denoised alongside a generatable-size
image, the two become semantic clones. Each patch is denoised in its own branch
of the generation process and then transplanted into the corresponding region of the
original noisy image at each timestep, resulting in robust spatial grounding for each
bounding box. In our experiments on the HRS and DrawBench benchmarks, we
achieve state-of-the-art performance compared to previous training-free approaches.
Project Page: https://groundit-diffusion.github.io/.
*

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

