Is Your LiDAR Placement Optimized for
3D Scene Understanding?

Ye Li1
1

Lingdong Kong2

Hanjiang Hu3

Xiaohao Xu1

Xiaonan Huang1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 National University of Singapore
3
Carnegie Mellon University
https://github.com/ywyeli/Place3D

Abstract
The reliability of driving perception systems under unprecedented conditions is
crucial for practical usage. Latest advancements have prompted increasing interest
in multi-LiDAR perception. However, prevailing driving datasets predominantly
utilize single-LiDAR systems and collect data devoid of adverse conditions, failing
to capture the complexities of real-world environments accurately. Addressing
these gaps, we proposed Place3D, a full-cycle pipeline that encompasses LiDAR placement optimization, data generation, and downstream evaluations. Our
framework makes three appealing contributions. 1) To identify the most effective
configurations for multi-LiDAR systems, we introduce the Surrogate Metric of
the Semantic Occupancy Grids (M-SOG) to evaluate LiDAR placement quality.
2) Leveraging the M-SOG metric, we propose a novel optimization strategy to
refine multi-LiDAR placements. 3) Centered around the theme of multi-condition
multi-LiDAR perception, we collect a 280,000-frame dataset from both clean and
adverse conditions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that LiDAR placements
optimized using our approach outperform various baselines. We showcase exceptional results in both LiDAR semantic segmentation and 3D object detection tasks,
under diverse weather and sensor failure conditions.

1

Introduction

Accurate 3D perception plays a crucial role in autonomous driving, involving detecting the objects
around the vehicle and segmenting the scene into meaningful semantic categories. LiDARs are becoming crucial for driving perception due to their capability to capture detailed geometric information
about the surroundings [3, 109, 53, 54, 118]. While the latest models achieved promising accuracy on
standard datasets, e.g., nuScenes [7] and SemanticKITTI [6], improving the resilience of perception
under corruptions and sensor failures is still a critical yet under-explored task [46, 94, 5, 95].
Recent studies have primarily focused on refining the sensing systems by designing new algorithms
with novel model architectures [15] or 3D representations [28, 99, 11]. The selection of LiDAR
configurations, however, often relies on industry experience and design aesthetics. Therefore, existing
literature has potentially overlooked optimal LiDAR placements for maximum sensing efficacy.
An intuitive approach for optimizing LiDAR configurations involves a comprehensive cycle of data
collection, model training, and validation across various LiDAR setups to enhance the autonomous
driving system’s perception accuracy [24, 52]. However, this approach faces significant challenges
due to the substantial computational resources and extensive time required for data collection and
processing [57, 17]. Although recent works [34, 65] made preliminary attempts to explore the impact
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

