Free Lunch in Pathology Foundation Model:
Task-specific Model Adaptation with Concept-Guided
Feature Enhancement
Yanyan Huang
The University of Hong Kong
yanyanh@connect.hku.hk

Weiqin Zhao
The University of Hong Kong
wqzhao98@connect.hku.hk

Yu Fu
Lanzhou University
fuyu@lzu.edu.cn

Yihang Chen
The University of Hong Kong
yihangc@connect.hku.hk

Lequan Yu∗
The University of Hong Kong
lqyu@hku.hk

Abstract
Whole slide image (WSI) analysis is gaining prominence within the medical imaging field. Recent advances in pathology foundation models have shown the potential
to extract powerful feature representations from WSIs for downstream tasks. However, these foundation models are usually designed for general-purpose pathology
image analysis and may not be optimal for specific downstream tasks or cancer
types. In this work, we present Concept Anchor-guided Task-specific Feature
Enhancement (CATE), an adaptable paradigm that can boost the expressivity and
discriminativeness of pathology foundation models for specific downstream tasks.
Based on a set of task-specific concepts derived from the pathology vision-language
model with expert-designed prompts, we introduce two interconnected modules to
dynamically calibrate the generic image features extracted by foundation models
for certain tasks or cancer types. Specifically, we design a Concept-guided Information Bottleneck module to enhance task-relevant characteristics by maximizing the
mutual information between image features and concept anchors while suppressing
superfluous information. Moreover, a Concept-Feature Interference module is
proposed to utilize the similarity between calibrated features and concept anchors
to further generate discriminative task-specific features. The extensive experiments
on public WSI datasets demonstrate that CATE significantly enhances the performance and generalizability of MIL models. Additionally, heatmap and umap
visualization results also reveal the effectiveness and interpretability of CATE. The
source code is available at https://github.com/HKU-MedAI/CATE.

1

Introduction

Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) [26, 34, 23, 2] is widely adopted for weakly supervised analysis in
computational pathology, where the input of MIL is typically a set of patch features generated by a
pre-trained feature extractor (i.e., image encoder). Although promising progress has been achieved,
the effectiveness of MIL models heavily relies on the quality of the extracted features. A robust
feature extractor can discern more distinctive pathological features, thereby improving the predictive
capabilities of MIL models. Recently, several studies have explored using pretrained foundation
models on large-scale pathology datasets with self-supervised learning as the feature extractors
for WSI analysis [37, 7, 3, 36]. Additionally, drawing inspiration from the success of Contrastive
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

