Amortized Bayesian Experimental Design
for Decision-Making

Daolang Huang
Aalto University
daolang.huang@aalto.fi

Yujia Guo
Aalto University
yujia.guo@aalto.fi

Luigi Acerbi
University of Helsinki
luigi.acerbi@helsinki.fi

Samuel Kaski
Aalto University
University of Manchester
samuel.kaski@aalto.fi

Abstract
Many critical decisions, such as personalized medical diagnoses and product pricing, are made based on insights gained from designing, observing, and analyzing
a series of experiments. This highlights the crucial role of experimental design,
which goes beyond merely collecting information on system parameters as in
traditional Bayesian experimental design (BED), but also plays a key part in facilitating downstream decision-making. Most recent BED methods use an amortized
policy network to rapidly design experiments. However, the information gathered
through these methods is suboptimal for down-the-line decision-making, as the
experiments are not inherently designed with downstream objectives in mind. In
this paper, we present an amortized decision-aware BED framework that prioritizes
maximizing downstream decision utility. We introduce a novel architecture, the
Transformer Neural Decision Process (TNDP), capable of instantly proposing the
next experimental design, whilst inferring the downstream decision, thus effectively
amortizing both tasks within a unified workflow. We demonstrate the performance
of our method across several tasks, showing that it can deliver informative designs
and facilitate accurate decision-making.

1

Introduction

In a wide array of disciplines, from clinical trials (Cheng and Shen, 2005) to medical imaging (Burger
et al., 2021), a fundamental challenge is the design of experiments to infer the distribution of some
unobservable, unknown properties of the systems under study. Bayesian Experimental Design (BED)
(Lindley, 1956; Chaloner and Verdinelli, 1995; Ryan et al., 2016; Rainforth et al., 2024) is a powerful
framework in this context, guiding and optimizing experimental design by maximizing the expected
amount of information about parameters gained from experiments, see Fig. 1(a). However, the
ultimate goal in many tasks extends beyond parameter inference to inform a downstream decisionmaking task by leveraging our understanding of these parameters. For example, in personalized
medical diagnostics, a model is built based on historical data to facilitate an optimal treatment for
a new patient (Bica et al., 2021). This data typically comprises patient covariates, administered
treatments, and observed outcomes. Since the query of such data tends to be expensive due to, e.g.,
privacy issues, we need to actively design queries to optimize resource utilization. Here, when the
goal is to improve decisions, the strategy of experimental designs should not focus solely on inferring
the parameters of the model, but rather on guiding the final decision-making for the new patient, to
ensure that each query contributes maximally to the diagnostic decision.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

