On Socially Fair Low-Rank Approximation and
Column Subset Selection
Zhao Song
The Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing
UC Berkeley
magic.linuxkde@gmail.com
David P. Woodruff
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu

Ali Vakilian
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
vakilian@ttic.edu

Samson Zhou
Department of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
samsonzhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Low-rank approximation and column subset selection are two fundamental and
related problems that are applied across a wealth of machine learning applications.
In this paper, we study the question of socially fair low-rank approximation and
socially fair column subset selection, where the goal is to minimize the loss over
all sub-populations of the data. We show that surprisingly, even constant-factor
approximation to fair low-rank approximation requires exponential time under
certain standard complexity hypotheses. On the positive side, we give an algorithm
for fair low-rank approximation that, for a constant number of groups and constantfactor accuracy, runs in 2poly(k) time rather than the naïve npoly(k) , which is a
substantial improvement when the dataset has a large number n of observations.
We then show that there exist bicriteria approximation algorithms for fair low-rank
approximation and fair column subset selection that run in polynomial time.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms are increasingly used in technologies and decision-making processes
that affect our daily lives, from high volume interactions such as online advertising, e-mail filtering,
smart devices, or large language models, to more critical processes such as autonomous vehicles,
healthcare diagnostics, credit scoring, and sentencing recommendations in courts of law [Cho17,
KLL+ 18, BHJ+ 21]. Machine learning algorithms frequently require statistical analysis, utilizing
fundamental problems from numerical linear algebra, especially low-rank approximation and column
subset selection.
In the classical low-rank approximation problem, the input is a data matrix A ∈ Rn×d and an integral
rank parameter k > 0, and the goal is to find the best rank k approximation to A, i.e., to find a set of
k vectors in Rd that span a matrix B, which minimizes L(A − B) across all rank-k matrices B, for
some loss function L. The rank parameter k should be chosen to accurately represent the complexity
of the underlying model chosen to fit the data, and thus the low-rank approximation problem is often
used for mathematical modeling and data compression.
Similarly, in the classic column subset selection problem, the goal is to choose k columns U of A
so as to minimize L(A − UV) across all choices of V ∈ Rk×d . Although low-rank approximation
can reveal important latent structure among the dataset, the resulting linear combinations may not
be as interpretable as simply selecting k features. The column subset selection problem is therefore
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

