Synatra: Turning Indirect Knowledge into Direct
Demonstrations for Digital Agents at Scale

Tianyue Ou♠ Frank F. Xu♠ Aman Madaan♢ Jiarui Liu♠ Robert Lo♠
Abishek Sridhar♠ Sudipta Sengupta♣ Dan Roth♣ Graham Neubig♠ Shuyan Zhou♠
♠
Carnegie Mellon University ♣ Amazon AWS AI ♢ xAI
{tianyueo, fangzhex, gneubig, shuyanzh}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
LLMs can now act as autonomous agents that interact with digital environments and
complete specific objectives (e.g., arranging an online meeting). However, accuracy
is still far from satisfactory, partly due to a lack of large-scale, direct demonstrations
for digital tasks. Obtaining supervised data from humans is costly, and automatic
data collection through exploration or reinforcement learning relies on complex
environmental and content setup, resulting in datasets that lack comprehensive
coverage of various scenarios. On the other hand, there is abundant knowledge that
may indirectly assist task completion, such as online tutorials that were created
for human consumption. In this work, we present Synatra, an approach that
effectively transforms this indirect knowledge into direct supervision at scale. We
define different types of indirect knowledge, and carefully study the available
sources to obtain it, methods to encode the structure of direct demonstrations, and
finally methods to transform indirect knowledge into direct demonstrations. We
use 100k such synthetically-created demonstrations to finetune a 7B CodeLlama,
and demonstrate that the resulting agent surpasses all comparably sized models on
three web-based task benchmarks Mind2Web, MiniWoB++ and WebArena, as well
as surpassing GPT-3.5 on WebArena and Mind2Web. In addition, while synthetic
demonstrations prove to be only 3% the cost of human demonstrations (at $0.031
each), we show that the synthetic demonstrations can be more effective than an
identical number of human demonstrations collected from limited domains.1

1

Introduction

AI agents that operate within a digital environment (e.g., a browser in a computer) intelligently
to accomplish complex tasks (e.g., “Create my July online shopping expense report.”) have the
potential to improve the productivity across a broad swath of tasks performed by humans every
day [2, 33, 6, 58]. However, agents still lack the ability to complete tasks with a high degree of
reliability, partly due to a paucity of training data for such agentic tasks. Typically, supervised
finetuning is a standard way to adapt large language models (LLMs) to tasks such as text generation
or classification, large-scale demonstration collections for digital agents are not readily available.
For AI agents, demonstrations typically involve specifying a sequence of actions and observations
that results in successful task completion, as shown on the right of Figure 1. Existing works that
automatically collect demonstrations (1) set up environments for an agent to interact with, (2) run
a baseline agent within this environment, and (3) employ scoring functions to remove low quality
demonstrations [9] or perform relabeling [1, 26]. All three of these requirements limit applicability
to a variety of practical applications. Setting up an environment that is representative of the actual
1

Data and code are publically available at https://oootttyyy.github.io/synatra

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

