Towards Effective Planning Strategies for Dynamic
Opinion Networks

Bharath Muppasani, Protik Nag, Vignesh Narayanan, Biplav Srivastava, and Michael N. Huhns
AI Institute and Department of Computer Science
University of South Carolina, USA
{bharath@email., pnag@email., vignar@, biplav.s@, huhns@}sc.edu

Abstract
In this study, we investigate the under-explored intervention planning aimed at
disseminating accurate information within dynamic opinion networks by leveraging
learning strategies. Intervention planning involves identifying key nodes (search)
and exerting control (e.g., disseminating accurate/official information through the
nodes) to mitigate the influence of misinformation. However, as the network size
increases, the problem becomes computationally intractable. To address this, we
first introduce a ranking algorithm to identify key nodes for disseminating accurate
information, which facilitates the training of neural network (NN) classifiers that
provide generalized solutions for the search and planning problems. Second, we
mitigate the complexity of label generation—which becomes challenging as the
network grows—by developing a reinforcement learning (RL)-based centralized
dynamic planning framework. We analyze these NN-based planners for opinion
networks governed by two dynamic propagation models. Each model incorporates
both binary and continuous opinion and trust representations. Our experimental
results demonstrate that the ranking algorithm-based classifiers provide plans
that enhance infection rate control, especially with increased action budgets for
small networks. Further, we observe that the reward strategies focusing on key
metrics, such as the number of susceptible nodes and infection rates, outperform
those prioritizing faster blocking strategies. Additionally, our findings reveal that
graph convolutional network (GCN)-based planners facilitate scalable centralized
plans that achieve lower infection rates (higher control) across various network
configurations (e.g., Watts-Strogatz topology, varying action budgets, varying
initial infected nodes, and varying degree of infected nodes).

1

Introduction

The spread of information across social networks profoundly impacts public opinion, collective
behaviors, and societal outcomes [1]. Especially during crises such as disease outbreaks or disasters,
there is often too much information coming from different sources. Sometimes, the resultant flood
of information is unreliable or misleading, or spreads too quickly, which can have serious effects
on society and health [8]. Online platforms such as Facebook, X, and WeChat, while essential
for communication, significantly contribute to the rapid spread of misinformation [2]. This has
led to public confusion and panic in events ranging from the Fukushima disaster to the COVID19 pandemic, and even the U.S. presidential elections [11], demonstrating the need for effective
information management on these platforms [8].
The first step in combating misinformation propagation is to reliably detect them. However, detection alone is insufficient to effectively mitigate its spread. It must be complemented with strategic
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

