A Simulation Benchmark for Autonomous Racing
with Large-Scale Human Data

Adrian Remonda1,2,4∗ Nicklas Hansen1 Ayoub Raji3 Nicola Musiu3
Marko Bertogna3 Eduardo E. Veas2,4 Xiaolong Wang1
1
UC San Diego 2 TU-Graz 3 Unimore 4 Know-Center GmbH

Rendering

TU-Graz Cockpit

TU-Graz Setup

UC San Diego Setup

Figure 1: Overview. We propose a high-fidelity racing simulation platform based on Assetto Corsa
that enables reproducible algorithm benchmarking, as well as data collection with human drivers.

Abstract
Despite the availability of international prize-money competitions, scaled vehicles, and simulation environments, research on autonomous racing and the control of sports cars operating close to the limit of handling has been limited by the
high costs of vehicle acquisition and management, as well as the limited physics
accuracy of open-source simulators. In this paper, we propose a racing simulation platform based on the simulator Assetto Corsa to test, validate, and benchmark autonomous driving algorithms, including reinforcement learning (RL) and
classical Model Predictive Control (MPC), in realistic and challenging scenarios.
Our contributions include the development of this simulation platform, several
state-of-the-art algorithms tailored to the racing environment, and a comprehensive dataset collected from human drivers. Additionally, we evaluate algorithms in
the offline RL setting. All the necessary code (including environment and benchmarks), working examples, datasets, and videos are publicly released and can be
found at: https://assetto-corsa-gym.github.io.

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving has become an industry with different levels of applications affecting our daily
lives, and it still has a large potential to continue revolutionizing future mobility and transportation.
This paper explores a slightly different setting from day-to-day driving and focuses on driving an
autonomous car at its physical limits, i.e., autonomous racing. Specifically, the goal is to maneuver
a car around a race track to achieve the lowest possible lap time and develop highly robust and
generalizable models [Betz et al., 2022].
However, developing and testing algorithms for autonomous racing is a challenging and expensive task. Traditional testing methods, such as on-track testing, are limited in scope and can pose
∗

Work done during internship at UC San Diego. Correspondence can be directed to Adrian Remonda
<aremonda@student.tugraz.at>.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

