A Boosting-Type Convergence Result for
A DA B OOST.MH with Factorized Multi-Class
Classifiers
Xin Zou∗ Zhengyu Zhou∗ Jingyuan Xu Weiwei Liu†
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University
{zouxin2021, zzysince1999, jingyuanxu777, liuweiwei863}@gmail.com

Abstract
A DA B OOST is a well-known algorithm in boosting. Schapire and Singer propose,
an extension of A DA B OOST, named A DA B OOST.MH, for multi-class classification
problems. Kégl shows empirically that A DA B OOST.MH works better when the
classical one-against-all base classifiers are replaced by factorized base classifiers
containing a binary classifier and a vote (or code) vector. However, the factorization
makes it much more difficult to provide a convergence result for the factorized
version of A DA B OOST.MH. Then, Kégl raises an open problem in COLT 2014 to
look for a convergence result for the factorized A DA B OOST.MH. In this work, we
resolve this open problem by presenting a convergence result for A DA B OOST.MH
with factorized multi-class classifiers.

1

Introduction

Boosting is an approach to machine learning based on the idea of creating a highly accurate prediction
rule by combining many relatively weak and inaccurate rules [19] and has inspired a lot on theoretical
analysis and algorithm design in supervised learning [11, 17]. The seminal algorithm in boosting,
A DA B OOST [9], requires no knowledge of the upper bound of the edge, which makes it convenient
in practice.
In addition to to binary A DA B OOST, [9] also proposes two multi-class extensions, named A D A B OOST.M1 and A DA B OOST.M2. Then, Schapire and Singer’s seminal paper [20] proposes another
extension named A DA B OOST.MH. The main idea of A DA B OOST.MH is to use vector-valued base
classifiers to build a multi-class discriminant function of K outputs when there are K classes, and
then replace the weight vector in A DA B OOST with a weight matrix over instances and labels.
The simplest implementation of the concept in A DA B OOST.MH is to use K independent one-againstall classifiers in which base classifiers are only loosely connected through the common normalization
of the weight matrix. However, [15] points out that such an implement is suboptimal in most of
the practical problems since it is limited to only decision stumps weak learners. To solve this
problem, [15] proposes another base learner named multi-class Hamming trees, which optimizes the
multi-class edge without reducing the problem to K binary classifications. The key idea in [15] is
to factorize general vector-valued classifiers h into an input-independent code vector of length K,
i.e., v ∈ {−1, +1}K , and label-independent scalar classifier φ. However, [15] gets in trouble when
proving the convergence rate of the proposed implement of A DA B OOST.MH due to the factorization
∗
†

equal contribution
Corresponding author: Weiwei Liu (liuweiwei863@gmail.com).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

