BLAST: Block-Level Adaptive Structured Matrices for
Efficient Deep Neural Network Inference

Changwoo Lee

Soo Min Kwon Qing Qu Hun-Seok Kim
University of Michigan
{cwoolee,kwonsm,qingqu,hunseok}@umich.edu

Abstract
Large-scale foundation models have demonstrated exceptional performance in
language and vision tasks. However, the numerous dense matrix-vector operations
involved in these large networks pose significant computational challenges during
inference. To address these challenges, we introduce the Block-Level Adaptive
STructured (BLAST) matrix, designed to learn and leverage efficient structures
prevalent in the weight matrices of linear layers within deep learning models.
Compared to existing structured matrices, the BLAST matrix offers substantial
flexibility, as it can represent various types of structures that are either learned
from data or computed from pre-existing weight matrices. We demonstrate the
efficiency of using the BLAST matrix for compressing both language and vision
tasks, showing that (i) for medium-sized models such as ViT and GPT-2, training
with BLAST weights boosts performance while reducing complexity by 70%
and 40%, respectively; and (ii) for large foundation models such as Llama-7B
and DiT-XL, the BLAST matrix achieves a 2x compression while exhibiting the
lowest performance degradation among all tested structured matrices. Our code is
available at https://github.com/changwoolee/BLAST.

1

Introduction

Foundation models built on large deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable
performance in vision and language tasks. However, the size of these large networks poses both
computational and storage challenges, especially in resource-constrained environments such as
edge devices. The size of a single DNN often exceeds the capacity of the supporting hardware
devices [1–5]. For example, Llama-70B [1] demands at least 140GB of memory solely for loading its
weights in half-precision floating point representation, while the state-of-the-art commercial GPU
only accommodates 80GB of memory. Furthermore, inference with these networks involves numerous
dense matrix-vector operations, which can be limiting when computing power is constrained.
Fortunately, large (overparameterized) DNNs often exhibits parameter redundancy, where the intrinsic
dimension of the weights is much lower than the ambient dimension. As such, the weights should be
structured, possessing hidden properties such as low-rankness [6–9] or sparsity [10, 11]. Hence, it is
possible to replace (or factorize) these dense existing weight matrices with structured ones without
degrading performance [10–12]. However, using structured matrices that do not align with the true
underlying structure of the weight matrices can result in significant performance degradation. We
demonstrate this point in Figure 1 where we attempt to capture the structure of a diffusion model
transformer (DiT) [13] using the low-rank structure to generate synthetic images. In Figure 1, we
compress the model’s linear layers by approximately 50% of the total number of parameters using
low-rank weight matrices via singular value decomposition (SVD) and generate images with the
compressed model (see Section 4.2 and Appendix C.3 for details). As shown in Figure 1 (middle),
simply using the low-rank structure introduces unwanted artifacts in the generated images.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

