Causal Context Adjustment Loss
for Learned Image Compression

Minghao Han1 , Shiyin Jiang1 , Shengxi Li2 , Xin Deng2 , Mai Xu2 , Ce Zhu1 , Shuhang Gu1∗
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Beihang University
{minghao.hmh, shuhanggu}@gmail.com

Abstract
In recent years, learned image compression (LIC) technologies have surpassed
conventional methods notably in terms of rate-distortion (RD) performance. Most
present learned techniques are VAE-based with an autoregressive entropy model,
which obviously promotes the RD performance by utilizing the decoded causal
context. However, extant methods are highly dependent on the fixed hand-crafted
causal context. The question of how to guide the auto-encoder to generate a
more effective causal context benefit for the autoregressive entropy models is
worth exploring. In this paper, we make the first attempt in investigating the
way to explicitly adjust the causal context with our proposed Causal Context
Adjustment loss (CCA-loss). By imposing the CCA-loss, we enable the neural
network to spontaneously adjust important information into the early stage of the
autoregressive entropy model. Furthermore, as transformer technology develops
remarkably, variants of which have been adopted by many state-of-the-art (SOTA)
LIC techniques. The existing computing devices have not adapted the calculation
of the attention mechanism well, which leads to a burden on computation quantity
and inference latency. To overcome it, we establish a convolutional neural network
(CNN) image compression model and adopt the unevenly channel-wise grouped
strategy for high efficiency. Ultimately, the proposed CNN-based LIC network
trained with our Causal Context Adjustment loss attains a great trade-off between
inference latency and rate-distortion performance. The code is available here.

1

Introduction

The burgeoning quality of high-resolution photos is driving an increasing demand for advanced image
storage and transmission technologies. Consequently, lossy image compression techniques have been
growing extraordinarily fast in recent years. In parallel to conventional coding technologies such as
JPEG [42], BPG [6], WebP [15], VVC [40], learned image compression (LIC) methods [3, 4, 10, 11,
17, 18, 20, 30, 35, 36, 47] emerge, achieving high peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and multiscale
structural similarity (MS-SSIM) [44] while operating fairly fast. Their superior compression results
over those of VVC demonstrate an enormous possibility that LIC technology would appear on par
with the traditional ones in the near future.
Learned lossy image compression methods are built upon a variational auto-encoder (VAE) framework
proposed by Ballé et al. [4]. The VAE based LIC framework mainly comprises an auto-encoder and
an entropy model. The auto-encoder conducts nonlinear transforms between the image space and the
latent representation space; while, the entropy model minimizes the code length by estimating the
probability distribution of latent representations. In comparison to the auto-encoder, which could
borrow ideas from recent advances in network architecture design, the entropy model is a unique
important component to LIC and has a vital influence on the final compression results.
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

