Towards Global Optimal Visual In-Context Learning
Prompt Selection

Chengming Xu1 * Chen Liu2 * Yikai Wang1 Q Yuan Yao2 Yanwei Fu1
1
Fudan University 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{cmxu18, yanweifu}@fdu.edu.cn cliudh@connect.ust.hk
yi-kai.wang@outlook.com yuany@ust.hk

Abstract
Visual In-Context Learning (VICL) is a prevailing way to transfer visual foundation models to new tasks by leveraging contextual information contained in
in-context examples to enhance learning and prediction of query samples. The
fundamental problem in VICL is how to select the best prompt to activate its power
as much as possible, which is equivalent to the ranking problem of testing the
in-context behavior of each candidate in the alternative set and selecting the best
one. To utilize a more appropriate ranking metric and more comprehensive information among the alternative set, we propose a novel in-context example selection
framework to approximately identify the global optimal prompt, i.e. choosing
the best performing in-context examples from all alternatives for each query sample. Our method, dubbed Partial2Global, adopts a transformer-based list-wise
ranker to provide a more comprehensive comparison within several alternatives
and a consistency-aware ranking aggregator to generate globally consistent ranking. The effectiveness of Partial2Global is validated through experiments on foreground segmentation, single object detection and image colorization, demonstrating
that Partial2Global selects consistently better in-context examples compared with
other methods, and thus establishes the new state-of-the-arts. Code is available at
https://github.com/chmxu/ranking_in_context.git.

1

Introduction

Foundation models like those used in AIGC, such as GPT and Gemini, play a big role in its success.
Different ways to fine-tune these models are being suggested to use them more effectively. One
popular idea is called Visual In-Context Learning (VICL), which is a way to teach Visual Foundation
Models (VFMs) using context from images. This helps the models learn better and make more
accurate ‘guesses’ based on what they see. Basically, VICL gives the models prompt examples
to learn from, like pairs of images and labels, termed in-context examples, based on which query
samples are inferred. This mimics how humans learn with the guidance. Using this method, VFMs
can take lots of different tasks, like understanding point clouds [6], editing images [29] , as well as
multi-modal inference [34], even if they were not trained specifically for those tasks.
The main challenge of VICL is picking the best in-context example that matches the query images, so
the VFM can perform well. Empirically, we have found that randomly picking an example does not
always work well, while a carefully selected example can really boost performance, as observed in
These authors contributed equally to this work. Q Corresponding author.
Dr. Fu is with School of Data Science in Fudan, Fudan ISTBI—ZJNU Algorithm Centre for Brain-inspired
Intelligence, Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and Technology Innovation Center of
Calligraphy and Painting Digital Generation, Ministry of Culture and Tourism, China. Dr. Xu is now with
Tencent Youtulab.
*

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

