MiraData: A Large-Scale Video Dataset with
Long Durations and Structured Captions

Xuan Ju1,2∗ , Yiming Gao1∗ , Zhaoyang Zhang1†∗ , Ziyang Yuan1 , Xintao Wang1 ,
Ailing Zeng2 , Yu Xiong2 , Qiang Xu2 , Ying Shan1
https://github.com/mira-space/MiraData
Ⅲ. Stitching (w/ 4 models)

Ⅳ. Selection (w/ 4 aspects)

Frames in Adjacent Clips

Color?

Too Bright/Dark

Ⅴ. Captioning
8 Frames in One Clips

…
Same Scene?
Qwen-VL-Chat

Panda-70M
Captioning Model

Aesthetic?

&

Ugly Videos

① Short Caption

LLaVA

…

OR

Motion?

Similar Feature?

Weak Motion

ImageBind
&
DINOv2

(a) Original Video

(b) Short Clips

…

Ⅰ. Manually Collected YouTube Videos

Ⅱ. Splitting

(c) Long Clips

NSFW?

Explicit Content

② Dense Caption
③ Main Object
④ Background
⑤ Style
⑥ Camera

(d) High-Quality Clips (e) Structured Captions

① Short Caption: A view of a city street with a bridge in the background.
② Dense Caption: The video presents a panoramic journey through a city street …(77 words)… movement from a
commercial zone towards a waterfront area, with the bridge becoming increasingly prominent in the view.
③ Main Object Caption: There are no main subjects such as people or animals …(60 words)… bridge as a focal point.
④ Background Caption: Cityscape that includes a mix of architectural styles, from red-brick …(49 words)…. sunlight.
⑤ Camera Caption: Smooth and appears to be tracking shot moving …(56 words)…. central element in later frames.
⑥ Style Caption: Realistic with clear, bright, and high-contrast depiction of an urban environment during a sunny day.
1

Figure 1: Video collection and annotation pipeline. An example shown at bottom.

Abstract
Sora’s high-motion intensity and long consistent videos have significantly impacted
the field of video generation, attracting unprecedented attention. However, existing
publicly available datasets are inadequate for generating Sora-like videos, as they
mainly contain short videos with low motion intensity and brief captions. To address these issues, we propose MiraData, a high-quality video dataset that surpasses
previous ones in video duration, caption detail, motion strength, and visual quality.
We curate MiraData from diverse, manually selected sources and meticulously
process the data to obtain semantically consistent clips. GPT-4V is employed to
annotate structured captions, providing detailed descriptions from four different
perspectives along with a summarized dense caption. To better assess temporal
consistency and motion intensity in video generation, we introduce MiraBench,
which enhances existing benchmarks by adding 3D consistency and tracking-based
motion strength metrics. MiraBench includes 150 evaluation prompts and 17 metrics covering temporal consistency, motion strength, 3D consistency, visual quality,
text-video alignment, and distribution similarity. To demonstrate the utility and
effectiveness of MiraData, we conduct experiments using our DiT-based video
generation model, MiraDiT. The experimental results on MiraBench demonstrate
the superiority of MiraData, especially in motion strength.

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

∗

Equal contribution. † Project Lead. 1 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG. 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong.

Submitted to the 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

