Maia-2: A Unified Model for Human-AI Alignment in
Chess
Zhenwei Tang
University of Toronto
josephtang@cs.toronto.edu
Reid McIlroy-Young
Harvard University
reidmcy@seas.harvard.edu

Difan Jiao
University of Toronto
difanjiao@cs.toronto.edu

Jon Kleinberg
Cornell University
kleinberg@cornell.edu

Siddhartha Sen
Microsoft Research
sidsen@microsoft.com

Ashton Anderson
University of Toronto
ashton@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
There are an increasing number of domains in which artificial intelligence (AI)
systems both surpass human ability and accurately model human behavior. This
introduces the possibility of algorithmically-informed teaching in these domains
through more relatable AI partners and deeper insights into human decision-making.
Critical to achieving this goal, however, is coherently modeling human behavior
at various skill levels. Chess is an ideal model system for conducting research
into this kind of human-AI alignment, with its rich history as a pivotal testbed
for AI research, mature superhuman AI systems like AlphaZero, and precise
measurements of skill via chess rating systems. Previous work in modeling human
decision-making in chess uses completely independent models to capture human
style at different skill levels, meaning they lack coherence in their ability to adapt
to the full spectrum of human improvement and are ultimately limited in their
effectiveness as AI partners and teaching tools. In this work, we propose a unified
modeling approach for human-AI alignment in chess that coherently captures
human style across different skill levels and directly captures how people improve.
Recognizing the complex, non-linear nature of human learning, we introduce a
skill-aware attention mechanism to dynamically integrate players’ strengths with
encoded chess positions, enabling our model to be sensitive to evolving player skill.
Our experimental results demonstrate that this unified framework significantly
enhances the alignment between AI and human players across a diverse range of
expertise levels, paving the way for deeper insights into human decision-making
and AI-guided teaching tools. Our implementation is available here.

1

Introduction

There are an increasing number of domains in which artificial intelligence (AI) systems both surpass
human ability and accurately model human behavior. This combination of machine mastery over
a domain and computational understanding of human behavior in it introduces the possibility of
algorithmically-informed teaching and learning. AI-powered aids could guide people along reliable
and efficient improvement paths, synthesized from their knowledge of both human trajectories and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

