Revisiting Differentially Private ReLU Regression

Meng Ding
University at Buffalo
Shaowei Wang
Guangzhou University

Mingxi Lei
University at Buffalo
Di Wang∗
KAUST

Liyang Zhu
KAUST
Jinhui Xu∗
University at Buffalo

Abstract
As one of the most fundamental non-convex learning problems, ReLU regression
under differential privacy (DP) constraints, especially in high-dimensional settings,
remains a challenging area in privacy-preserving machine learning. Existing results are limited to the assumptions of bounded norm ∥x∥2 ≤ 1, which becomes
stringent and strong with increasing data dimensionality. In this work, we revisit
the problem of DP ReLU regression in overparameterized regimes. We propose
two innovative algorithms, DP-GLMtron and DP-TAGLMtron, that outperform
the conventional DPSGD. DP-GLMtron is based on a generalized linear model
perceptron approach, integrating adaptive clipping and Gaussian mechanism for
enhanced privacy. To overcome
p the constraints of small privacy budgets in DPe 1/N ) where N is the sample size, we introduce
GLMtron, represented by O(
DP-TAGLMtron, which utilizes a tree aggregation protocol to balance privacy and
utility effectively, showing that DP-TAGLMtron achieves comparable performance
with only an additional factor of O(log N ) in the utility upper bound. Moreover,
our theoretical analysis extends beyond Gaussian-like data distributions to settings
with eigenvalue decay, showing how data distribution impacts learning in high dimensions. Notably, our findings suggest that the utility bound could be independent
of the dimension d, even when d ≫ N . Experiments on synthetic and real-world
datasets also validate our results.

1

Introduction

Protecting individual privacy in data analysis has emerged as a critical concern. In light of the vast
quantities of personal and sensitive information involved, traditional methods of ensuring privacy
are encountering significant challenges. Differential Privacy (DP), introduced by [13], has gained
widespread recognition as a method for preserving privacy by adding a controlled amount of random
noise to the data or query responses, thereby effectively concealing the details of any individual.
Differentially Private Stochastic Optimization (DP-SO) and its empirical form, Differentially Private
Empirical Risk Minimization (DP-ERM), are foundational models extensively studied in the DP
community. Although there is a substantial body of research on DP-SO and DP-ERM with convex
loss functions [10, 46, 7, 16, 35, 37, 6, 9, 26, 36, 38, 39], the understanding of nonconvex optimization
in a DP context remains limited. Recent efforts have developed private algorithms with established
proven utility bounds for differentially private nonconvex optimization [51, 46, 43, 52, 8, 47].
However, most of the current work employs the gradient norm of the population risk function as
a measurement instead of excess population risk, commonly used in convex scenarios. Recently,
[33] comprehensively studied different instances of non-convex learning, such as generalized linear
∗

Correspondence to: Di Wang <di.wang@kaust.edu.sa>, Jinhui Xu <jinhui@buffalo.edu>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

