Self-Refining Diffusion Samplers:
Enabling Parallelization via Parareal Iterations

Nikil Roashan Selvam
Amil Merchant
Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{nrs,amil,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In diffusion models, samples are generated through an iterative refinement process,
requiring hundreds of sequential model evaluations. Several recent methods have
introduced approximations (fewer discretization steps or distillation) to trade off
speed at the cost of sample quality. In contrast, we introduce Self-Refining Diffusion Samplers (SRDS) that retain sample quality and can improve latency at the cost
of additional parallel compute. We take inspiration from the Parareal algorithm, a
popular numerical method for parallel-in-time integration of differential equations.
In SRDS, a quick but rough estimate of a sample is first created and then iteratively
refined in parallel through Parareal iterations. SRDS is not only guaranteed to
accurately solve the ODE and converge to the serial solution but also benefits
from parallelization across the diffusion trajectory, enabling batched inference
and pipelining. As we demonstrate for pre-trained diffusion models, the early
convergence of this refinement procedure drastically reduces the number of steps
required to produce a sample, speeding up generation for instance by up to 1.7x on
a 25-step StableDiffusion-v2 benchmark and up to 4.3x on longer trajectories.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models based on diffusion processes have showcased the capability to produce
high-fidelity samples in a wide-range of applications [28, 11, 39, 27]. From their origins in image
and audio generation [31, 33, 10], diffusion models have enabled robotic applications as well as
scientific discovery via drug design [1]. Despite this promise, sampling from diffusion models can
still be prohibitively slow. Early Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models [10] required a thousand
sequential model evaluations (steps), and state-of-the-art models such as StableDiffusion [27] can
still require up to 100s of iterations for high-quality generations. This large number of sampling
steps leads to high-latencies associated with diffusion models, limiting applications such as real-time
image or music editing and trajectory planning in robotics [13, 12].
As sampling involves solving an ordinary differential equation (ODE), a prominent body of research
— including works such as Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM, [32]), Diffusion Exponential
Integrator Sampler (DEIS, [42]), and DPM-Solver [19] — has tried to reduce the number of model
evaluations required by introducing various approximations. For example, progressive distillation
[29] requires re-training models to approximate the solution to the ODE at larger timesteps. However,
such approaches trade-off speed at the cost of sample quality.
In this work, we instead take an orthogonal approach: we focus on additional parallel compute and
show how this can be used to reduce latencies while still providing accurate solutions to the original
ODE, thereby preserving sample quality. Recently Shih et al. [30] leveraged a parallel-in-time
integration method to introduce the first highly-parallelizable algorithm for diffusion model sampling.
The presented ParaDiGMs algorithm builds on Picard iterations [26] to perform denoising steps
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

