Continuous Spatiotemporal Events Decoupling
through Spike-based Bayesian Computation

Yajing Zheng1B Jiyuan Zhang1 Zhaofei Yu1,2B Tiejun Huang1,2
1
State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{yj.zheng,yuzf12,tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn
jyzhang@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Numerous studies have demonstrated that the cognitive processes of the human
brain can be modeled using the Bayes theorem for probabilistic inference of the
external world. Spiking neural networks (SNNs), capable of performing Bayesian
computation with greater physiological interpretability, offer a novel approach
to distributed information processing in the cortex. However, applying these
models to real-world scenarios to harness the advantages of brain-like computation
remains a challenge. Recently, bio-inspired sensors with high dynamic range and
ultra-high temporal resolution have been widely used in extreme vision scenarios.
Event streams, generated by various types of motion, represent spatiotemporal
data. Inferring motion targets from these streams without prior knowledge remains
a difficult task. The Bayesian inference-based Expectation-Maximization (EM)
framework has proven effective for motion segmentation in event streams, allowing
for decoupling without prior information about the motion or its source. This
work demonstrates that Bayesian computation based on spiking neural networks
can decouple event streams of different motions. The Winner-Take-All (WTA)
circuits in the constructed network implement an equivalent E-step, while Spike
Timing Dependent Plasticity (STDP) achieves an equivalent optimization in the
M-step. Through theoretical analysis and experiments, we show that STDP-based
learning can maximize the contrast of warped events under mixed motion models.
Experimental results show that the constructed spiking network can effectively
segment the motion contained in event streams.

1

Introduction

Bayesian computation is a fundamental concept in statistics, machine learning, and computational
neuroscience [35, 3]. The Bayesian brain hypothesis suggests that the brain functions as a probabilistic
generative model, simultaneously inferring hidden causes of sensory inputs and refining its model
parameters [22, 8, 21]. Bayesian computation requires a generative model to predict observations,
formulated as the joint probability P (x, y) of observations x and hidden states y. This joint probability
can be decomposed into the prior P (y) and the likelihood P (x|y), which are combined using the
Bayes theorem to update the before a posterior probability P (y|x).
The brain’s inferential processes use probabilistic models to represent and update perceptions based
on new sensory input, framing perception as an active test of predictions against sensory data [11, 34].
B

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

