Rethinking Out-of-Distribution Detection on
Imbalanced Data Distribution
Kai Liu1,2∗, Zhihang Fu2†, Sheng Jin2 , Chao Chen2 , Ze Chen2 ,
Rongxin Jiang1†, Fan Zhou1 , Yaowu Chen1 , Jieping Ye2
1

Zhejiang University,

2

Alibaba Cloud

Abstract
Detecting and rejecting unknown out-of-distribution (OOD) samples is critical for
deployed neural networks to void unreliable predictions. In real-world scenarios,
however, the efficacy of existing OOD detection methods is often impeded by the
inherent imbalance of in-distribution (ID) data, which causes significant performance decline. Through statistical observations, we have identified two common
challenges faced by different OOD detectors: misidentifying tail class ID samples
as OOD, while erroneously predicting OOD samples as head class from ID. To
explain this phenomenon, we introduce a generalized statistical framework, termed
ImOOD, to formulate the OOD detection problem on imbalanced data distribution.
Consequently, the theoretical analysis reveals that there exists a class-aware bias
item between balanced and imbalanced OOD detection, which contributes to the
performance gap. Building upon this finding, we present a unified training-time
regularization technique to mitigate the bias and boost imbalanced OOD detectors across architecture designs. Our theoretically grounded method translates
into consistent improvements on the representative CIFAR10-LT, CIFAR100-LT,
and ImageNet-LT benchmarks against several state-of-the-art OOD detection approaches. Code is available at https://github.com/alibaba/imood.

1

Introduction

Identifying and rejecting unknown samples during models’ deployments, aka OOD detection, has
garnered significant attention and witnessed promising advancements in recent years [57, 5, 41,
48, 30]. Nevertheless, most advanced OOD detection methods are designed and evaluated in ideal
settings with category-balanced in-distribution (ID) data. However, in practical scenarios, long-tailed
class distribution (a typical imbalance problem) not only limits classifiers’ capability [7], but also
causes a substantial performance decline for OOD detectors [51].
As Wang et al. [51] reveal, a naive combination of long-tailed image cognition [39] and general
OOD detection [20] techniques cannot simply mitigate this issue, and several efforts have been
applied to study the joint imbalanced OOD detection problem [51, 22, 45]. They mainly attribute
the performance degradation to misidentifying samples from tail classes as OOD (due to the lack of
training data), and concentrate on improving the discriminability for tail classes and out-of-distribution
samples [51, 55]. Whereas, we argue that the confusion between tail class and OOD samples presents
only one aspect of the imbalance problem arising from the long-tailed data distribution.
To comprehensively understand the imbalance issue, we investigate a wide range of representative
OOD detection methods (i.e., OE [20], Energy [32], and PASCL [51]) on the CIFAR10-LT dataset [8].
For each model, we statistic the distribution of wrongly detected ID samples and wrongly detected
* Work done during Kai Liu’s research internship at Alibaba Cloud. Email: kail@zju.edu.cn.
†

Corresponding authors. Email: rongxinj@zju.edu.cn, zhihang.fzh@alibaba-inc.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

