Understanding Transformers via N -gram Statistics

Timothy Nguyen
Google DeepMind
timothycnguyen@google.com

Abstract
Transformer based large-language models (LLMs) display extreme proficiency with
language yet a precise understanding of how they work remains elusive. One way
of demystifying transformer predictions would be to describe how they depend on
their context in terms of simple template functions. This paper takes a first step in
this direction by considering families of functions (i.e. rules) formed out of simple
N -gram based statistics of the training data. By studying how well these rulesets
approximate transformer predictions, we obtain a variety of novel discoveries: a
simple method to detect overfitting during training without using a holdout set, a
quantitative measure of how transformers progress from learning simple to more
complex statistical rules over the course of training, a model-variance criterion
governing when transformer predictions tend to be described by N -gram rules, and
insights into how well transformers can be approximated by N -gram rulesets in
the limit where these rulesets become increasingly complex. In this latter direction,
we find that for 79% and 68% of LLM next-token distributions on TinyStories and
Wikipedia, respectively, their top-1 predictions agree with those provided by our
N -gram rulesets.

1

Introduction

This paper is an attempt to answer the following
Question: How does a transformer-based large language model (LLM) make use of its context when
predicting the next token?
Our approach proceeds via studying the statistical properties of training data. This is perhaps the
most natural place to start even though it is not exhaustive (e.g. it does not include in-context learning
[5]). The reasons to understand LLM behavior in terms of the statistics of their training data are
plenty. First, the functional form of how LLMs use their training data is not well-understood (though
there has been progress on understanding memorization [22, 6]). Second, the over-reliance of LLMs
on training data statistics leads to brittleness (e.g. the “reversal curse" [3]) and the perpetuation of
dataset biases [12]. Understanding the nature of this statistical dependence can lead to improved and
more informed dataset curation and training methods. Finally, in various scenarios, the performance
of LLMs on downstream tasks are found to be correlated with frequency of relevant training data
[26, 10, 16, 17]. A better understanding of this phenomenon would allow better steering of models
towards desired performance levels.
We can think of the complexity of an LLM next token prediction (regarded as a probability distribution
over tokens) along two axes: form and selection. Form refers to the functional form of the prediction
as a function of the context, e.g. whether the prediction is some explicit function of associated
training data statistics (see Figure 1). Selection refers to which functional form, chosen from a set
of functional templates, suitably describes the transformer prediction (supposing the choice set is
sufficiently rich). As a first nontrivial step, one might hope that an approximate model for an LLM
is that each of its next token predictions can be roughly described by simple statistical rules from
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

