MAGIS: LLM-Based Multi-Agent Framework
for GitHub Issue ReSolution

Wei Tao
Fudan University
wtao18@fudan.edu.cn
Yanlin Wang
Sun Yat-sen University
wangylin36@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Yucheng Zhou
University of Macau
yucheng.zhou@connect.um.edu.mo
Wenqiang Zhang ∗
Fudan University
wqzhang@fudan.edu.cn

Hongyu Zhang
Chongqing University
hyzhang@cqu.edu.cn

Yu Cheng ∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
chengyu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
In software development, resolving the emergent issues within GitHub repositories
is a complex challenge that involves not only the incorporation of new code but
also the maintenance of existing code. Large Language Models (LLMs) have
shown promise in code generation but face difficulties in resolving Github issues,
particularly at the repository level. To overcome this challenge, we empirically
study the reason why LLMs fail to resolve GitHub issues and analyze the major
factors. Motivated by the empirical findings, we propose a novel LLM-based MultiAgent framework for GitHub Issue reSolution, MAGIS, consisting of four agents
customized for software evolution: Manager, Repository Custodian, Developer, and
Quality Assurance Engineer agents. This framework leverages the collaboration of
various agents in the planning and coding process to unlock the potential of LLMs
to resolve GitHub issues. In experiments, we employ the SWE-bench benchmark
to compare MAGIS with popular LLMs, including GPT-3.5, GPT-4, and Claude2. MAGIS can resolve 13.94% GitHub issues, significantly outperforming the
baselines. Specifically, MAGIS achieves an eight-fold increase in resolved ratio
over the direct application of GPT-4, the advanced LLM.

1

Introduction

In real-world software development, the code repository for a project is rarely set in stone. Highquality and popular software always evolves to address emergent bugs or new requirements. On
platforms such as GitHub [21], issues typically signify the requirement for software evolution. However, addressing these issues poses significant challenges, as it requires implementing the code change
across the entire repository and maintaining the existing functionality while integrating new capabilities. For example, django, a framework for over 1.6M projects has 34K issues [19]. Consequently,
resolving GitHub issues remains a significant challenge across academia and industry [27, 5].
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a variety of
tasks [8], including code generation and code understanding [64, 47]. Specifically, LLMs excel in
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

