Can Transformers Smell Like Humans?
Farzaneh Taleb
Department of Intelligent Systems
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
farzantn@kth.se

Miguel Vasco
Department of Intelligent Systems
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
miguelsv@kth.se

Antônio H. Ribeiro
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University
Uppsala, Sweden
antonio.horta.ribeiro@it.uu.se

Mårten Björkman
Department of Intelligent Systems
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
celle@kth.se

Danica Kragic
Department of Intelligent Systems
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
dani@kth.se

Abstract
The human brain encodes stimuli from the environment into representations that
form a sensory perception of the world. Despite recent advances in understanding
visual and auditory perception, olfactory perception remains an under-explored
topic in the machine learning community due to the lack of large-scale datasets
annotated with labels of human olfactory perception. In this work, we ask the
question of whether pre-trained transformer models of chemical structures encode representations that are aligned with human olfactory perception, i.e., can
transformers smell like humans? We demonstrate that representations encoded
from transformers pre-trained on general chemical structures are highly aligned
with human olfactory perception. We use multiple datasets and different types of
perceptual representations to show that the representations encoded by transformer
models are able to predict: (i) labels associated with odorants provided by experts;
(ii) continuous ratings provided by human participants with respect to pre-defined
descriptors; and (iii) similarity ratings between odorants provided by human participants. Finally, we evaluate the extent to which this alignment is associated with
physicochemical features of odorants known to be relevant for olfactory decoding.

1

Introduction

The human brain receives sensory input from the environment and encodes it into a high-dimensional
representation space, forming a perception of the world [1]. Recent studies have significantly
improved our understanding of the underlying mechanisms of visual, linguistic, and auditory perception [2–4]. Indeed, there is a significant level of alignment between human response (from neuron to
behavior) and activations of deep neural networks when provided with the same stimuli [5–14].
Despite these recent advances, human olfactory perception remains an under-explored topic. There is
no single organizing principle that determines the dimensions of odor space, making the characteriza38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

