Adaptive Q-Aid for Conditional Supervised Learning
in Offline Reinforcement Learning

Jeonghye Kim1 , Suyoung Lee1 , Woojun Kim2 , Youngchul Sung1∗
1
KAIST 2 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) has progressed with return-conditioned supervised learning (RCSL), but its lack of stitching ability remains a limitation.
We introduce Q-Aided Conditional Supervised Learning (QCS), which effectively
combines the stability of RCSL with the stitching capability of Q-functions. By
analyzing Q-function over-generalization, which impairs stable stitching, QCS
adaptively integrates Q-aid into RCSL’s loss function based on trajectory return.
Empirical results show that QCS significantly outperforms RCSL and valuebased methods, consistently achieving or exceeding the maximum trajectory returns across diverse offline RL benchmarks. The project page is available at
https://beanie00.com/publications/qcs.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) is a vital
framework for acquiring decision-making skills
from fixed datasets, particularly when online interactions are impractical. This is especially relevant in fields such as robotics, autonomous driving, and healthcare, where the costs and risks of
real-time experimentation are significant.

QCS Policy Training
RCSL
Optimal

Loss Function
RCSL

Offline Dataset

Sub-optimal

Q-Aid

Q-Aid

Loss Function

A promising approach in offline RL is return- Figure 1: Conceptual idea of QCS: Follow RCSL
conditioned supervised learning (RCSL) [10, 12, when learning from optimal trajectories where it
20]. By framing offline RL as sequence model- predicts actions confidently but the Q-function
ing tasks, RCSL allows an agent to leverage past may stitch incorrectly. Conversely, refer to the Qexperiences and condition on the target outcome, function when learning from sub-optimal trajectofacilitating the generation of future actions that ries where RCSL is less certain but the Q-function
are likely to achieve desired outcomes. This is likely accurate.
method builds on recent advancements in supervised learning (SL) [41, 9, 11, 30], and thus benefits from the inherent stability and scalability of
SL. However, RCSL is significantly limited by its lack of ‘stitching ability’, the ability to combine
suboptimal trajectory segments to form better overall trajectories [13, 27, 53, 16, 7, 58]. As a result,
its effectiveness is restricted to the best trajectories within the dataset.
Conversely, the Q-function possesses the ability to stitch together multiple sub-optimal trajectories, dissecting and reassembling them into an optimal trajectory through dynamic programming.
Therefore, to address the weakness of RCSL, prior works have attempted to enhance stitching ability
through the Q-function [53, 16]. However, these prior works employ the Q-function as a conditioning factor for RCSL and do not fully leverage the Q-function’s stitching ability, resulting in either
negligible performance improvements or even reduced performance. The primary challenge lies
∗

Correspondence to Youngchul Sung.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

