SureMap: Simultaneous mean estimation
for single-task and multi-task disaggregated evaluation

Mikhail Khodak∗
Princeton University
mkhodak@cs.cmu.edu

Lester Mackey, Alexandra Chouldechova, Miroslav Dudík
Microsoft Research
{lmackey,alexandrac,mdudik}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Disaggregated evaluation—estimation of performance of a machine learning
model on different subpopulations—is a core task when assessing performance
and group-fairness of AI systems. A key challenge is that evaluation data is scarce,
and subpopulations arising from intersections of attributes (e.g., race, sex, age) are
often tiny. Today, it is common for multiple clients to procure the same AI model
from a model developer, and the task of disaggregated evaluation is faced by each
customer individually. This gives rise to what we call the multi-task disaggregated
evaluation problem, wherein multiple clients seek to conduct a disaggregated
evaluation of a given model in their own data setting (task). In this work we develop
a disaggregated evaluation method called SureMap that has high estimation
accuracy for both multi-task and single-task disaggregated evaluations of blackbox
models. SureMap’s efficiency gains come from (1) transforming the problem into
structured simultaneous Gaussian mean estimation and (2) incorporating external
data, e.g., from the AI system creator or from their other clients. Our method
combines maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation using a well-chosen prior together with cross-validation-free tuning via Stein’s unbiased risk estimate (SURE).
We evaluate SureMap on disaggregated evaluation tasks in multiple domains,
observing significant accuracy improvements over several strong competitors.

1

Introduction

Evaluation is a key challenge in modern AI, with much effort spent deciding what metrics to measure,
with which methods, and on what data. This challenge is especially acute in fairness assessment,
which requires not only high-quality data to run a model and score its outputs but also demographic information for defining groups. Due to the high cost of obtaining high-quality evaluation data, the issue
of sample complexity—sample size needed to get a good performance estimate—remains salient, especially when we want to release not just one overall measure but instead to output a disaggregated evaluation that captures variation among demographic subpopulations of the data [Barocas et al., 2021].
For instance, we might want to assess group fairness by examining the variation in performance across
groups of users defined by intersections of the demographic attributes age, race, and sex. The naive approach of independently evaluating each group’s performance on its own data can fail because the sample sizes of intersectional groups rapidly decrease as we consider more attributes [Herlihy et al., 2024].
Recent work has shown how to improve upon naive methods by combining data from multiple subpopulations to inform their individual performance estimates [Miller et al., 2021, Herlihy et al., 2024].
In today’s technology landscape it is common for multiple clients to procure the same model (e.g., an
automated speech recognition or language model) from an AI developer, with each client performing
a disaggregated evaluation of the same model on their own data. We refer to this problem as the
multi-task disaggregated evaluation. We formalize and study this problem, showing that one can
improve the disaggregated evaluations of individual clients by using multi-task data in the form of
∗

Work done in part while at Microsoft Research and supported in part by a CMU TCS Presidential Fellowship.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

