Entropy-regularized Diffusion Policy with
Q-Ensembles for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Ruoqi Zhang∗ Ziwei Luo∗ Jens Sjölund Thomas B. Schön Per Mattsson
Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University
{ruoqi.zhang,ziwei.luo,jens.sjolund,thomas.schon,per.mattsson}@it.uu.se

Abstract
Diffusion policy has shown a strong ability to express complex action distributions
in offline reinforcement learning (RL). However, it suffers from overestimating
Q-value functions on out-of-distribution (OOD) data points due to the offline
dataset limitation. To address it, this paper proposes a novel entropy-regularized
diffusion policy and takes into account the confidence of the Q-value prediction
with Q-ensembles. At the core of our diffusion policy is a mean-reverting stochastic
differential equation (SDE) that transfers the action distribution into a standard
Gaussian form and then samples actions conditioned on the environment state with
a corresponding reverse-time process. We show that the entropy of such a policy
is tractable and that can be used to increase the exploration of OOD samples in
offline RL training. Moreover, we propose using the lower confidence bound of
Q-ensembles for pessimistic Q-value function estimation. The proposed approach
demonstrates state-of-the-art performance across a range of tasks in the D4RL
benchmarks, significantly improving upon existing diffusion-based policies. The
code is available at https://github.com/ruoqizzz/entropy-offlineRL.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL), also known as batch RL [29] focuses on learning optimal
policies from a previously collected dataset without further active interactions with the environment
[31]. Although offline RL offers a promising avenue for deploying RL in real-world settings where
online exploration is infeasible, a key challenge lies in deriving effective policies from fixed datasets,
which usually are diversified and sub-optimal. The direct application of standard policy improvement
approaches is hindered by the distribution shift problem [10]. Previous works mainly address this
issue by either regularizing the learned policy close to the behavior policy [10, 9] or by making
conservative updates for Q-networks [28, 26].
Diffusion models have rapidly become a prominent class of highly expressive policies in offline
RL [44, 49]. While this expressiveness is beneficial when modeling complex behaviors, it also means
that the model has a higher capacity to overfit the noise or specific idiosyncrasies in the training data.
To address this, existing work introduce Q-learning guidance and regard the diffusion loss as a special
regularizer adding to the policy improvement process [44, 17, 22]. Such a framework has achieved
impressive results on offline RL tasks. However, its performance is limited by pre-collected datasets
(or behavior policies) and the learning suffers severe overestimation of Q-value functions on unseen
state-action samples [31].
One promising approach is to increase exploration for out-of-distribution (OOD) actions, with the
hope that the RL agent can be more robust to diverse Q-values and estimation errors [50]. Previous
online RL algorithms achieve this by maximizing the entropy of pre-defined tractable policies such
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

