Vista: A Generalizable Driving World Model with
High Fidelity and Versatile Controllability

Shenyuan Gao1,2 Jiazhi Yang2 Li Chen2,5 Kashyap Chitta3,4 Yihang Qiu2
Andreas Geiger3,4† Jun Zhang1† Hongyang Li2,5†
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 OpenDriveLab at Shanghai AI Lab
3
University of Tübingen 4 Tübingen AI Center 5 University of Hong Kong
Code and model: github.com/OpenDriveLab/Vista
Demo page: opendrivelab.com/Vista

Abstract
World models can foresee the outcomes of different actions, which is of paramount
importance for autonomous driving. Nevertheless, existing driving world models
still have limitations in generalization to unseen environments, prediction fidelity of
critical details, and action controllability for flexible application. In this paper, we
present Vista, a generalizable driving world model with high fidelity and versatile
controllability. Based on a systematic diagnosis of existing methods, we introduce
several key ingredients to address these limitations. To accurately predict real-world
dynamics at high resolution, we propose two novel losses to promote the learning
of moving instances and structural information. We also devise an effective latent
replacement approach to inject historical frames as priors for coherent long-horizon
rollouts. For action controllability, we incorporate a versatile set of controls from
high-level intentions (command, goal point) to low-level maneuvers (trajectory,
angle, and speed) through an efficient learning strategy. After large-scale training,
the capabilities of Vista can seamlessly generalize to different scenarios. Extensive
experiments on multiple datasets show that Vista outperforms the most advanced
general-purpose video generator in over 70% of comparisons and surpasses the
best-performing driving world model by 55% in FID and 27% in FVD. Moreover,
for the first time, we utilize the capacity of Vista itself to establish a generalizable
reward for real-world action evaluation without accessing the ground truth actions.

1

Introduction

Driven by scalable learning techniques, autonomous driving has made encouraging strides over the
past few years [18, 58, 135]. However, intricate and out-of-distribution situations are still intractable
for state-of-the-art techniques [83]. One promising solution lies in world models [57, 76], which infer
the possible future states of the world from historical observations and alternative actions, in turn
assessing the feasibility of such actions. They hold the potential to reason with uncertainty and avoid
catastrophic errors [54, 76, 127], thereby promoting generalization and safety in autonomous driving.
Although a primary prospect of world models is to enable the generalization ability to novel environments, existing driving world models are still constrained by data scale [90, 125, 127, 143, 147] and
geographical coverage [54, 61]. As summarized in Table 1 and Fig. 1, they are also often confined to
low frame rates and resolutions, resulting in a loss of critical details. Furthermore, most models only
support a single control modality such as the steering angle and speed. This is insufficient to express
various action formats ranging from high-level intentions to low-level maneuvers, and incompatible
with the outputs of prevalent planning algorithms [12, 14, 21, 56, 58, 64]. In addition, generalizing
action controllability to unseen datasets is understudied. These limitations impede the applicability
of existing works, making it imperative to develop a world model that overcomes these limitations.
Primary contact to Shenyuan at sygao@connect.ust.hk

†

Equal advising.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

