Data Mixture Inference: What do BPE
Tokenizers Reveal about their Training Data?

*Jonathan Hayase♡
♡

*Alisa Liu♡ Yejin Choi♡♣ Sewoong Oh♡ Noah A. Smith♡♣
University of Washington ♣ Allen Institute for AI
{jhayase,alisaliu}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
The pretraining data of today’s strongest language models is opaque; in particular,
little is known about the proportions of various domains or languages represented.
In this work, we tackle a task which we call data mixture inference, which aims to
uncover the distributional make-up of training data. We introduce a novel attack
based on a previously overlooked source of information: byte-pair encoding (BPE)
tokenizers, used by the vast majority of modern language models. Our key insight
is that the ordered list of merge rules learned by a BPE tokenizer naturally reveals
information about the token frequencies in its training data. Given a tokenizer’s
merge list along with example data for each category of interest, we formulate a
linear program that solves for the proportion of each category in the tokenizer’s
training set. In controlled experiments, we show that our attack recovers mixture
ratios with high precision for tokenizers trained on known mixtures of natural
languages, programming languages, and data sources. We then apply our approach
to off-the-shelf tokenizers released with recent LMs. We confirm much publicly
disclosed information about these models, and also make several new inferences:
G PT-4 O and M ISTRAL N E M O’s tokenizers are much more multilingual than their
predecessors, training on 39% and 47% non-English language data, respectively;
L LAMA 3 extends G PT-3.5’s tokenizer primarily for multilingual (48%) use; G PT3.5’s and C LAUDE’s tokenizers are trained on predominantly code (∼ 60%). We
hope our work sheds light on current design practices for pretraining data, and
inspires continued research into data mixture inference for LMs.1

1

Introduction

Pretraining data is at the heart of language model development, yet it remains a trade secret for today’s
strongest models. While it has become more common for model-producing organizations to release
model parameters, they rarely share the pretraining data or important details about its construction.
In particular, little is known about the proportion of different languages, code, or data sources present
in the data; these design decisions require extensive experimentation that few organizations have the
resources to perform, and have a significant impact on the resulting LM [7, 39, 35, 38, 49, 59].
While a long line of membership inference attacks [15, 51, 43, 52, 16, 21] aim to reveal information
about the model’s pretraining data, they typically focus on testing whether particular instances or
authors contributed to the data. In this work, we tackle a different task we call data mixture inference
which, given a set of disjoint categories that cover the training data (e.g., the set of natural and
programming languages), aims to uncover each of their proportions.
*
1

Equal contribution, ordered alphabetically.
Code and detailed inferences available at https://github.com/alisawuffles/tokenizer-attack.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

