Infusing Synthetic Data with Real-World Patterns for
Zero-Shot Material State Segmentation

Sagi Eppel 1,2* , Jolina Yining Li 2* , Manuel S. Drehwald2 , Alan Aspuru-Guzik1,2
1
Vector institute, 2 University of Toronto, * Equal contributions

Abstract
Visual recognition of materials and their states is essential for understanding the
physical world, from identifying wet regions on surfaces or stains on fabrics to
detecting infected areas on plants or minerals in rocks. Collecting data that captures
this vast variability is complex due to the scattered and gradual nature of material
states. Manually annotating real-world images is constrained by cost and precision,
while synthetic data, although accurate and inexpensive, lacks real-world diversity.
This work aims to bridge this gap by infusing patterns automatically extracted
from real-world images into synthetic data. Hence, patterns collected from natural
images are used to generate and map materials into synthetic scenes. This unsupervised approach captures the complexity of the real world while maintaining
the precision and scalability of synthetic data. We also present the first comprehensive benchmark for zero-shot material state segmentation, utilizing real-world
images across a diverse range of domains, including food, soils, construction,
plants, liquids, and more, each appears in various states such as wet, dry, infected,
cooked, burned, and many others. The annotation includes partial similarity between regions with similar but not identical materials and hard segmentation of only
identical material states. This benchmark eluded top foundation models, exposing
the limitations of existing data collection methods. Meanwhile, nets trained on the
infused data performed significantly better on this and related tasks. The dataset,
code, and trained model are available at these URLs: 1, 2, 3, 4. We also share
300,000 extracted textures and SVBRDF/PBR materials to facilitate future datasets
generation at these URLs: 1,2, 3, 4.

1

Introduction

Materials and their states form a vast array of patterns and textures that define the physical and visual
world. Minerals in rocks, sediment in soil, dust on surfaces, infection on leaves, stains on fabrics,
and foam in liquids are some of these almost infinite numbers of states and patterns. Segmenting
these states in images is fundamental to the comprehension of the world and is essential for a wide
range of tasks, from cooking and cleaning to construction and laboratory work. Currently, there is no
comprehensive dataset or benchmark that addresses this general task, and even the top foundation
models perform poorly on this problem (Section 6). This work presents the first general benchmark
and datasets focused on this task, encompassing a wide range of material states and domains without
being limited to specific materials or settings[7, 59]. This includes dealing with gradual transitions
and partial similarity between states, as well as scattered shapes and fuzzy boundaries (Figure 1 top).
For the benchmark, the goal is to achieve this using real-world images taken in the wild. The goal of
the training set is to provide unlimited synthetic data that capture the complexity and variability of
the real world while not being limited to a set of procedural rules and assets. Manual annotation of
material states is highly complex from a human perspective, especially for cases with soft boundaries
and gradual transitions or sparse and scattered patterns. In specific settings, it is sometimes possible
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

