Spiking Transformer with Experts Mixture
Zhaokun Zhou1,2∗, Yijie Lu1∗, Yanhao Jia3,7 , Kaiwei Che1,2 , Jun Niu1 , Liwei
Huang4,2 , Xinyu Shi5,4 , Yuesheng Zhu1 , Guoqi Li6,2 , Zhaofei Yu5,4†, Li Yuan1,2†
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
4
School of Computer Science, Peking University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
6
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
7
Deep NeuroCognition Lab, I2R and CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) provide a sparse spike-driven mechanism which
is believed to be critical for energy-efficient deep learning. Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE), on the other side, aligns with the brain mechanism of distributed and
sparse processing, resulting in an efficient way of enhancing model capacity and
conditional computation. In this work, we consider how to incorporate SNNs’
spike-driven and MoE’s conditional computation into a unified framework. However, MoE uses softmax to get the dense conditional weights for each expert and
TopK to hard-sparsify the network, which does not fit the properties of SNNs. To
address this issue, we reformulate MoE in SNNs and introduce the Spiking Experts
Mixture Mechanism (SEMM) from the perspective of sparse spiking activation.
Both the experts and the router output spiking sequences, and their element-wise
operation makes SEMM computation spike-driven and dynamic sparse-conditional.
By developing SEMM into Spiking Transformer, the Experts Mixture Spiking Attention (EMSA) and the Experts Mixture Spiking Perceptron (EMSP) are proposed,
which performs routing allocation for head-wise and channel-wise spiking experts,
respectively. Experiments show that SEMM realizes sparse conditional computation and obtains a stable improvement on neuromorphic and static datasets with
approximate computational overhead based on the Spiking Transformer baselines.

1

Introduction

The spiking neural networks (SNNs) are regarded as the third generation of neural networks [1],
distinguished by biological plausibility [2], spike-driven characteristic, and low power consumption.
SNNs emulate the dynamics of biological neurons at a microscopic level, utilizing asynchronous
binary spikes for information transmission. The membrane potential of spiking neurons in SNNs is
only updated upon the arrival of spikes, avoiding calculations of zero values. The inherent features
make SNNs promising candidates for low-energy consumption on neuromorphic hardware, such
as TrueNorth [3] and Loihi [4]. There are lots of architectures in SNNs include Spiking Recurrent
Neural Networks [5], ResNet-like SNNs [6–9], Spiking Graph Neural Networks [10], and Spiking
Transformers [11–13]. Spiking Transformers stands at the forefront. Spikformer [11] introduces
Spiking Self-Attention (SSA). The Spike-Driven Transformer [12] introduces Spike-driven Self∗
†

Equal
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

