Uncovering the Redundancy in Graph
Self-supervised Learning Models

Zhibiao Wang1 , Xiao Wang1∗ , Haoyue Deng1 , Nian Liu2 , Shirui Pan3 , Chunming Hu1
1
Beihang University, China
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
Grifﬁth University, Australia
{wzb2321, xiao_wang, haoyue_deng, hucm}@buaa.edu.cn,
nianliu@bupt.edu.cn, s.pan@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
Graph self-supervised learning, as a powerful pre-training paradigm for Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) without labels, has received considerable attention. We
have witnessed the success of graph self-supervised learning on pre-training the
parameters of GNNs, leading many not to doubt that whether the learned GNNs
parameters are all useful. In this paper, by presenting the experimental evidence
and analysis, we surprisingly discover that the graph self-supervised learning models are highly redundant at both of neuron and layer levels, e.g., even randomly
removing 51.6% of parameters, the performance of graph self-supervised learning models still retains at least 96.2%. This discovery implies that the parameters
of graph self-supervised models can be largely reduced, making simultaneously
ﬁne-tuning both graph self-supervised learning models and prediction layers more
feasible. Therefore, we further design a novel graph pre-training and ﬁne-tuning
paradigm called SLImming DE-correlation Fine-tuning (SLIDE2 ). The effectiveness of SLIDE is veriﬁed through extensive experiments on various benchmarks,
and the performance can be even improved with fewer parameters of models in
most cases. For example, in comparison with full ﬁne-tuning GraphMAE on
Amazon-Computers dataset, even randomly reducing 40% of parameters, we can
still achieve the improvement of 0.24% and 0.27% for Micro-F1 and Macro-F1
scores respectively.

1

Introduction

Graph self-supervised learning, aiming at learning the parameters of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) without labels, has been a popular graph pre-training paradigm [1–3]. Usually, graph
self-supervised learning is naturally divided into two learning methods, i.e., graph contrastive learning [4, 5] and graph generative self-supervised learning [6, 7]. After pre-training the parameters
of self-supervised GNNs, graph self-supervised learning achieves state-of-the-art performance on a
variety of tasks by ﬁne-tuning an additional prediction layer [8, 7].
Various researches have attempted to improve and understand graph self-supervised learning from
different perspectives. For example, the graph augmentation techniques [9, 10], graph spectrum feature of graph self-supervised learning [11, 12], and others [7, 13]. Despite their remarkable achievements, little efforts have been made to understand the behavior of the learned model parameters
by graph self-supervised learning. Here, we ask: Are the model parameters all always useful? Or
∗
2

Corresponding authors.
Code available at https://github.com/zhlgg/SLIDE

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

