Make Continual Learning Stronger via C-Flat

Ang Bian∗ 1 , Wei Li∗ 1,2 , Hangjie Yuan 3,4 , Chengrong Yu1 , Mang Wang5
Zixiang Zhao6 , Aojun Lu1 , Pengliang Ji7 , Tao Feng† 2
1
Sichuan University 2 Tsinghua University 3 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
4
Zhejiang University 5 ByteDance 6 Xi’an Jiaotong University 7 Carnegie Mellon University
hj.yuan@zju.edu.cn, {ymjiii98, fengtao.hi}@gmail.com

Abstract
How to balance the learning ’sensitivity-stability’ upon new task training and
memory preserving is critical in CL to resolve catastrophic forgetting. Improving
model generalization ability within each learning phase is one solution to help
CL learning overcome the gap in the joint knowledge space. Zeroth-order loss
landscape sharpness-aware minimization is a strong training regime improving
model generalization in transfer learning compared with optimizer like SGD. It
has also been introduced into CL to improve memory representation or learning
efficiency. However, zeroth-order sharpness alone could favors sharper over flatter
minima in certain scenarios, leading to a rather sensitive minima rather than a
global optima. To further enhance learning stability, we propose a Continual
Flatness (C-Flat) method featuring a flatter loss landscape tailored for CL. C-Flat
could be easily called with only one line of code and is plug-and-play to any CL
methods. A general framework of C-Flat applied to all CL categories and a thorough
comparison with loss minima optimizer and flat minima based CL approaches is
presented in this paper, showing that our method can boost CL performance in
almost all cases. Code is available at https://github.com/WanNaa/C-Flat.
C-Flat: just a line of code suffices for its utilization.
from . . . i m p o r t C_Flat

1
2

# i n i t i a l i z e o p t i m i z e r f o r CL .
C _ F l a t _ o p t i m i z e r = C_Flat ( params , b a s e _ o p t i m i z e r , model , a r g s )

3
4

1

Introduction

Why study Continual Learning (CL)? CL is generally acknowledged as a necessary attribute for
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) [22, 55, 40, 67]. In the open world, CL holds the potential for
substantial benefits across many applications: e.g. vision model needs to learn a growing image
set [17, 61, 62], or, embodied model needs to incrementally add skills to their repertoire [12].
Challenges. A good CL model is expected to keep the memory of all seen tasks upon learning
new knowledge [22]. However, due to the limited access to previous data, the learning phase is
naturally sensitive to the current task, hence resulting in a major challenge in CL called catastrophic
forgetting [9], which refers to the drastic performance drop on past knowledge after learning new
knowledge. This learning sensitivity-stability dilemma is critical in CL, requiring model with strong
generalization ability [16] to overcome the knowledge gaps between sequentially arriving tasks.
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

