Structured Unrestricted-Rank Matrices for
Parameter Efficient Fine-tuning

Arijit Sehanobish1∗ Avinava Dubey2* Krzysztof Choromanski3,4*
Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury5* Deepali Jain3 Vikas Sindhwani3 Snigdha Chaturvedi5
1

Independent 2 Google Research 3 Google DeepMind
4
Columbia University 5 UNC Chapel Hill

Abstract
Recent efforts to scale Transformer models have been successful across a wide
range of tasks [77]. However, fine-tuning these models for downstream tasks can be
expensive, as it requires updating a large number of parameters in the Transformer
model. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) approaches have emerged as a viable
alternative that allow us to fine-tune models by updating only a small number of
parameters. In this work, we propose a general framework for parameter efficient
fine-tuning using structured unrestricted-rank matrices (SURM), which can serve
as a drop-in replacement for popular approaches such as Adapters and LoRA.
Unlike other methods like LoRA, SURMs provides more flexibility in finding the
right balance between compactness and expressiveness. This is achieved by using
low displacement rank matrices (LDRMs), which has not been used in this context
before. SURMs remain competitive with baselines, often providing significant
quality improvements while using a smaller parameter budget. SURMs achieve
5-7% accuracy gains on various image classification tasks while replacing lowrank matrices in LoRA. It also results in up to 12x reduction of the number of
parameters in adapters (with virtually no loss in quality) on the GLUE benchmark.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large-scale Transformer models have demonstrated impressive performance across a
wide range of domains, including natural language processing (NLP) [20, 8], vision [36], robotics [7],
and even multi-modal settings [81]. For many applications, a single large pre-trained model is
adapted for several downstream problems. Fine-tuning, where all the model parameters are updated,
is a popular way to adapt a pre-trained model to a new task or domain. However, fine-tuning large
models on specific downstream tasks requires significant computational resources and involves a
massive memory footprint, as each task necessitates storing its own set of parameters.
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods have emerged as the preferred methodology to adapt
pre-trained Transformers to different downstream tasks. PEFT methods often achieve performance on
par with full fine-tuning while training only a small number of parameters [80, 45]. PEFT techniques
involve either training a small subset of the model’s parameters [84, 42] or integrating small modular
layers while freezing the base model’s weights [26, 25]. There are two popular classes of methods
to inject additional parameters: (a) using small modular layers inside Transformers called adapter
layers [59], and (b) constraining the updates as low-rank matrices (LoRA) [26].
Although adapters and LoRA (including their variants) differ architecturally and conceptually, they
share a common reliance on low-rank matrices. The success of these methods has been attributed
to the low intrinsic dimensionality of the hidden representations in the pre-trained Transformer
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

