Paloma

: A Benchmark for Evaluating Language
Model Fit

Ian Magnusson♠ Akshita Bhagia♠ Valentin Hofmann♠ Luca Soldaini♠
Ananya Harsh Jha♠ Oyvind Tafjord♠ Dustin Schwenk♠ Evan Pete Walsh♠
Yanai Elazar♠♢ Kyle Lo♠ Dirk Groeneveld♠ Iz Beltagy♠ Hannaneh Hajishirzi♠♢
Noah A. Smith♠♢ Kyle Richardson♠ Jesse Dodge♠
♠
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
♢
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
{ianm,jessed}@allenai.org

Abstract
Evaluations of language models (LMs) commonly report perplexity on monolithic
data held out from training. Implicitly or explicitly, this data is composed of domains—varying distributions of language. We introduce P ERPLEXITY A NALYSIS
FOR L ANGUAGE M ODEL A SSESSMENT (PALOMA )1 , a benchmark to measure
LM fit to 546 English and code domains, instead of assuming perplexity on one
distribution extrapolates to others. We include two new datasets of the top 100
subreddits (e.g., r/depression on Reddit) and programming languages (e.g., Java
on GitHub), both sources common in contemporary LMs. With our benchmark, we
release 6 baseline 1B LMs carefully controlled to provide fair comparisons about
which pretraining corpus is best and code for others to apply those controls to
their own experiments. Our case studies demonstrate how the fine-grained results
from PALOMA surface findings such as that models pretrained without data beyond
Common Crawl exhibit anomalous gaps in LM fit to many domains or that loss is
dominated by the most frequently occurring strings in the vocabulary.

1

Introduction

Progress in AI is catalyzed by evaluations that define new ways of measuring progress (Deng et al.,
2009, Wang et al., 2018, and Wang et al., 2019, inter alia). Language models (LMs) often evaluate
LM fit as loss or perplexity [Jelinek et al., 1977] on held out training data or few traditional test
sets (Chelba et al., 2013, Merity et al., 2016, inter alia). These loss measures have been shown to
improve predictably with increases in training compute [Kaplan et al., 2020, Hoffmann et al., 2022]
and loss may predict performance on downstream tasks [Xia et al., 2022, Gadre et al., 2024, Du
et al., 2024]. However, scaling pretraining data aggregates more domains that LMs implicitly learn
to model [Diaz and Madaio, 2023, Aharoni and Goldberg, 2020]. Does rising performance lift all
data? Or do some domains capture most improvement in LM fit? How do we evaluate what language
distributions models learn from different pretraining data? What domains should studies evaluate
loss on to measure the relationship of loss and downstream performance? To answer these questions,
perplexity evaluations ought to measure LM fit to many domains, rather than extrapolating trends
from a single prescriptive mix of domains.
1

Dataset and links to code repository are available at https://paloma.allen.ai

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

