FewViewGS: Gaussian Splatting with Few View
Matching and Multi-stage Training

Ruihong Yin
University of Amsterdam
r.yin@uva.nl

Vladimir Yugay
University of Amsterdam
v.yugay@uva.nl

Sezer Karaoglu
University of Amsterdam
3DUniversum
s.karaoglu@3duniversum.com

Yue Li
University of Amsterdam
y.li6@uva.nl

Theo Gevers
University of Amsterdam
3DUniversum
th.gevers@uva.nl

Abstract
The field of novel view synthesis from images has seen rapid advancements with the
introduction of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) and more recently with 3D Gaussian
Splatting. Gaussian Splatting became widely adopted due to its efficiency and
ability to render novel views accurately. While Gaussian Splatting performs well
when a sufficient amount of training images are available, its unstructured explicit
representation tends to overfit in scenarios with sparse input images, resulting in
poor rendering performance. To address this, we present a 3D Gaussian-based
novel view synthesis method using sparse input images that can accurately render
the scene from the viewpoints not covered by the training images. We propose a
multi-stage training scheme with matching-based consistency constraints imposed
on the novel views without relying on pre-trained depth estimation or diffusion
models. This is achieved by using the matches of the available training images to
supervise the generation of the novel views sampled between the training frames
with color, geometry, and semantic losses. In addition, we introduce a locality
preserving regularization for 3D Gaussians which removes rendering artifacts by
preserving the local color structure of the scene. Evaluation on synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrates competitive or superior performance of our method in
few-shot novel view synthesis compared to existing state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Reconstruction of a 3D scene representation from sparse 2D observations that can render novel views
unseen during training has been an active field of research with wide applications in VR/AR and
navigation. Recently, neural radiance fields (NeRF) [20] utilizing differentiable volume rendering
and implicit scene representation achieved great results in novel view synthesis (NVS). The NeRF
framework was extended to the sparse-view setting (few-shot NVS) using efficient training schemes,
regularization losses, depth consistency, and image priors [11, 22, 8, 34]. While being good at
rendering, NeRFs typically take a long time to be optimized, and their rendering speed is far from
real-time which greatly limits their practical application.
3D Gaussian Splatting [13] has introduced an unstructured radiance field represented with 3D
Gaussians. Gaussians are initialized from a sparse Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [29] point cloud
and dynamically added or removed from the scene during training. With images observing a static
scene from different viewpoints, Gaussian parameters are optimized using photometric loss. This
method became widely adopted due to its training efficiency, unprecedented rendering speed, and
quality. However, the rendering performance dramatically drops when fewer images are used for
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

