Understanding Hallucinations in Diffusion Models
through Mode Interpolation

Sumukh K Aithal1

Pratyush Maini1,2
Zachary C. Lipton1
J. Zico Kolter1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
DatologyAI
{saithal, pratyus2, zlipton, zkolter}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Colloquially speaking, image generation models based upon diffusion processes are
frequently said to exhibit “hallucinations”—samples that could never occur in the
training data. But where do such hallucinations come from? In this paper, we study
a particular failure mode in diffusion models, which we term mode interpolation.
Specifically, we find that diffusion models smoothly “interpolate” between nearby
data modes in the training set to generate samples that are completely outside
the support of the original training distribution; this phenomenon leads diffusion
models to generate artifacts that never existed in real data (i.e., hallucinations). We
systematically study the reasons for, and the manifestation of this phenomenon.
Through experiments on 1D and 2D Gaussians, we show how a discontinuous loss
landscape in the diffusion model’s decoder leads to a region where any smooth
approximation will cause such hallucinations. Through experiments on artificial
datasets with various shapes, we show how hallucination leads to the generation
of combinations of shapes that never existed. We extend the validity of mode
interpolation in real-world datasets by explaining the unexpected generation of
images with additional or missing fingers similar to those produced by popular textto-image generative models. Finally, we show that diffusion models in fact know
when they go out of support and hallucinate. This is captured by the high variance
in the trajectory of the generated sample towards the final few backward sampling
steps. Using a simple metric to capture this variance, we can remove over 95% of
hallucinations at generation time while retaining 96% of in-support samples in the
synthetic datasets. We conclude our exploration by showing the implications of
such hallucination (and its removal) on the collapse (and stabilization) of recursive
training on synthetic data with experiments on MNIST and a 2D Gaussians dataset.
We release our code at https://github.com/locuslab/diffusion-model-hallucination.

1

Introduction

The high quality and diversity of images generated by diffusion models [15, 38] have made them
the de facto standard generative models across various tasks including video generation [6], image
inpainting [24], image super-resolution [11], data augmentation [44], and others. As a result of their
uptake, large volumes of synthetic data are rapidly proliferating on the internet. The next generation of
generative models will likely be exposed to many machine-generated instances during their training,
making it crucial to understand ways in which diffusion models fail to model the true underlying data
distribution. Like other generative model families, much research has been done to understand the
failure modes of diffusion models as well. Past works have identified, and attempted to explain and
remedy failures such as, training instabilities [17], memorization [7, 39] and inaccurate modeling of
objects such as hands and legs [4, 23, 28].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

