DynaMo: In-Domain Dynamics Pretraining
for Visuo-Motor Control
Zichen Jeff Cui∗ Hengkai Pan

Aadhithya Iyer

Siddhant Haldar

Lerrel Pinto

New York University

Abstract
Imitation learning has proven to be a powerful tool for training complex visuomotor policies. However, current methods often require hundreds to thousands
of expert demonstrations to handle high-dimensional visual observations. A key
reason for this poor data efficiency is that visual representations are predominantly
either pretrained on out-of-domain data or trained directly through a behavior
cloning objective. In this work, we present DynaMo, a new in-domain, selfsupervised method for learning visual representations. Given a set of expert
demonstrations, we jointly learn a latent inverse dynamics model and a forward
dynamics model over a sequence of image embeddings, predicting the next frame
in latent space, without augmentations, contrastive sampling, or access to ground
truth actions. Importantly, DynaMo does not require any out-of-domain data such
as Internet datasets or cross-embodied datasets. On a suite of six simulated and real
environments, we show that representations learned with DynaMo significantly
improve downstream imitation learning performance over prior self-supervised
learning objectives, and pretrained representations. Gains from using DynaMo
hold across policy classes such as Behavior Transformer, Diffusion Policy, MLP,
and nearest neighbors. Finally, we ablate over key components of DynaMo and
measure its impact on downstream policy performance. Robot videos are best
viewed at https://dynamo-ssl.github.io.

1

Introduction

Learning visuo-motor policies from human demonstrations is an exciting approach for training
difficult control tasks in the real world [1–5]. However, a key challenge in such a learning paradigm
is to efficiently learn a policy with fewer expert demonstrations. To address this, prior works have
focused on learning better visual representations, often by pretraining on large Internet-scale video
datasets [6–11]. However, as shown in Dasari et al. [12], these out-of-domain representations may not
transfer to downstream tasks with very different embodiments and viewpoints from the pretraining
dataset.
An alternative to using Internet-pretrained models is to train the visual representations ‘in-domain’
on the demonstration data collected to solve the task [13, 4]. However, in-domain datasets are much
smaller than Internet-scale data. This has resulted in the use of domain-specific augmentations [13]
to induce representational invariances with self-supervision or to collect larger amounts of demonstrations [2, 14]. The reliance of existing methods on large datasets might suggest that in-domain
self-supervised pretraining is ineffective for visuo-motor control, and we might be better with simply
training end-to-end. In this work, we argue the contrary – in-domain self-supervision can be effective
with a better training objective that extracts more information from small datasets.
∗

Corresponding author. Email: jeff.cui@nyu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

