Towards Reliable Model Selection for Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation: An Empirical Study and A
Certified Baseline
Dapeng Hu1∗ Mi Luo3 Jian Liang4,5† Chuan-Sheng Foo2,1
1
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
National University of Singapore
4
NLPR & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Selecting appropriate hyperparameters is crucial for unlocking the full potential
of advanced unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods in unlabeled target
domains. Although this challenge remains under-explored, it has recently garnered
increasing attention with the proposals of various model selection methods. Reliable model selection should maintain performance across diverse UDA methods
and scenarios, especially avoiding highly risky worst-case selections—selecting
the model or hyperparameter with the worst performance in the pool. Are existing
model selection methods reliable and versatile enough for different UDA tasks? In
this paper, we provide a comprehensive empirical study involving 8 existing model
selection approaches to answer this question. Our evaluation spans 12 UDA methods across 5 diverse UDA benchmarks and 5 popular UDA scenarios. Surprisingly,
we find that none of these approaches can effectively avoid the worst-case selection.
In contrast, a simple but overlooked ensemble-based selection approach, which we
call EnsV, is both theoretically and empirically certified to avoid the worst-case
selection, ensuring high reliability. Additionally, EnsV is versatile for various
practical but challenging UDA scenarios, including validation of open-partial-set
UDA and source-free UDA. Finally, we call for more attention to the reliability of
model selection in UDA: avoiding the worst-case is as significant as achieving peak
selection performance and should not be overlooked when developing new model
selection methods. Code is available at https://github.com/LHXXHB/EnsV.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved incredible advancements in various tasks through supervised learning
with large labeled datasets [1]. However, obtaining labels can be expensive, and deep models often
struggle to generalize to unlabeled data from unseen distributions [2]. Domain adaptation [3] tackles
this challenge by transferring knowledge from a labeled source domain to a target domain with limited
labels but a similar task. Unsupervised domain adaptation [4] (UDA), particularly, has garnered
significant attention due to its practical assumption that the target domain is entirely unlabeled,
witnessing the development of many effective methods [5–8] and practical settings [9–12].
However, successful applications of UDA methods across diverse tasks rely heavily on selecting appropriate hyperparameters. Sub-optimal hyperparameters can cause state-of-the-art UDA methods to
* This work was completed while Dapeng (lhxxhb15@gmail.com) was a scientist at A*STAR.
†

Corresponding author: Jian Liang (liangjian92@gmail.com)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

