Robust Reinforcement Learning with General Utility

Ziyi Chen, Yan Wen, Zhengmian Hu, Heng Huang
Department of Computer Science, Institute of Health Computing,
University of Maryland College Park
College Park, MA 20742, USA
{zc286,ywen1,zhu123,heng}@umd.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) problem with general utility is a powerful decision
making framework that covers standard RL with cumulative cost, exploration
problems, and demonstration learning. Existing works on RL with general utility
do not consider the robustness under environmental perturbation, which is important
to adapt RL system in the real-world environment that differs from the training
environment. To train a robust policy, we propose a robust RL framework with
general utility, which subsumes many existing RL frameworks including RL,
robust RL, RL with general utility, constrained RL, robust constrained RL, pure
exploration, robust entropy regularized RL, etc. Then we focus on popular convex
utility functions, with which our proposed learning framework is a challenging
nonconvex-nonconcave minimax optimization problem, and design a two-phase
stochastic policy gradient type algorithm and obtain its sample complexity result for
gradient convergence. Furthermore, for convex utility on a widely used polyhedral
ambiguity set, we design an algorithm and obtain its convergence rate to a global
optimal solution.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is an important decision-making framework [41] aiming to find the
optimal policy that minimizes accumulative cost, which is also a linear utility function of occupancy
measure. Recent works have extended standard RL to more general utility functions to account for a
variety of practical needs, including risk-sensitive applications [22, 8, 52], exploration maximization
[18, 54, 51, 13, 6], and safety constraints [54, 51, 13]. There are provably convergent algorithms to
solve RL with general utility [54, 55, 6]. However, these works study RL with general utility in a
fixed environment, which may fail in many applications where the policy is trained in a simulation
environment but implemented in a different real-world environment [37, 56].
To make the policy robust to such environmental change, robust RL has been proposed to find the
optimal robust policy under the worst possible environment [36, 20, 48, 45, 14]. However, all the
existing robust RL works restrict to linear utility function to our knowledge. Therefore, we aim to
answer the following research question:
Q: Can we train a robust policy for RL with general utility and obtain convergence results?
1.1

Our Contributions

We affirmatively answer this question by proposing robust RL with general utility, the first learning
framework that obtains a robust policy for general utility in the worst possible environment. It
is formulated as a minimax optimization problem minθ∈Θ maxξ∈Ξ f (λθ,ξ ) where f is the utility
function and λθ,ξ is the occupancy measure under the policy parameter θ ∈ Θ and the environmental
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

