Provably Efficient Interaction-Grounded Learning
with Personalized Reward
Mengxiao Zhang ∗
University of Iowa
mengxiao-zhang@uiowa.edu

Yuheng Zhang ∗
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
yuhengz2@illinois.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Paul Mineiro
Microsoft Research
pmineiro@microsoft.com

Abstract
Interaction-Grounded Learning (IGL) [Xie et al., 2021] is a powerful framework in
which a learner aims at maximizing unobservable rewards through interacting with
an environment and observing reward-dependent feedback on the taken actions.
To deal with personalized rewards that are ubiquitous in applications such as
recommendation systems, Maghakian et al. [2022] study a version of IGL with
context-dependent feedback, but their algorithm does not come with theoretical
guarantees. In this work, we consider the same problem and provide the first
provably efficient algorithms with sublinear regret under realizability. Our analysis
reveals that the step-function estimator of prior work can deviate uncontrollably due
to finite-sample effects. Our solution is a novel Lipschitz reward estimator which
underestimates the true reward and enjoys favorable generalization performances.
Building on this estimator, we propose two algorithms, one based on explore-thenexploit and the other based on inverse-gap weighting. We apply IGL to learning
from image feedback and learning from text feedback, which are reward-free
settings that arise in practice. Experimental results showcase the importance of
using our Lipschitz reward estimator and the overall effectiveness of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Traditional bandit problems [Auer et al., 2002] or reinforcement learning problems [Sutton and Barto,
2018] assume that the learner has access to the reward, which is her learning goal. However, such
explicit reward information is usually difficult to obtain in many real-world scenarios, including
human-computer interface applications [Pantic and Rothkrantz, 2003, Freeman et al., 2017] and
recommender systems [Yi et al., 2014, Wu et al., 2017]. Recently, Xie et al. [2021] study a new
setting called Interaction-Grounded Learning (IGL), where the learner interacts with the environment
and receives some feedback on her actions instead of explicit reward signals. The learner needs to
discover the implicit information about the reward in the feedback and maximizes the reward.
From an information-theoretic perspective, IGL is intractable unless further assumptions are made.
Xie et al. [2021] introduce a conditional independence assumption which states that the feedback is
conditionally independent of the action and context given the latent reward. However, this assumption
is unrealistic in many scenarios. For example, different users interact with recommender systems
in different ways even under the same latent reward [Maghakian et al., 2022]. This inspires us to
study IGL with personalized rewards, a setting where the feedback depends on the context. Although
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

