OctreeOcc: Efficient and Multi-Granularity
Occupancy Prediction Using Octree Queries

Yuhang Lu
ShanghaiTech University
luyh2@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Tai Wang∗
Shanghai AI Laboratory
taiwang.me@gmail.com

Xinge Zhu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zhuxinge123@gmail.com
Yuexin Ma∗
ShanghaiTech University
mayuexin@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Occupancy prediction has increasingly garnered attention in recent years for its
fine-grained understanding of 3D scenes. Traditional approaches typically rely on
dense, regular grid representations, which often leads to excessive computational
demands and a loss of spatial details for small objects. This paper introduces
OctreeOcc, an innovative 3D occupancy prediction framework that leverages the
octree representation to adaptively capture valuable information in 3D, offering
variable granularity to accommodate object shapes and semantic regions of varying
sizes and complexities. In particular, we incorporate image semantic information to
improve the accuracy of initial octree structures and design an effective rectification
mechanism to refine the octree structure iteratively. Our extensive evaluations show
that OctreeOcc not only surpasses state-of-the-art methods in occupancy prediction,
but also achieves a 15% − 24% reduction in computational overhead compared to
dense-grid-based methods.

1

Introduction

Holistic 3D scene understanding is a pivotal aspect of a stable and reliable visual perception system,
especially for real-world applications such as autonomous driving. Occupancy, as a classical representation, has been renascent recently with more datasets support and exploration in learning-based
approaches. Such occupancy prediction tasks aim at partitioning the 3D scene into grid cells and
predicting semantic labels for each voxel. It is particularly an essential solution for recognizing irregularly shaped objects and also enables the open-set understanding (1), further benefiting downstream
tasks, like prediction and planning.
Existing occupancy prediction methods (2; 3; 4; 5; 6) typically construct dense and regular grid
representations, same as the ground truth. While such approach is intuitive and direct, it overlooks
the statistical and geometric properties of 3D environments. In fact, the 3D scene is composed of
foreground objects and background regions with various shapes and sizes. For example, the space
occupied by larger objects, such as buses, are considerably more extensive than that taken up by
smaller items like traffic cones (Fig. 1a). Consequently, employing a uniform voxel resolution to
depict the scene proves to be inefficient, leading to computational waste for larger objects and a lack
of geometry details for smaller ones. Considering the large computation cost of aforementioned
∗

Corresponding authors. This work was supported by NSFC (No.62206173), Shanghai Frontiers Science
Center of Human-centered Artificial Intelligence (ShangHAI), MoE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception
and Human-Machine Collaboration (KLIP-HuMaCo), ShanghaiTech University.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

