Understanding Model Selection for Learning in
Strategic Environments

Tinashe Handina ∗
Computing + Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
thandina@caltech.edu

Eric Mazumdar
Computing + Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
mazumdar@caltech.edu

Abstract
The deployment of ever-larger machine learning models reflects a growing consensus that the more expressive the model class one optimizes over—and the more
data one has access to—the more one can improve performance. As models get
deployed in a variety of real-world scenarios, they inevitably face strategic environments. In this work, we consider the natural question of how the interplay of
models and strategic interactions affects the relationship between performance at
equilibrium and the expressivity of model classes. We find that strategic interactions
can break the conventional view—meaning that performance does not necessarily
monotonically improve as model classes get larger or more expressive (even with
infinite data). We show the implications of this result in several contexts including
strategic regression, strategic classification, and multi-agent reinforcement learning.
In particular, we show that each of these settings admits a Braess’ paradox-like
phenomenon in which optimizing over less expressive model classes allows one
to achieve strictly better equilibrium outcomes. Motivated by these examples, we
then propose a new paradigm for model selection in games wherein an agent seeks
to choose amongst different model classes to use as their action set in a game.

1

Introduction

Machine learning—and deep learning in particular— has already demonstrated enormous potential
to enable new services across a wide spectrum of everyday life. Examples range from chatbots [1],
to hiring [2], and content moderation [3]. Driving this proliferation is the fact that the increasing
availability of compute resources coupled with the abundance of data provided by internet-scale
datasets allows one to train larger and larger models while monotonically improving performance
[4, 5, 6]. Despite signs of diminishing returns, this consensus has broadly held true. Machine learning
algorithms tend to follow a monotonic scaling law: with more compute and data, one can train more
expressive models and eke out performance gains.
As algorithms are deployed into real-world scenarios, however, they will inevitably come into contact
with some form of strategic decision-making—whether that be in the form of adversarial agents
attempting to manipulate the output of the algorithm [7], gig-workers taking actions to enforce better
working conditions from learning-powered platforms [8], or more broadly individuals whose goals
are misaligned with those of the algorithm [9].
Reflecting this reality, recent years have seen a surge in research seeking to understand the effects
of strategic decision-making on learning algorithms. Two sub-fields in particular include strategic
classification [10]—in which one seeks to learn a classifier or predictor in the presence of agents
∗

Correspondence to Tinashe Handina <thandina@caltech.edu>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

