On the Scalability of Certified Adversarial Robustness
with Generated Data
Thomas Altstidl1

David Dobre3 Arthur Kosmala5 Björn Eskofier1,2
Gauthier Gidel3,4 Leo Schwinn5

1

Machine Learning and Data Analytics Lab, FAU Erlangen Nürnberg, Germany
2
Institute of AI for Health, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Germany
3
Mila, Université de Montréal, Canada 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair
5
Data Analytics and Machine Learning, Technische Universität München, Germany
{thomas.r.altstidl,bjoern.eskofier}@fau.de
{david-a.dobre,gidelgau}@mila.quebec {a.kosmala,l.schwinn}@tum.de

Abstract
Certified defenses against adversarial attacks offer formal guarantees on the robustness of a model, making them more reliable than empirical methods such as
adversarial training, whose effectiveness is often later reduced by unseen attacks.
Still, the limited certified robustness that is currently achievable has been a bottleneck for their practical adoption. Gowal et al. and Wang et al. have shown
that generating additional training data using state-of-the-art diffusion models can
considerably improve the robustness of adversarial training. In this work, we
demonstrate that a similar approach can substantially improve deterministic certified defenses but also reveal notable differences in the scaling behavior between
certified and empirical methods. In addition, we provide a list of recommendations to scale the robustness of certified training approaches. Our approach
achieves state-of-the-art deterministic robustness certificates on CIFAR-10 for the
ℓ2 (ϵ = 36/255) and ℓ∞ (ϵ = 8/255) threat models, outperforming the previous
results by +3.95 and +1.39 percentage points, respectively. Furthermore, we
report similar improvements for CIFAR-100.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have been successfully applied for a variety of different applications. However,
it is widely recognized that the vulnerability of neural networks to adversarial examples [1] remains an
open problem and hinders their adoption in safety-critical domains. Prior research on improving the
robustness of neural networks against adversarial examples can be broadly classified into empirical [2,
3] and certified approaches [4].
Adversarial training is currently the most prominent empirical robustification method [3]. Here, the
training data of neural networks is augmented with adversarial examples, improving the robustness
against attacks at inference time. Recent work has demonstrated that adversarial training can be
considerably improved using synthetically generated data, even without training the generative
model with external data [5, 6]. Nevertheless, empirical robustness has repeatedly been shown to be
ineffective against more sophisticated attacks developed in subsequent work [7].
In contrast to empirical methods, certified approaches yield robustness guarantees given a predefined
threat model, most often based on the ℓ1 , ℓ2 , or ℓ∞ norm. As a result, these methods provide reliable
protection against future attacks. Nevertheless, the robustness guarantees achieved by certification
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

