Be Confident in What You Know: Bayesian Parameter
Efficient Fine-Tuning of Vision Foundation Models

Deep Shankar Pandey † Spandan Pyakurel † Qi Yu∗
Rochester Institute of Technology
{dp7972,sp1468,qi.yu}@rit.edu

Abstract
Large transformer-based foundation models have been commonly used as pretrained models that can be adapted to different challenging datasets and settings
with state-of-the-art generalization performance. Parameter efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) provides promising generalization performance in adaptation while incurring minimum computational overhead. However, adaptation of these foundation
models through PEFT leads to accurate but severely underconfident models, especially in few-shot learning settings. Moreover, the adapted models lack accurate
fine-grained uncertainty quantification capabilities limiting their broader applicability in critical domains. To fill out this critical gap, we develop a novel lightweight
Bayesian Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning (referred to as Bayesian-PEFT) framework for large transformer-based foundation models. The framework integrates
state-of-the-art PEFT techniques with two Bayesian components to address the
under-confidence issue while ensuring reliable prediction under challenging fewshot settings. The first component performs base rate adjustment to strengthen the
prior belief corresponding to the knowledge gained through pre-training, making
the model more confident in its predictions; the second component builds an evidential ensemble that leverages belief regularization to ensure diversity among
different ensemble components. Our thorough theoretical analysis justifies that the
Bayesian components can ensure reliable and accurate few-shot adaptations with
well-calibrated uncertainty quantification. Extensive experiments across diverse
datasets, few-shot learning scenarios, and multiple PEFT techniques demonstrate
the outstanding prediction and calibration performance by Bayesian-PEFT.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based foundation models have been developed as general models with state-of-the-art
generalization performance [32, 66, 52, 28]. These models leverage the rich meta-knowledge acquired
during the pre-training stage to effectively adapt to complex downstream tasks [32], where pretraining is usually performed on massive-scale annotated datasets (e.g., [35, 55]) through supervised
learning[32, 66, 28] or self-supervised learning [52]. To achieve effective adaption, various parameterefficient fine-tuning (PEFT) approaches have been developed [38, 27, 9, 54] that introduce a small
number of tunable parameters either within or outside of the backbone architecture to ensure good
generalization capability while incurring little computational overhead because most parts of (or
the entire) backbone architecture is frozen during fine-tuning [25, 59, 67]. Bias-fine tuning [9], a
representative partial tuning-based PEFT, only fine-tunes the bias parameters to downstream tasks.
Adapter [51] and side-tune [72] fine-tuning techniques are instances of extra module-based PEFT that
introduce extra parameterized modules and fine-tune them based on the downstream tasks. Visual
Prompt-tuning [32] (VPT) follows the popular prompt learning paradigm by introducing a learnable
∗

Corresponding author, † equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

