Clustering with Non-adaptive Subset Queries

Hadley Black

Euiwoong Lee

Arya Mazumdar

Barna Saha

UC San Diego

University of Michigan

UC San Diego

UC San Diego

Abstract
Recovering the underlying clustering of a set U of n points by asking pair-wise
same-cluster queries has garnered significant interest in the last decade. Given a
query S ⊂ U , |S| = 2, the oracle returns yes if the points are in the same cluster
and no otherwise. We study a natural generalization of this problem to subset
queries for |S| > 2, where the oracle returns the number of clusters intersecting
S. Our aim is to determine the minimum number of queries needed for exactly
recovering an arbitrary k-clustering. We focus on non-adaptive schemes, where all
the queries are asked in one round, thus allowing for the querying process to be
parallelized, which is a highly desirable property.
For adaptive algorithms with pair-wise queries, the complexity is known to be
Θ(nk), where k is the number of clusters. In contrast, non-adaptive pair-wise query
algorithms are extremely limited: even for k = 3, such algorithms require Ω(n2 )
queries, which matches the trivial O(n2 ) upper bound attained by querying every
pair of points. Allowing for subset queries of unbounded size, O(n) queries is
possible with an adaptive scheme. However, the realm of non-adaptive algorithms
remains completely unknown. Is it possible to attain algorithms that are nonadaptive while still making a near-linear number of queries?
In this paper, we give the first non-adaptive algorithms for clustering with subset
queries. We provide, (i) a non-adaptive algorithm making O(n log2 n log k) queries
which improves to O(n log k) when the cluster sizes are within any constant factor
of each other, (ii) for constant k, a non-adaptive algorithm making O(n log log n)
queries. In addition to non-adaptivity, we take into account other practical considerations, such as enforcing a bound on query size. For constant k,
we give an
e 2 /s2 ) queries on subsets of size at most s ≤ √n, which is
algorithm making O(n
optimal among all non-adaptive algorithms within a log n-factor. For arbitrary k,
the dependence varies as Õ(n2 /s).

1

Introduction

Clustering is one of the most fundamental problems in unsupervised machine learning, and permeates
beyond the boundaries of statistics and computer science to social sciences, economics and so on. The
goal of clustering is to partition items so that similar items are in the same group. The applications
of clustering are manifold. However, finding the underlying clusters is sometimes hard for an
automated process due to data being noisy, incomplete, but easily discernible by humans. Motivated
by this scenario, in order to improve the quality of clustering, early works have studied the so-called
clustering under “limited supervision” (e.g.,[1, 2]). Balcan and Blum initiated the study of clustering
under active feedback [3] where given the current clustering solution, the users can provide feedback
whether a cluster needs to be merged or split. Perhaps a simpler query model would be where users
only need to answer the number of clusters, and that too only on a subset of points without requiring
to analyze the entire clustering. This scenario is common in unsupervised learning problems, where a
centralized algorithm aims to compute a clustering by crowdsourcing. The crowd-workers play the
role of an oracle here, and are able to answer simple queries that involve a small subset of the universe.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

