Aligning to Thousands of Preferences
via System Message Generalization

Seongyun Lee1∗ Sue Hyun Park1∗
KAIST AI1

Seungone Kim2

Minjoon Seo1

Carnegie Mellon University2

{seongyun, suehyunpark, minjoon}@kaist.ac.kr

seungone@cmu.edu

Abstract
Although humans inherently have diverse values, current large language model
(LLM) alignment methods often assume that aligning LLMs with the general public’s preferences is optimal. A major challenge in adopting a more individualized
approach to LLM alignment is its lack of scalability, as it involves repeatedly
acquiring preference data and training new reward models and LLMs for each
individual’s preferences. To address these challenges, we propose a new paradigm
where users specify what they value most within the system message, steering the
LLM’s generation behavior to better align with the user’s intentions. However, a
naive application of such an approach is non-trivial since LLMs are typically trained
on a uniform system message (e.g., “You are a helpful assistant”), which limits
their ability to generalize to diverse, unseen system messages. To improve this
generalization, we create M ULTIFACETED C OLLECTION, augmenting 66k user instructions into 197k system messages through hierarchical user value combinations.
Using this dataset, we train a 7B LLM called JANUS and test it on 921 prompts
from 5 benchmarks (AlpacaEval 2.0, FLASK, Koala, MT-Bench, and Self-Instruct)
by adding system messages that reflect unseen user values. JANUS achieves tie+win
rate of 75.2%, 72.4%, and 66.4% against Mistral 7B Instruct v0.2, GPT-3.5 Turbo,
and GPT-4, respectively. Unexpectedly, on three benchmarks focused on response
helpfulness (AlpacaEval 2.0, MT-Bench, Arena Hard Auto v0.1), JANUS also
outperforms LLaMA 3 8B Instruct by a +4.0%p, +0.1%p, +3.0%p margin, underscoring that training with a vast array of system messages could also enhance
alignment to the general public’s preference as well. Our code, dataset, benchmark,
and models are available at https://lklab.kaist.ac.kr/Janus/.

1

Introduction

Post-training techniques such as reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) or instruction
fine-tuning are effective at enhancing the alignment of large language models (LLMs) with human
preferences [4, 5, 6, 33, 56, 61]. These methods involve collecting preference data based on high-level
values that many people agree upon, such as helpfulness and harmlessness, and then using this data
to train reward models (RMs) and LLMs. However, human preferences cannot simply be categorized
into such binary divisions; they are typically diverse and exhibit nuanced variations according to
different people and contexts [8, 30, 31, 36, 38, 39, 40, 74, 84]. As a result, a significant amount
of data is created without considering the conflicting preferences that individuals may have, which
results in annotation disagreement [21, 87, 90]. Training LLMs on generic, unattributed preference
data inadvertently leads to undesirable traits like verbosity [69].
∗

denotes equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

