Soft Superpixel Neighborhood Attention

Kent Gauen
Purdue University
gauenk@purdue.edu

Stanley Chan
Purdue University
stanchan@purdue.edu

Abstract
Images contain objects with deformable boundaries, such as the contours of a human face, yet attention operators act on square windows. This mixes features from
perceptually unrelated regions, which can degrade the quality of a denoiser. One
can exclude pixels using an estimate of perceptual groupings, such as superpixels,
but the naive use of superpixels can be theoretically and empirically worse than
standard attention. Using superpixel probabilities rather than superpixel assignments, this paper proposes soft superpixel neighborhood attention (SNA) which
interpolates between the existing neighborhood attention and the naive superpixel
neighborhood attention. This paper presents theoretical results showing SNA is the
optimal denoiser under a latent superpixel model. SNA outperforms alternative local attention modules on image denoising, and we compare the superpixels learned
from denoising with those learned with superpixel supervision.1

1

Introduction

The attention mechanism is attributed to meaningful benchmark improvements in deep neural
networks [1]. While the initial attention mechanism acted globally, recent methods operate on
local neighborhoods, which requires less computation and reduces the chance of learning spurious
correlations [2]. Neighborhood attention (NA) transforms each pixel using its surrounding square
neighborhood of pixels. In reality, this square neighborhood is merely an implementation convenience.
Natural images contain objects with non-rigid boundaries, such as the contours of a human face or the
outlines of text. To account for these deformations, this paper proposes a new local attention module
that re-weights the attention map according to low-level perceptual groups, or “superpixels” [3],
named soft superpixel neighborhood attention (SNA).
Theory from vision science posits that humans view scenes according to perceptual groups (e.g.
Gestalt principles) [4]. Superpixels are one such formulation of perceptual groupings, and they create
a deformable, boundary-preserving segmentation of an image [3]. Since deep learning models can
learn spurious correlations, operations that utilize perceptual groups should principally help a network
learn desirable correlations. Despite the deformable neighborhood shapes, applying attention with a
superpixel estimate is straightforward. However, this naive approach is theoretically worse than NA
for some superpixel shapes and sensitive to errors in the superpixel estimate. To address these issues,
we propose thinking beyond using a single superpixel estimate.
While recent works use the maximum likelihood (ML) superpixel estimate [6, 7], many superpixel
formations are equally likely. Figure 1 depicts three samples from a (slightly modified) recent BASS
superpixel model [5]. Many of the boundaries seem arbitrary and change among the samples, while
some remain fixed. No single superpixel segmentation is the absolute “best”. This is not a deficiency
of the particular method to estimate superpixels, but rather a drawback of using a point estimate.
1
2

Code for this project is available at https://github.com/gauenk/spix_paper
For educational value, hyperparameters are modified to create more boundaries.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

