NovoBench: Benchmarking Deep Learning-based
De Novo Peptide Sequencing Methods in Proteomics

Jingbo Zhou1,2∗, Shaorong Chen1,2∗ , Jun Xia1,2∗† , Sizhe Liu3 , Tianze Ling4
Wenjie Du2 , Yue Liu2 , Jianwei Yin1 , Stan Z. Li2†
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Westlake University,
3
University of Southern California 4 Tsinghua Univerisity
{zhoujingbo, xiajun, stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Tandem mass spectrometry has played a pivotal role in advancing proteomics,
enabling the high-throughput analysis of protein composition in biological tissues.
Many deep learning methods have been developed for de novo peptide sequencing
task, i.e., predicting the peptide sequence for the observed mass spectrum. However, two key challenges seriously hinder the further advancement of this important
task. Firstly, since there is no consensus for the evaluation datasets, the empirical
results in different research papers are often not comparable, leading to unfair comparison. Secondly, the current methods are usually limited to amino acid-level or
peptide-level precision and recall metrics. In this work, we present the first unified
benchmark NovoBench for de novo peptide sequencing, which comprises diverse
mass spectrum data, integrated models, and comprehensive evaluation metrics. Recent impressive methods, including DeepNovo, PointNovo, Casanovo, InstaNovo,
AdaNovo and π-HelixNovo are integrated into our framework. In addition to
amino acid-level and peptide-level precision and recall, we evaluate the models’
performance in terms of identifying post-tranlational modifications (PTMs), efficiency and robustness to peptide length, noise peaks and missing fragment ratio,
which are important influencing factors while seldom be considered. Leveraging
this benchmark, we conduct a large-scale study of current methods, report many
insightful findings that open up new possibilities for future development. The code
is available at https://github.com/Westlake-OmicsAI/NovoBench.

1

Introduction

Proteomics, the study of proteins within biological systems, relies heavily on mass spectrometry
for protein identification [1]. Traditional methods use existing databases to match observed peptide
fragments with known sequences. However, these methods may miss novel or modified peptides not
present in the databases [23, 22, 29]. De novo peptide sequencing offers a solution by directly annotating mass spectra to reconstruct peptide sequences without relying on databases. By circumventing
the need for predefined databases, de novo sequencing enables researchers to uncover new peptides
and investigate post-translational modifications (PTMs), contributing to a deeper understanding of
cellular processes [42] and disease mechanisms [24]. Here, PTMs refers to chemically modified
version of 20 naturally-occurring amino acids, influencing many critical biomolecular processes
including central enzyme activities, protein turnover, and DNA repair [33, 6, 30]. Deep learning has
been widely used in the de novo peptide sequencing, where researchers “translate” the observed mass
spectrum to peptide sequence using the encoder-decoder architectures [40, 32, 52, 25, 49, 21, 54].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

