Renovating Names in
Open-Vocabulary Segmentation Benchmarks

Haiwen Huang1,2,3 Songyou Peng3,4,5 Dan Zhang6 Andreas Geiger2,3
1
Bosch IoC Lab, University of Tübingen 3 Tübingen AI Center
3
4
Autonomous Vision Group, University of Tübingen
ETH Zurich
5
6
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Names are essential to both human cognition and vision-language models. Openvocabulary models utilize class names as text prompts to generalize to categories
unseen during training. However, the precision of these names is often overlooked
in existing datasets. In this paper, we address this underexplored problem by
presenting a framework for “renovating” names in open-vocabulary segmentation benchmarks (RENOVATE). Our framework features a renaming model that
enhances the quality of names for each visual segment. Through experiments,
we demonstrate that our renovated names help train stronger open-vocabulary
models with up to 15% relative improvement and significantly enhance training efficiency with improved data quality. We also show that our renovated
names improve evaluation by better measuring misclassification and enabling
fine-grained model analysis. We provide our code and relabelings for several
popular segmentation datasets to the research community on our project page:
https://andrehuang.github.io/renovate/ .

1

Introduction
Categorizations which humans make of the concrete world are not arbitrary but highly
determined. In taxonomies of concrete objects, there is one level of abstraction at which the
most basic category cuts are made.
— Eleanor Rosch, Basic Objects in Natural Categories [1]

We use names every day. Imagine wandering the trails of a national park – do you pause by a “lake”
or simply a body of “water”? While driving through urban sprawl, do you see “trees” or “vegetation”
along the road? Our instinctual use of terms like “lake” and “trees” illustrates the human propensity to categorize the world around us into “basic categories” — rich in information and readily
identifiable without unnecessary complexity [1, 2, 3]. Such categorization is fundamental to human
cognition and communication.
In stark contrast, recent advancements in open-vocabulary models [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] struggle to replicate this nuanced aspect of human categorization. While these models have made strides
in generalizing to both familiar and novel categories via textual prompts, they are often hampered by
the imprecise and sometimes wrong names provided in existing benchmarks. In fact, most datasets
are labeled with class names that serve merely as identifiers to distinguish classes within a dataset,
rather than descriptive labels aligning with the “basic categories” that match with the actual visual
contents. As shown in Fig. 1, existing names are often inaccurate, too general, or lack enough
context, leading to discrepancies between the model’s outputs and the actual visual segments. This
misalignment indicates a pressing need for a reassessment and refinement of name labeling prac38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

