CableInspect-AD: An Expert-Annotated Anomaly
Detection Dataset
Akshatha Arodi1⇤ Margaux Luck1⇤ Jean-Luc Bedwani2
Aldo Zaimi
Ge Li1 Nicolas Pouliot2 Julien Beaudry2 Gaétan Marceau Caron1
1
Mila - Quebec AI Institute 2 IREQ - Institut de recherche d’Hydro-Québec
⇤
equal contributions
1

Abstract
Machine learning models are increasingly being deployed in real-world contexts.
However, systematic studies on their transferability to specific and critical applications are underrepresented in the research literature. An important example is
visual anomaly detection (VAD) for robotic power line inspection. While existing VAD methods perform well in controlled environments, real-world scenarios
present diverse and unexpected anomalies that current datasets fail to capture. To
address this gap, we introduce CableInspect-AD, a high-quality, publicly available
dataset created and annotated by domain experts from Hydro-Québec, a Canadian public utility. This dataset includes high-resolution images with challenging
real-world anomalies, covering defects with varying severity levels. To address
the challenges of collecting diverse anomalous and nominal examples for setting
a detection threshold, we propose an enhancement to the celebrated PatchCore
algorithm. This enhancement enables its use in scenarios with limited labeled data.
We also present a comprehensive evaluation protocol based on cross-validation to
assess models’ performances. We evaluate our Enhanced-PatchCore for few-shot
and many-shot detection, and Vision-Language Models for zero-shot detection.
While promising, these models struggle to detect all anomalies, highlighting the
dataset’s value as a challenging benchmark for the broader research community.
Project page: https://mila-iqia.github.io/cableinspect-ad/.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is increasingly applied across diverse industrial fields such as robotics, genomics,
climate and materials science due to the impressive performance of large pre-trained models. As the
community looks towards deploying these models in specialized domains where their effectiveness
remains uncertain, there is a pressing need to improve their transferability in these contexts. This
underscores the necessity for tailored datasets by domain experts. Visual anomaly detection (VAD)
in a specific industrial context, exemplifies a critical application, promising cost reduction, time
savings, and enhanced safety measures by enabling preventive maintenance. While existing VAD
methods perform well in controlled environments, real-world scenarios present diverse and unexpected
anomalies that current datasets fail to capture. Public VAD datasets, such as MvTec AD [7], VisA [56],
and MVTec LOCO AD [6], focus mainly on objects and textures in a controlled manufacturing
context, thus limiting the scope of potential anomalies. Moreover, these datasets do not account
for scenarios with significant variations of the same object, further complicating AD in real-world
applications. For instance, objects may exhibit substantial differences when viewed indoors versus
outdoors due to varying operational conditions and environmental factors such as lighting and weather.
Additionally, wear and tear over time can introduce anomalies that evolve, creating multiple views
and states of the same object. Compounding the complexity, images may contain more than one
anomaly, requiring models to discern and identify multiple issues simultaneously.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

