Multi-Group Proportional Representation in Retrieval

Alex Oesterling∗
Harvard University

Claudio Mayrink Verdun∗
Harvard University

Lucas Monteiro Paes
Harvard University

Sajani Vithana
Harvard University

Carol Xuan Long
Harvard University

Alexander Glynn
Harvard University

Martina Cardone
University of Minnesota

Flavio P. Calmon
Harvard University

Abstract
Image search and retrieval tasks can perpetuate harmful stereotypes, erase cultural
identities, and amplify social disparities. Current approaches to mitigate these
representational harms balance the number of retrieved items across population
groups defined by a small number of (often binary) attributes. However, most
existing methods overlook intersectional groups determined by combinations of
group attributes, such as gender, race, and ethnicity. We introduce Multi-Group
Proportional Representation (MPR), a novel metric that measures representation
across intersectional groups. We develop practical methods for estimating MPR,
provide theoretical guarantees, and propose optimization algorithms to ensure
MPR in retrieval. We demonstrate that existing methods optimizing for equal
and proportional representation metrics may fail to promote MPR. Crucially, our
work shows that optimizing MPR yields more proportional representation across
multiple intersectional groups specified by a rich function class, often with minimal
compromise in retrieval accuracy. Code is provided at https://github.com/
alex-oesterling/multigroup-proportional-representation.

1

Introduction

A recognized objective in fair machine learning (ML) is discovering, reporting, and mitigating
representational harms [1–3]. Representational harms arise when systems reinforce and perpetuate
the marginalization of population groups based on characteristics such as race, socioeconomic status,
cultural background, and gender [1, 4–6]. These harms often manifest through the biased portrayal or
misrepresentation of these groups, stereotype reinforcement, and erasure of cultural identities [7, 8].
Representational harms have been widely documented in ML systems. For instance, many freely
available datasets used in ML are not geo-diverse [9], and generative models can output images that
under-represent demographic minorities across gender and racial identities [10–12].
We focus on representation in retrieval tasks. Representational harms in retrieval and ranking tasks
arise when retrieved items do not accurately reflect the true diversity and proportions present in
reality, perpetuating harmful stereotypes and biases [13]. For instance, Kay et al. [2] demonstrated
that, in 2015, only 10% of the top 100 results for CEO in Google Image Search were women, despite
28% of CEOs in the US being women, and recent studies [14, 15] have demonstrated that this bias is
still present in modern image search engines. Later, Otterbacher et al. [16] showed that the search
engine Bing usually produced twice as many men as compared to women when queried with the word
“person”. Finally, [17] systematically studied gender biases in image representations by auditing the
four most important image search engines: Google, Bing, Baidu, and Yandex. In particular, among
other findings, this study showed that when a qualifier such as “intelligent” is added to the query
“person”, the engines still exhibit a significant gender discrepancy; see also [1, Chapter 7]. When
∗

Equal contribution, correspondence to aoesterling@g.harvard.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

