Semi-supervised Knowledge Transfer Across
Multi-omic Single-cell Data

Fan Zhang1 , Tianyu Liu2 , Zihao Chen3 , Xiaojiang Peng4 ,
Chong Chen5 , Xian-Sheng Hua5 , Xiao Luo6,∗ , Hongyu Zhao2
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Yale University, 3 Peking University,
4
Shenzhen Technology University, 5 Terminus Group, 6 University of California, Los Angeles
fanzhang@gatech.edu, tianyu.liu@yale.edu, g.e.challenger@pku.edu.cn
pengxiaojiang@sztu.edu.cn, chenchong.cz@gmail.com, huaxiansheng@gmail.com
xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu, hongyu.zhao@yale.edu

Abstract
Knowledge transfer between multi-omic single-cell data aims to effectively transfer
cell types from scRNA-seq data to unannotated scATAC-seq data. Several approaches aim to reduce the heterogeneity of multi-omic data while maintaining the
discriminability of cell types with extensive annotated data. However, in reality, the
cost of collecting both a large amount of labeled scRNA-seq data and scATAC-seq
data is expensive. Therefore, this paper explores a practical yet underexplored
problem of knowledge transfer across multi-omic single-cell data under cell type
scarcity. To address this problem, we propose a semi-supervised knowledge transfer
framework named Dual label scArcity elimiNation with Cross-omic multi-samplE
Mixup (DANCE). To overcome the label scarcity in scRNA-seq data, we generate
pseudo-labels based on optimal transport and merge them into the labeled scRNAseq data. Moreover, we adopt a divide-and-conquer strategy which divides the
scATAC-seq data into source-like and target-specific data. For source-like samples,
we employ consistency regularization with random perturbations while for targetspecific samples, we select a few candidate labels and progressively eliminate
incorrect cell types from the label set for additional supervision. Next, we generate virtual scRNA-seq samples with multi-sample Mixup based on the class-wise
similarity to reduce cell heterogeneity. Extensive experiments on many benchmark datasets suggest the superiority of our DANCE over a series of state-of-the-art
methods. Code is available at https://github.com/zfkarl/DANCE.

1

Introduction

In the realm of biology and medicine, many experimental methods [18, 25, 53, 51, 54, 63] using
high-throughput sequencing technologies have emerged and characterize diverse properties of single
cells. The predominant techniques are single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) [55, 88, 49] and
single-cell ATAC-sequencing (scATAC-seq) [15, 75] for understanding complicated organisms and
tissues at the single cell level. Specifically, scATAC-seq is an epigenomic profiling method designed
to assess chromatin accessibility and provides an additional layer of information that complements
scRNA-seq, enhancing the ability to comprehend epigenetic heterogeneity within complex tissues.
However, identifying the cell types of scATAC-seq data is challenging because of the high sparsity,
large dimensionality, and increasing scale of scATAC-seq data. Considering the lack of cell type
annotations for scATAC-seq data, several methods [38, 36, 72] have been proposed to transfer cell
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

