Linear Causal Representation Learning from
Unknown Multi-node Interventions
Burak Varıcı∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Emre Acartürk
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
Google DeepMind

Ali Tajer
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract
Despite the multifaceted recent advances in interventional causal representation
learning (CRL), they primarily focus on the stylized assumption of single-node
interventions. This assumption is not valid in a wide range of applications, and
generally, the subset of nodes intervened in an interventional environment is fully
unknown. This paper focuses on interventional CRL under unknown multi-node
(UMN) interventional environments and establishes the first identifiability results
for general latent causal models (parametric or nonparametric) under stochastic interventions (soft or hard) and linear transformation from the latent to observed space.
Specifically, it is established that given sufficiently diverse interventional environments, (i) identifiability up to ancestors is possible using only soft interventions,
and (ii) perfect identifiability is possible using hard interventions. Remarkably,
these guarantees match the best-known results for more restrictive single-node
interventions. Furthermore, CRL algorithms are also provided that achieve the identifiability guarantees. A central step in designing these algorithms is establishing the
relationships between UMN interventional CRL and score functions associated with
the statistical models of different interventional environments. Establishing these
relationships also serves as constructive proof of the identifiability guarantees.

1

Introduction

Causal representation learning (CRL) is a major leap in causal inference, moving away from the
conventional objective of discovering causal relationships among a set of variables and learning the
variables themselves. By combining the strengths of causal inference and machine learning, CRL
specifies data representations that facilitate reasoning and planning [1]. CRL is motivated by the
premise that in a wide range of applications, a lower-dimensional latent set of variables with causal
interactions generates the usually high-dimensional observed data. Therefore, CRL’s objective is to
use the observed data and learn the latent causal generative factors, which include the causal latent
variables and their causal relationships.
CRL objectives. Formally, consider a set of latent causal random variables Z ∈ Rn and a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) G that encodes the causal relationships among Z. The latent variables are
transformed by an unknown function g to generate the observed random variables X ∈ Rd , where
X ≜ g(Z). CRL aims to use X to recover the latent causal variables Z and the causal structure G.
Two central questions of CRL pertain to identifiability, which refers to determining the conditions
under which Z and G can be recovered, and achievability, which refers to designing CRL algorithms
that can achieve the foreseen identifiability guarantees. Identifiability has been demonstrated to
∗

Work was done while BV was a Ph.D. student at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

