Beyond the Doors of Perception: Vision Transformers
Represent Relations Between Objects

Michael A. Lepori1∗
Alexa R. Tartaglini2, 3∗
1
Wai Keen Vong
Thomas Serre
Brenden M. Lake2
Ellie Pavlick1
1
Brown University 2 New York University 3 Stanford University
{michael_lepori,thomas_serre,ellie_pavlick}@brown.edu
alexart@stanford.edu
{waikeen.vong,brenden}@nyu.edu
2

Abstract
Though vision transformers (ViTs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in a
variety of settings, they exhibit surprising failures when performing tasks involving
visual relations. This begs the question: how do ViTs attempt to perform tasks that
require computing visual relations between objects? Prior efforts to interpret ViTs
tend to focus on characterizing relevant low-level visual features. In contrast, we
adopt methods from mechanistic interpretability to study the higher-level visual
algorithms that ViTs use to perform abstract visual reasoning. We present a case
study of a fundamental, yet surprisingly difficult, relational reasoning task: judging
whether two visual entities are the same or different. We find that pretrained ViTs
fine-tuned on this task often exhibit two qualitatively different stages of processing
despite having no obvious inductive biases to do so: 1) a perceptual stage wherein
local object features are extracted and stored in a disentangled representation, and
2) a relational stage wherein object representations are compared. In the second
stage, we find evidence that ViTs can sometimes learn to represent abstract visual
relations, a capability that has long been considered out of reach for artificial neural
networks. Finally, we demonstrate that failures at either stage can prevent a model
from learning a generalizable solution to our fairly simple tasks. By understanding
ViTs in terms of discrete processing stages, one can more precisely diagnose and
rectify shortcomings of existing and future models.

1

Introduction

Despite the well-established successes of transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) for a variety of
vision applications (ViTs; Dosovitskiy et al. (2020)) – notably image generation and classification
– there has been comparatively little breakthrough progress on complex tasks involving relations
between visual entities, such as visual question answering (Schwenk et al., 2022) and image-text
matching (Thrush et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Yuksekgonul et al., 2022). One fundamental difference
between these tasks is that the former is largely semantic – relying on pixel-level image features that
correlate with learned class labels – whereas the latter often involves syntactic operations – those
which are independent of pixel-level features (Ricci et al., 2021; Hochmann et al., 2021). Though
the ability to compute over abstract visual relations is thought to be fundamental to human visual
intelligence (Ullman, 1987; Hespos et al., 2021), the ability of neural networks to perform such
syntactic operations has been the subject of intense debate (Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988; Marcus, 2003;
Chalmers, 1992; Quilty-Dunn et al., 2023; Lake et al., 2017; Davidson et al., 2024).
Much prior work has attempted to empirically resolve whether or not vision networks can implement
an abstract, relational operation, typically by behaviorally assessing the model’s ability to generalize
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

