In-N-Out: Lifting 2D Diffusion Prior for 3D Object
Removal via Tuning-Free Latents Alignment
Dongting Hu 1
Tingjin Chu 1

Huan Fu 3
Feng Liu 1

Jiaxian Guo 4
Tongliang Liu 2, 5

Liuhua Peng 1
Mingming Gong 1, 5

1

4

The University of Melbourne 2 The University of Sydney 3 Alibaba
Google Research 5 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
Project Page: https://timmy11hu.github.io/3dor.github.io/

Abstract
Neural representations for 3D scenes have made substantial advancements recently,
yet object removal remains a challenging yet practical issue, due to the absence
of multi-view supervision over occluded areas. Diffusion Models (DMs), trained
on extensive 2D images, show diverse and high-fidelity generative capabilities in
the 2D domain. However, due to not being specifically trained on 3D data, their
application to multi-view data often exacerbates inconsistency, hence impacting
the overall quality of the 3D output. To address these issues, we introduce “In-NOut”, a novel approach that begins by inpainting a prior, i.e., the occluded area
from a single view using DMs, followed by outstretching it to create multi-view
inpaintings via latents alignments. Our analysis identifies that the variability in
DMs’ outputs mainly arises from initially sampled latents and intermediate latents
predicted in the denoising process. We explicitly align of initial latents using a
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) to establish a consistent foundational structure in
the inpainted area, complemented by an implicit alignment of intermediate latents
through cross-view attention during the denoising phases, enhancing appearance
consistency across views. To further enhance rendering results, we apply a patchbased hybrid loss to optimize NeRF. We demonstrate that our techniques effectively
mitigate the challenges posed by inconsistencies in DMs and substantially improve
the fidelity and coherence of inpainted 3D representations.

1

Introduction

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [50, 2, 23, 58, 81, 37, 13, 10, 3, 92] have effectively revolutionized
3D scene reconstruction from multi-view images. These models offer high-fidelity novel-view
synthesis, proving beneficial across a variety of domains [32, 87, 88, 43, 107, 6, 63, 72, 8, 60]. Despite
the impressive ability to reconstruct highly detailed scenes, these learning-based methods depend
on the availability of consistent multi-view training data. This reliance limits their generalizability,
particularly in editing 3D representations for tasks like object removal and inpainting occluded areas.
Recently, diffusion models (DMs) [30, 18, 71, 80] have gained significant attention in the field of
generative modelling for 2D images. These models are well-known for their robustness as generative
priors, capable of producing diverse and high-fidelity results in 2D inpainting tasks. However,
adapting these 2D priors for 3D object removal is not straightforward. While the inherent diversity of
DMs benefits the generation of varied outputs, it also poses a significant challenge: high variance
in the inpainted results (Fig.1 middle column). Consequently, these models frequently produce
outputs that, while visually appealing in isolation, may appear misaligned when incorporated into 3D
domain [53, 94, 93, 25, 19, 97, 84]. This misalignment often results in the loss of high-frequency
details, crucial for realistic and coherent scene rendering.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

