Kuro Siwo: 33 billion m2 under the water
A global multi-temporal satellite dataset for rapid
flood mapping

Nikolaos Ioannis Bountos1,2∗
bountos@noa.gr

Maria Sdraka1,2∗
masdra@noa.gr

Angelos Zavras1,2
azabras@noa.gr

Ilektra Karasante1
ile.karasante@noa.gr

Andreas Karavias1
karavias@hua.gr

Themistocles Herekakis1
therekak@noa.gr

Angeliki Thanasou1
thanasoua@gmail.com

Dimitrios Michail2
michail@hua.gr

Ioannis Papoutsis1
ipapoutsis@noa.gr

1
Orion Lab
National Observatory of Athens & National Technical University of Athens

2

Harokopio University of Athens

Abstract
Global flash floods, exacerbated by climate change, pose severe threats to human
life, infrastructure, and the environment. Recent catastrophic events in Pakistan and
New Zealand underscore the urgent need for precise flood mapping to guide restoration efforts, understand vulnerabilities, and prepare for future occurrences. While
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) remote sensing offers day-and-night, all-weather
imaging capabilities, its application in deep learning for flood segmentation is
limited by the lack of large annotated datasets. To address this, we introduce Kuro
Siwo, a manually annotated multi-temporal dataset, spanning 43 flood events globally. Our dataset maps more than 338 billion m2 of land, with 33 billion designated
as either flooded areas or permanent water bodies. Kuro Siwo includes a highly
processed product optimized for flash flood mapping based on SAR Ground Range
Detected, and a primal SAR Single Look Complex product with minimal preprocessing, designed to promote research on the exploitation of both the phase and
amplitude information and to offer maximum flexibility for downstream task preprocessing. To leverage advances in large scale self-supervised pretraining methods
for remote sensing data, we augment Kuro Siwo with a large unlabeled set of SAR
samples. Finally, we provide an extensive benchmark, namely BlackBench, offering strong baselines for a diverse set of flood events globally. All data and code are
published in our Github repository: https://github.com/Orion-AI-Lab/KuroSiwo.

1

Introduction

There is compelling evidence of compound effects that link extreme natural disasters worldwide
[66]. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) [72] underscores that floods represent
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

