How Far Can Transformers Reason?
The Globality Barrier and Inductive Scratchpad

Emmanuel Abbe1,2 , Samy Bengio1 , Aryo Lotfi2 , Colin Sandon2 , Omid Saremi1
1
Apple 2 EPFL

Abstract
Can Transformers predict new syllogisms by composing established ones? More
generally, what type of targets can be learned by such models from scratch? Recent
works show that Transformers can be Turing-complete in terms of expressivity,
but this does not address the learnability objective. This paper puts forward the
notion of globality degree of a target distribution to capture when weak learning is
efficiently achievable by regular Transformers. This measure shows a contrast with
the expressivity results of Transformers captured by T C 0 /T C 1 classes (further
studied here), since the globality relates to correlations with the more limited N C 0
class. We show here experimentally and theoretically under additional assumptions
that distributions with high globality cannot be learned efficiently. In particular,
syllogisms cannot be composed on long chains. Further, we develop scratchpad
techniques and show that: (i) agnostic scratchpads cannot break the globality barrier,
(ii) educated scratchpads can break the globality with intermediate steps, although
not all such scratchpads can generalize out-of-distribution (OOD), (iii) a notion of
‘inductive scratchpad’, that composes the prior information more efficiently, can
both break the globality barrier and improve the OOD generalization. In particular,
some of our inductive scratchpads can achieve length generalizations of up to 6×
for some arithmetic tasks depending on the input formatting.

1

Introduction

Transformers [1] have proved to have strong learning capabilities, in particular in applications with
large amounts of text, image, or audio data [2, 3]. Some reasoning capabilities are also notable in
these settings, however, the picture deteriorates when the target complexity increases, such as in tasks
involving more advanced forms of ‘reasoning’ [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. While reasoning is present at all
levels of learning, it is pushed to a higher level in tasks such as logic or mathematics, where ‘learning
by seeing enough representative examples’ is precluded by the more combinatorial nature of the task.
For such tasks, combining learned concepts in order to extrapolate seems necessary, as for the length
generalization problem [11]. Current Transformer-based models exhibit difficulties learning at scale
on such tasks. Can we understand why and what is missing? We start with a specific motivational
example before expanding the discussion to more general tasks.
1.1

Syllogisms composition

Reasoning relates to the process of inferring new knowledge by composing efficiently some prior
knowledge. A basic notion of reasoning is syllogism composition, e.g., inferring a ⇒ c from a ⇒ b
and b ⇒ c. For instance, one may be given a set of implications:
task 1 has priority over task 2
task 1 has priority over task 3
task 4 has priority over task 1
task 1 has priority over task 5

x > 2 ⇒ x2 > 3
x > 2 ⇒ (x − 1)(x + 1) > 1
4x > 17 ⇒ x > 2
x > 2 ⇒ x − x4 > 1 − 2x4

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

