The Empirical Impact of Neural Parameter
Symmetries, or Lack Thereof

Derek Lim∗
MIT CSAIL
dereklim@mit.edu
Robin Walters
Northeastern University

Theo (Moe) Putterman∗
UC Berkeley
moeputterman@berkeley.edu
Haggai Maron
Technion, NVIDIA

Stefanie Jegelka
TU Munich, MIT

Abstract
Many algorithms and observed phenomena in deep learning appear to be affected
by parameter symmetries — transformations of neural network parameters that
do not change the underlying neural network function. These include linear mode
connectivity, model merging, Bayesian neural network inference, metanetworks,
and several other characteristics of optimization or loss-landscapes. However, theoretical analysis of the relationship between parameter space symmetries and these
phenomena is difficult. In this work, we empirically investigate the impact of neural
parameter symmetries by introducing new neural network architectures that have reduced parameter space symmetries. We develop two methods, with some provable
guarantees, of modifying standard neural networks to reduce parameter space symmetries. With these new methods, we conduct a comprehensive experimental study
consisting of multiple tasks aimed at assessing the effect of removing parameter
symmetries. Our experiments reveal several interesting observations on the empirical impact of parameter symmetries; for instance, we observe linear mode connectivity between our networks without alignment of weight spaces, and we find that
our networks allow for faster and more effective Bayesian neural network training.
Our code is available at https://github.com/cptq/asymmetric-networks.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have found profound empirical success, but have many associated behaviors and
phenomena that are difficult to understand. One important property of neural networks is that they
generally have many parameter space symmetries — for any set of parameters, there are typically
many other choices of parameters that correspond to the same exact neural network function [24].
For instance, permutations of hidden neurons in a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) induce permutations
of weights that leave the overall input-output relationship unchanged. These parameter symmetries
are a type of (not-necessarily detrimental) redundancy in the parameterization of neural networks,
that adds much non-Euclidean structure to parameter space.
Parameter space symmetries appear to influence several phenomena observed in neural networks.
For example, when linearly interpolating between the parameters of two independently trained
networks with the same architecture, the intermediate networks typically perform poorly [59, 13].
However, if we first align the two networks via a permutation of parameters that does not affect
the network function, then the intermediate networks can perform just as well as the unmerged
networks [59, 1]. In some sense, this suggests that neural network loss landscapes are more convex
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

