Automating Dataset Updates Towards Reliable and
Timely Evaluation of Large Language Models

Jiahao Ying1 , Yixin Cao2∗, Yushi Bai3 , Qianru Sun1 , Bo Wang 4 , Wei Tang5 ,
Zhaojun Ding6 , Yizhe Yang4 , Xuanjing Huang2 , Shuicheng Yan7∗
1
Singapore Management University, Singapore 2 Fudan University, China
3
Tsinghua University, China 4 Beijing Institute of Technology, China
5
University of Science and Technology of China, China
6
School of Computing, University of Georgia, USA 7 Skywork AI
{jhying.2022}@phdcs.smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive performance across
various natural language benchmarks, prompting a continual need to curate more
difficult datasets for larger LLMs, which is costly and time-consuming. In this
paper, we propose to automate dataset updating and provide systematical analysis
regarding its effectiveness in dealing with benchmark leakage issue, difficulty
control, and stability. Thus, once current benchmark has been mastered or leaked,
we can update it for timely and reliable evaluation. There are two updating strategies: 1) mimicking strategy to generate similar samples based on original data,
preserving stylistic and contextual essence, and 2) extending strategy that further expands existing samples at varying cognitive levels by adapting Bloom’s
taxonomy of educational objectives. Extensive experiments on updated MMLU
and BIG-Bench demonstrate the stability of the proposed strategies and find that
the mimicking strategy can effectively alleviate issues of overestimation from
benchmark leakage. In cases where the efficient mimicking strategy fails, our
extending strategy still shows promising results. Additionally, by controlling the
difficulty, we can better discern the models’ performance and enable fine-grained
analysis — neither too difficult nor too easy an exam can fairly judge students’
learning status. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to automate updating
benchmarks for reliable and timely evaluation. Our demo leaderboard can be found
at https://yingjiahao14.github.io/Automating-DatasetUpdates/.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are becoming increasingly important in both academia and industry,
such as enhancing language translation systems, improving customer service bots, and streamlining
data analysis processes across sectors [23, 2, 21, 38, 31, 43]. They have achieved to some extent
general intelligence, showing superior performance across various benchmarks including GLUE [35],
SQuAD [24], CoQA [25]. As scaling continues, LLMs are gradually mastering more challenging
datasets, demanding experts to curate more difficult datasets, which may soon be conquered again by
larger and more advanced LLMs. Clearly, such a way of constantly updating dataset is impractical.
In this paper, we aim to automate updating benchmarks for LLMs evaluation to minimize human
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

