MOTE-NAS: Multi-Objective Training-based Estimate
for Efficient Neural Architecture Search
Yu-Ming Zhang1 Jun-Wei Hsieh2 Xin Li3 Ming-Ching Chang3
Chun-Chieh Lee1 Kuo-Chin Fan1
1
National Central University 3 University at Albany
2
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
108522036@g.ncu.edu.tw; jwhsieh@nycu.edu.tw

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods seek effective optimization toward
performance metrics regarding model accuracy and generalization while facing
challenges regarding search costs and GPU resources. Recent Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK) NAS methods achieve remarkable search efficiency based on a
training-free model estimate. However, they overlook the non-convex nature of the
DNNs in the search process. In this paper, we develop Multi-Objective Trainingbased Estimate (MOTE) for efficient NAS, retaining search effectiveness and
achieving the new state-of-the-art in the accuracy and cost trade-off. To improve
NTK and inspired by the Training Speed Estimation (TSE) method, MOTE is
designed to model the actual performance of DNNs from macro to micro perspective by drawing the loss landscape and convergence speed simultaneously.
Using two reduction strategies, the MOTE is generated based on a reduced architecture and a reduced dataset. Inspired by evolutionary search, our iterative
ranking-based, coarse-to-fine architecture search is highly effective. Experiments
on NASBench-201 show MOTE-NAS achieves 94.32% accuracy on CIFAR-10,
72.81% on CIFAR-100, and 46.38% on ImageNet-16-120, outperforming NTKbased NAS approaches. An evaluation-free (EF) version of MOTE-NAS delivers
high efficiency in only 5 minutes, delivering a model more accurate than KNAS.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [52] tackles the challenge of automating the design and search for
suitable neural network architectures in many applications. NAS approaches mainly comprise two
stages: a model search stage dedicated to identifying promising candidates within the architecture
search space, and an evaluation stage where candidate performance is assessed. In the search stage,
the search space can be exponentially large. To reduce search complexity, the cell-based tabular
search space [49, 10, 38] is widely considered. Reinforcement learning [52, 2, 39] and evolutionary
algorithms [27, 31, 33, 46, 9] are also used to accelerate the search process. However, the primary
cost of NAS lies in the evaluation stage, where candidate models must undergo intensive training
until convergence to obtain a precise performance assessment. This incurs significant time costs (e.g.,
NASBench-201 requires 3-10K GPU seconds for convergence after 200 epochs). So, various proxy
estimates (e.g., zero-cost proxy [1] and training speed estimation [34]) have been developed to rank
candidates, mitigating computational demands for model evaluation.
Recently, several estimates based on NTK have been proposed, including TE-NAS [6], KNAS [47],
and Eigen-NAS [51]. NTK-based estimates serve as condensed representations of gradients and their
correlations. The NTK theory aims to macro-model the actual performance of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs). It assumes that the performance of an infinite-width DNN can be fully described by the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

