MOTIVE: A Drug-Target Interaction Graph For
Inductive Link Prediction
John Arevalo∗ Ellen Su∗ Anne E. Carpenter Shantanu Singh
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
{jarevalo, suellen, anne, shantanu}@broadinstitute.org

Abstract
Drug-target interaction (DTI) prediction is crucial for identifying new therapeutics
and detecting mechanisms of action. While structure-based methods accurately
model physical interactions between a drug and its protein target, cell-based assays
such as Cell Painting can better capture complex DTI interactions. This paper introduces MOTIVE, a Morphological cOmpound Target Interaction Graph dataset
comprising Cell Painting features for 11, 000 genes and 3, 600 compounds, along
with their relationships extracted from seven publicly available databases. We provide random, cold-source (new drugs), and cold-target (new genes) data splits to enable rigorous evaluation under realistic use cases. Our benchmark results show that
graph neural networks that use Cell Painting features consistently outperform those
that learn from graph structure alone, feature-based models, and topological heuristics. MOTIVE accelerates both graph ML research and drug discovery by promoting the development of more reliable DTI prediction models. MOTIVE resources
are available at https://github.com/carpenter-singh-lab/motive.

1

Introduction

High-quality graph benchmarking datasets propel graph machine learning (ML) research. Providing a
diversity of domains, tasks, and evaluation methods, they allow for rigorous and extensive explorations
of structured learning methods. Still, gaps remain in the areas of scalability, network sparsity, and
generalizability under realistic data splits [1]. These challenges are particularly relevant in the
biological domain. The representation of the rich heterogeneity between entities—compounds, genes,
proteins, diseases, phenotypes, side effects, and more—is a nontrivial task due to their varied units and
terminology and highly complex relational structure. This makes biological data an apt, challenging,
and bettering application for graph ML.
Next, effectively predicting drug-target interactions (DTIs), the relationships between chemical
compounds and their protein targets, remains a pressing research area due to its relevance to drug
discovery, drug repurposing, understanding side effects, and virtual screening. The DTI task is
challenging due to the shortage of clean perturbational data and nonspecificity of these interactions.
Even as structure-based methods such as AlphaFold3 are increasingly accomplished at making DTI
predictions, they are mainly based on molecular characteristics [2, 3]. Experimental data uniquely
captures complex biological interactions; the morphological profiles, feature vectors that capture a
cell’s appearance, from the Cell Painting (CP) assay have been shown to model the mechanism of
action, toxicity, and additional properties of compounds [4, 5].
To address the challenges of graph ML, biological data representation, and DTI, we introduce a
publicly available dataset, MOTIVE, which enhances a graph of compound and gene relations with
features from the JUMP Cell Painting dataset [6]. As there is currently no compound-gene graph
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

