Learning Infinitesimal Generators of Continuous
Symmetries from Data

Gyeonghoon Ko, Hyunsu Kim, Juho Lee
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
KAIST
Seoul, South Korea
{kog, kim.hyunsu, juholee}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Exploiting symmetry inherent in data can significantly improve the sample efficiency of a learning procedure and the generalization of learned models. When
data clearly reveals underlying symmetry, leveraging this symmetry can naturally
inform the design of model architectures or learning strategies. Yet, in numerous
real-world scenarios, identifying the specific symmetry within a given data distribution often proves ambiguous. To tackle this, some existing works learn symmetry
in a data-driven manner, parameterizing and learning expected symmetry through
data. However, these methods often rely on explicit knowledge, such as pre-defined
Lie groups, which are typically restricted to linear or affine transformations. In this
paper, we propose a novel symmetry learning algorithm based on transformations
defined with one-parameter groups, continuously parameterized transformations
flowing along the directions of vector fields called infinitesimal generators. Our
method is built upon minimal inductive biases, encompassing not only commonly
utilized symmetries rooted in Lie groups but also extending to symmetries derived
from nonlinear generators. To learn these symmetries, we introduce a notion of a
validity score that examine whether the transformed data is still valid for the given
task. The validity score is designed to be fully differentiable and easily computable,
enabling effective searches for transformations that achieve symmetries innate to
the data. We apply our method mainly in two domains: image data and partial differential equations, and demonstrate its advantages. Our codes are available at https:
//github.com/kogyeonghoon/learning-symmetry-from-scratch.git.

1

Introduction

Symmetry is fundamental in many scientific disciplines, crucial for understanding the structure
and dynamics of physical systems, datasets, and mathematical models. The ability to uncover and
leverage symmetries has become increasingly important in machine learning and scientific research
due to its potential to improve model efficiency, generalization, and interpretability. By capturing
inherent symmetrical properties, models can learn more compact and informative representations,
leading to improved performance in tasks like supervised learning [31, 29, 4, 7, 33], self-supervised
learning [8, 15, 23], and generative models [19, 11, 18].
Previous methods for learning symmetry have often relied on the explicit parameterization of group
representations based on predefined generators, which can be limited in capturing various symmetries,
including transformations that do not align along the generators. For example, when searching for Lie
group symmetries in images or physics data, existing methods [3, 34] parameterize a group action g
as the matrix exponential of a linear combination
P of linear or affine Lie algebra generators Li with
their learnable coefficients wi as g = exp ( i wi Li ). In the affine transformations of images in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

