GenArtist: Multimodal LLM as an Agent for Unified
Image Generation and Editing

Zhenyu Wang1 ∗
1

Aoxue Li2

Zhenguo Li2

Xihui Liu3 †

Tsinghua University 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei 3 The University of Hong Kong
wangzy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, lax@pku.edu.cn,
Li.Zhenguo@huawei.com, xihuiliu@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
Despite the success achieved by existing image generation and editing methods, current models still struggle with complex problems including intricate text prompts,
and the absence of verification and self-correction mechanisms makes the generated
images unreliable. Meanwhile, a single model tends to specialize in particular tasks
and possess the corresponding capabilities, making it inadequate for fulfilling all
user requirements. We propose GenArtist, a unified image generation and editing
system, coordinated by a multimodal large language model (MLLM) agent. We
integrate a comprehensive range of existing models into the tool library and utilize
the agent for tool selection and execution. For a complex problem, the MLLM
agent decomposes it into simpler sub-problems and constructs a tree structure to
systematically plan the procedure of generation, editing, and self-correction with
step-by-step verification. By automatically generating missing position-related inputs and incorporating position information, the appropriate tool can be effectively
employed to address each sub-problem. Experiments demonstrate that GenArtist
can perform various generation and editing tasks, achieving state-of-the-art performance and surpassing existing models such as SDXL and DALL-E 3, as can be
seen in Fig. 1. Project page is https://zhenyuw16.github.io/GenArtist_page/.

1

Introduction

With the recent advancements in diffusion models [17, 10], image generation and editing methods
have rapidly progressed. Current improvements in image generation and editing can be broadly
categorized into two tendencies. The first [40, 41, 37, 6, 1] involves training from scratch using more
advanced model architectures [41, 36] and larger-scale datasets, thereby scaling up existing models
to achieve a more general generation or editing capability. These methods can usually enhance the
overall controllability and quality of image generation. The second is primarily about finetuning or
additionally designing pre-trained large-scale image generation models on specific datasets to extend
their capability [42, 23, 4] or enhance their performance on certain tasks [25, 18]. These methods are
usually task-specific and can demonstrate advantageous results on some particular tasks.
Despite this, current image generation or editing methods are still imperfect and confront some urgent
challenges on the way to building a human-desired system: 1) The demand for image generation
and editing is highly diverse and variable, like various requirements for objects and backgrounds,
numerous demands about various operations in text prompts or instructions. Meanwhile, different
models often possess different strengths and focus. General models may be weaker than some
finetuned models in certain aspects, but they can exhibit better performance in out-of-distribution data.
∗
†

This work is done when Zhenyu Wang was intern in Huawei
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

