Open-Vocabulary Object Detection via Language
Hierarchy

Jiaxing Huang, Jingyi Zhang, Kai Jiang, Shijian Lu∗
College of Computing and Data Science
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract
Recent studies on generalizable object detection have attracted increasing attention
with additional weak supervision from large-scale datasets with image-level labels.
However, weakly-supervised detection learning often suffers from image-to-box
label mismatch, i.e., image-level labels do not convey precise object information.
We design Language Hierarchical Self-training (LHST) that introduces language
hierarchy into weakly-supervised detector training for learning more generalizable
detectors. LHST expands the image-level labels with language hierarchy and enables co-regularization between the expanded labels and self-training. Specifically,
the expanded labels regularize self-training by providing richer supervision and
mitigating the image-to-box label mismatch, while self-training allows assessing
and selecting the expanded labels according to the predicted reliability. In addition, we design language hierarchical prompt generation that introduces language
hierarchy into prompt generation which helps bridge the vocabulary gaps between
training and testing. Extensive experiments show that the proposed techniques
achieve superior generalization performance consistently across 14 widely studied
object detection datasets.

1

Introduction

Object detection aims to locate and identify objects in images by providing basic visual information of
“where and what objects are”. Thanks to the recent advances of deep neural networks, it has achieved
great success with various applications in autonomous driving [1, 2, 3, 4], intelligent surveillance [5,
6, 7, 8], wildlife tracking [9, 10, 11], etc. However, learning a generalizable object detector for
various downstream tasks that have different data distributions and data vocabularies remains an open
research challenge. To this end, weakly-supervised object detection (WSOD) [12, 13, 14, 15], which
allows access of large-scale image-level datasets (e.g., ImageNet-21K [16] with 14M images of 21K
classes) with super rich data distributions and data vocabularies, has reignited new research interest
under the context of learning generalizable detectors.
While exploiting WSOD to learn generalizable detectors, one typical challenge is that the provided
image-level labels do not convey precise object information [15] and often mismatch with box-level
labels. Recent methods address this challenge by designing various label-to-box assignment strategies
that assign the image-level labels to the predicted top-score [13, 14] or max-size [15] object proposals.
However, the mismatch problem remains due to the restriction of the raw image-level labels [17]. At
the other end, self-training [18, 19, 20] with the detectors pre-trained with [13, 14, 15] can generate
box-level pseudo labels without the restriction of image-level labels. It allows learning from more
object proposals without the image-to-box label mismatch issue, but it does not benefit much from
the provided image-level label supervision.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

