Unsupervised Modality Adaptation with Text-to-Image
Diffusion Models for Semantic Segmentation

Ruihao Xia1,2∗, Yu Liang2 , Peng-Tao Jiang2 , Hao Zhang2
Bo Li2†, Yang Tang1,3†, Pan Zhou4
1
East China University of Science and Technology, 2 vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 4 Singapore Management University

Abstract
Despite their success, unsupervised domain adaptation methods for semantic segmentation primarily focus on adaptation between image domains and do not utilize
other abundant visual modalities like depth, infrared and event. This limitation
hinders their performance and restricts their application in real-world multimodal
scenarios. To address this issue, we propose Modality Adaptation with text-toimage Diffusion Models (MADM) for semantic segmentation task which utilizes
text-to-image diffusion models pre-trained on extensive image-text pairs to enhance
the model’s cross-modality capabilities. Specifically, MADM comprises two key
complementary components to tackle major challenges. First, due to the large
modality gap, using one modal data to generate pseudo labels for another modality suffers from a significant drop in accuracy. To address this, MADM designs
diffusion-based pseudo-label generation which adds latent noise to stabilize pseudolabels and enhance label accuracy. Second, to overcome the limitations of latent
low-resolution features in diffusion models, MADM introduces the label palette
and latent regression which converts one-hot encoded labels into the RGB form by
palette and regresses them in the latent space, thus ensuring the pre-trained decoder
for up-sampling to obtain fine-grained features. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that MADM achieves state-of-the-art adaptation performance across
various modality tasks, including images to depth, infrared, and event modalities.
We open-source our code and models at https://github.com/XiaRho/MADM.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation (UDASS) involves a source domain
with image-label pairs and a target domain with only unlabeled samples [9–11], and has achieved
promising segmentation results in the image modality. Currently, most existing UDASS methods are
restricted to transferring knowledge between similar image domains, such as from virtual scene [2, 12]
to real scene [13], or from daytime scene [13] to nighttime scene [3, 4]. However, these approaches
do not account for the wide range of visual modalities present in real-world scenarios, such as depth,
infrared, and event modalities, which are valuable in nighttime perception [14–16] but often lack
sufficient and high-quality labels for supervising segmentation training. Hence, in this paper, we
are particularly interested in extending UDASS to Unsupervised Modality Adaptation for Semantic
Segmentation (UMASS) across different visual modalities, i.e., the adaptation of a model from a
labeled source image modality to an unlabeled target modality.
Differences across images arise from the objects, lighting, camera parameters, etc, while there are
fundamental disparities in imaging principles across modalities that lead to greater variability. This
∗
†

Work was done during interning at vivo.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

