KV Cache is 1 Bit Per Channel: Efficient Large
Language Model Inference with Coupled Quantization

Tianyi Zhang
Dept. of Computer Science, Rice University
xMAD.ai
Houston, TX
tz21@rice.edu
Zhaozhuo Xu
Dept. of Computer Science,
Stevens Institute of Technology
xMAD.ai
Hoboken, NJ
zxu79@stevens.edu

Jonah Yi
Dept. of Computer Science, Rice University
xMAD.ai
Houston, TX
jwy4@rice.edu
Anshumali Shrivastava
Dept. of Computer Science, Rice University
Ken Kennedy Institute
ThirdAI Corp.
xMAD.ai
Houston, TX
anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
Efficient deployment of Large Language Models (LLMs) requires batching multiple requests together to improve throughput. As batch size, context length, or
model size increases, the size of key and value (KV) cache quickly becomes the
main contributor to GPU memory usage and the bottleneck of inference latency
and throughput. Quantization has emerged as an effective technique for KV cache
compression, but existing methods still fail at very low bit widths. Currently, KV
cache quantization is performed per-channel or per-token independently. Our analysis shows that distinct channels of a key/value activation embedding are highly
interdependent, and the joint entropy of multiple channels grows at a slower rate
than the sum of their marginal entropy, which implies that per-channel independent
quantization is sub-optimal. To mitigate this sub-optimality, we propose Coupled Quantization (CQ), which couples multiple key/value channels together for
quantization to exploit their interdependence and encode the activations in a more
information-efficient manner. Extensive experiments reveal that CQ compares
favorably with existing baselines in preserving model quality, and improves inference throughput by 1.4–3.5× relative to the uncompressed baseline. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that CQ can preserve model quality reasonably with KV cache
quantized down to 1 bit.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have showcased remarkable generalization abilities across various
tasks without needing specific fine-tuning [30]. These impressive capabilities have empowered
LLMs to find applications in numerous domains [19]. However, the high computational demands
and prohibitive deployment costs of LLMs create significant barriers, hindering their widespread
adoption [19, 4]. Particularly, as LLMs move towards larger model size [14] and longer context
length [40], they require faster hardware accelerators such as graphics processing units (GPUs) with
higher memory capacity for efficient inference. Hence it is crucial to develop approaches for reducing
the computational costs and memory requirement of LLMs.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

