Resfusion: Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
for Image Restoration Based on Prior Residual Noise

Zhenning Shi 1
Haoshuai Zheng1
Chen Xu1
Changsheng Dong1
3
1∗
1,3∗
Xueshuo Xie
Along He
Tao Li
Huazhu Fu4
1
College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
School of Statistics and Data Science, Nankai University
3
Haihe Lab of ITAI
4
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR

Bin Pan2

Abstract
Recently, research on denoising diffusion models has expanded its application to
the field of image restoration. Traditional diffusion-based image restoration methods utilize degraded images as conditional input to effectively guide the reverse
generation process, without modifying the original denoising diffusion process.
However, since the degraded images already include low-frequency information,
starting from Gaussian white noise will result in increased sampling steps. We
propose Resfusion, a general framework that incorporates the residual term into the
diffusion forward process, starting the reverse process directly from the noisy degraded images. The form of our inference process is consistent with the DDPM. We
introduced a weighted residual noise, named resnoise, as the prediction target and
explicitly provide the quantitative relationship between the residual term and the
noise term in resnoise. By leveraging a smooth equivalence transformation, Resfusion determine the optimal acceleration step and maintains the integrity of existing
noise schedules, unifying the training and inference processes. The experimental results demonstrate that Resfusion exhibits competitive performance on ISTD dataset,
LOL dataset and Raindrop dataset with only five sampling steps. Furthermore, Resfusion can be easily applied to image generation and emerges with strong versatility.
Our code and model are available at https://github.com/nkicsl/Resfusion.

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models [1, 2] have emerged as powerful and effective conditional generative
models, demonstrating remarkable success in synthesizing high-fidelity data for image generation.
Saharia et al. [3] proved that these generative processes can be applied to image restoration by feeding
degraded images as conditional input into the score network. SNIPS [4] combines annealed Langevin
dynamics and Newton’s method to arrive at a posterior sampling algorithm, exploring the generative
diffusion processes to solve the general linear inverse problems. Based on these, many diffusion-based
models were adapted for downstream image restoration tasks [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. For traditional
diffusion-based models, the reverse process begins with Gaussian white noise, considering only the
degraded images as the conditional input. This results in an increased number of sampling steps.
Image restoration tasks often focus on restoring and editing specific high-frequency details while
preserving crucial low-frequency information, such as the image structure. The degraded images
used as conditional input inherently contain the low-frequency information. Therefore, initiating
the reverse process from Gaussian white noise for image restoration tasks appears unnecessary and
inefficient.
∗

Corresponding authors: litao@nankai.edu.cn, healong2020@163.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

