Statistical and Geometrical Properties of Regularized
Kernel Kullback-Leibler Divergence

Clémentine Chazal
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
clementine.chazal@ensae.fr

Anna Korba
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
anna.korba@ensae.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA - Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research university
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we study the statistical and geometrical properties of the KullbackLeibler divergence with kernel covariance operators (KKL) introduced by Bach
[2022]. Unlike the classical Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence that involves density
ratios, the KKL compares probability distributions through covariance operators
(embeddings) in a reproducible kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), and compute the
Kullback-Leibler quantum divergence. This novel divergence hence shares parallel
but different aspects with both the standard Kullback-Leibler between probability
distributions and kernel embeddings metrics such as the maximum mean discrepancy. A limitation faced with the original KKL divergence is its inability to be
defined for distributions with disjoint supports. To solve this problem, we propose
in this paper a regularized variant that guarantees that the divergence is well defined
for all distributions. We derive bounds that quantify the deviation of the regularized
KKL to the original one, as well as finite-sample bounds. In addition, we provide
a closed-form expression for the regularized KKL, specifically applicable when
the distributions consist of finite sets of points, which makes it implementable. Furthermore, we derive a Wasserstein gradient descent scheme of the KKL divergence
in the case of discrete distributions, and study empirically its properties to transport
a set of points to a target distribution.

1

Introduction

A fundamental task in machine learning is to approximate a target distribution q. For example, in
Bayesian inference [Gelman et al., 1995], it is of interest to approximate posterior distributions of the
parameters of a statistical model for predictive inference. This has led to the vast development of
parametric methods from variational inference [Blei et al., 2017], or non-parametric ones such as
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [Roberts and Rosenthal, 2004], and more recently particlebased optimization [Liu and Wang, 2016, Korba et al., 2021]. In generative modelling [Brock et al.,
2019, Ho et al., 2020, Song et al., 2020, Franceschi et al., 2023] only samples from q are available and
the goal is to generate data whose distribution is similar to the training set distribution. Generally, this
problem can be cast as an optimization problem over P(Rd ), the space of probability distributions
over Rd , where the optimization objective is chosen as a dissimilarity function D(·|q) (a distance
or divergence) between probability distributions, that only vanishes at q. Starting from an initial
distribution p0 , a descent scheme can then be applied such that the trajectory (pt )t≥0 approaches q.
In particular, on the space of probability distributions with bounded second moment P2 (Rd ), one
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

