Accelerating Transformers with Spectrum-Preserving
Token Merging

Hoai-Chau Tran∗1,2 , Duy M. H. Nguyen∗1,3,4 , Duy M. Nguyen5 , TrungTin Nguyen6 , Ngan Le7 ,
Pengtao Xie8,9 , Daniel Sonntag1,10 , James Zou11 , Binh T. Nguyen† 2 , Mathias Niepert† 3,4
1

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), 2 University of Science - VNUHCM
3
Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS), 4 University of Stuttgart,
5
Dublin City University, 6 University of Queensland, 7 University of Arkansas, 8 MBZUAI,
9
UC San Diego, 10 Oldenburg University, 11 Stanford University.

Abstract
Increasing the throughput of the Transformer architecture, a foundational component used in numerous state-of-the-art models for vision and language tasks
(e.g., GPT, LLaVa), is an important problem in machine learning. One recent and
effective strategy is to merge token representations within Transformer models,
aiming to reduce computational and memory requirements while maintaining accuracy. Prior works have proposed algorithms based on Bipartite Soft Matching
(BSM), which divides tokens into distinct sets and merges the top k similar tokens.
However, these methods have significant drawbacks, such as sensitivity to tokensplitting strategies and damage to informative tokens in later layers. This paper
presents a novel paradigm called P I T O M E, which prioritizes the preservation of
informative tokens using an additional metric termed the energy score. This score
identifies large clusters of similar tokens as high-energy, indicating potential candidates for merging, while smaller (unique and isolated) clusters are considered as
low-energy and preserved. Experimental findings demonstrate that P I T O M E saved
from 40-60% FLOPs of the base models while exhibiting superior off-the-shelf performance on image classification (0.5% average performance drop of ViT-MAEH
compared to 2.6% as baselines), image-text retrieval (0.3% average performance
drop of CLIP on Flickr30k compared to 4.5% as others), and analogously in visual
questions answering with LLaVa-7B. Furthermore, P I T O M E is theoretically shown
to preserve intrinsic spectral properties to the original token space under mild
conditions. Our implementation is available at this link.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformers (ViTs) [1] have been integral to recent advancements in computer vision,
leading to state-of-the-art deep learning architectures for representing images and videos [2–5].
However, these transformer-based architectures incur substantial memory costs and have a quadratic
time complexity in the number of tokens due to the self-attention layers. This challenge becomes
particularly severe as model sizes increase, as observed in Large Language Models (LLMs) [6].
To address such limitations, several efforts focus on designing a more efficient attention mechanism
by making it linearly scale with input tokens [7, 8], integrating vision or language domain-specific
modules [9, 10], or pruning the head numbers in ViT [11, 12]. Others propose dynamically pruning
less important tokens w.r.t. pre-defined metrics using learnable masks [13, 14]. However, a primary
downside of these novel methodologies lies in the necessity to retrain the model from scratch,
therefore hindering the leveraging of well-trained models such as LLMs. Moreover, most pruningbased techniques may not accelerate the training process, which arises from the dynamic removal
∗

Co-first author, † Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

