Classifier-guided Gradient Modulation for
Enhanced Multimodal Learning

Zirun Guo1,2 , Tao Jin1†, Jingyuan Chen1 , Zhou Zhao1,2
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Shanghai AI Lab
zrguo.cs@gmail.com

Abstract
Multimodal learning has developed very fast in recent years. However, during the
multimodal training process, the model tends to rely on only one modality based
on which it could learn faster, thus leading to inadequate use of other modalities.
Existing methods to balance the training process always have some limitations
on the loss functions, optimizers and the number of modalities and only consider
modulating the magnitude of the gradients while ignoring the directions of the
gradients. To solve these problems, in this paper, we present a novel method to balance multimodal learning with Classifier-Guided Gradient Modulation (CGGM),
considering both the magnitude and directions of the gradients. We conduct extensive experiments on four multimodal datasets: UPMC-Food 101, CMU-MOSI,
IEMOCAP and BraTS 2021, covering classification, regression and segmentation
tasks. The results show that CGGM outperforms all the baselines and other stateof-the-art methods consistently, demonstrating its effectiveness and versatility. Our
code is available at https://github.com/zrguo/CGGM.

1

Introduction

Humans perceive the world in a multimodal way, such as sight, touch and sound. These multimodal
features can provide comprehensive information to help us understand and explore the environment. Recent years have witnessed great success in multimodal learning, such as visual question
answering [2], multimodal sentiment analysis [18] and multimodal retrieval [26, 13].
Although multimodal learning has made significant progress in recent years, inadequate use of
different modality information during training remains a challenge. Theoretically, for example, Wu
et al. [25] put forward the greedy learner hypothesis which states that a multimodal model learns to
rely on one of the input modalities, based on which it could learn faster, and does not continue to
learn to use other modalities. Huang et al. [12] find that during joint training, multiple modalities
will compete with each other and some modalities will fail in the competition. Experimentally, on
some multimodal datasets, there is little improvement in accuracy between training with only one
modality and training with all modalities [18, 21]. These theoretical analyses and experimental results
demonstrate the inefficiency of multimodal learning to fully utilize and integrate information from
different modalities.
To deal with this problem, recent studies [25, 17, 15, 8, 28, 9] investigate the training process of
multimodal learning and propose gradient modulation strategies to better integrate the information
of different modalities and balance the training process in some situations. However, all of these
methods can not be applied easily for some limitations. For example, Wu et al. [25], Peng et al.
[17], Li et al. [15] and Hua et al. [11] propose balancing methods based on cross-entropy loss for
†

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

