Energy-Guided Continuous Entropic Barycenter
Estimation for General Costs
Alexander Kolesov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
a.kolesov@skoltech.ru

Petr Mokrov & Igor Udovichenko
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia
{p.mokrov, i.udovichenko}@skoltech.ru

Milena Gazdieva
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
m.gazdieva@skoltech.ru

Gudmund Pammer
Graz University of Technology
Graz, Austria
gudmund.pammer@tugraz.at

Anastasis Kratsios
Vector Institute, McMaster University
Ontario, Canada
kratsioa@mcmaster.ca

Evgeny Burnaev & Alexander Korotin
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
{e.burnaev, a.korotin}@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) barycenters are a mathematically grounded way of averaging probability distributions while capturing their geometric properties. In short,
the barycenter task is to take the average of a collection of probability distributions
w.r.t. given OT discrepancies. We propose a novel algorithm for approximating the
continuous Entropic OT (EOT) barycenter for arbitrary OT cost functions. Our approach is built upon the dual reformulation of the EOT problem based on weak OT,
which has recently gained the attention of the ML community. Beyond its novelty,
our method enjoys several advantageous properties: (i) we establish quality bounds
for the recovered solution; (ii) this approach seamlessly interconnects with the
Energy-Based Models (EBMs) learning procedure enabling the use of well-tuned
algorithms for the problem of interest; (iii) it provides an intuitive optimization
scheme avoiding min-max, reinforce and other intricate technical tricks. For validation, we consider several low-dimensional scenarios and image-space setups, including non-Euclidean cost functions. Furthermore, we investigate the practical task of
learning the barycenter on an image manifold generated by a pretrained generative
model, opening up new directions for real-world applications. Our code is available
at https://github.com/justkolesov/EnergyGuidedBarycenters.

1

Introduction

Averaging is a fundamental concept in mathematics and plays a central role in numerous applications.
While it is a straightforward operation when applied to scalars or vectors in a linear space, the
situation complicates when working in the space of probability distributions. Here, simple
convex combinations can be inadequate or even compromise essential geometric features, which
necessitates a different way of taking averages. To address this issue, one may carefully select a
measure of distance that properly captures similarity in the space of probabilities. Then, the task is
to find a procedure which identifies a ‘center’ that, on average, is closest to the reference distributions.
One good choice for comparing and averaging probability distributions is provided by the family of
Optimal Transport (OT) discrepancies [110]. They have clear geometrical meaning and practical
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

