Bridging Geometric States
via Geometric Diffusion Bridge

Shengjie Luo1∗, Yixian Xu1,4∗ , Di He1† , Shuxin Zheng2 , Tie-Yan Liu2 , Liwei Wang1,3†
1
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Microsoft Research AI4Science 3 Center for Data Science, Peking University
4
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong 510555, China
luosj@stu.pku.edu.cn, xyx050@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{shuz, tyliu}@microsoft.com, {dihe, wanglw}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The accurate prediction of geometric state evolution in complex systems is critical
for advancing scientific domains such as quantum chemistry and material modeling.
Traditional experimental and computational methods face challenges in terms of
environmental constraints and computational demands, while current deep learning
approaches still fall short in terms of precision and generality. In this work, we introduce the Geometric Diffusion Bridge (GDB), a novel generative modeling framework that accurately bridges initial and target geometric states. GDB leverages a
probabilistic approach to evolve geometric state distributions, employing an equivariant diffusion bridge derived by a modified version of Doob’s h-transform for connecting geometric states. This tailored diffusion process is anchored by initial and
target geometric states as fixed endpoints and governed by equivariant transition kernels. Moreover, trajectory data can be seamlessly leveraged in our GDB framework
by using a chain of equivariant diffusion bridges, providing a more detailed and
accurate characterization of evolution dynamics. Theoretically, we conduct a thorough examination to confirm our framework’s ability to preserve joint distributions
of geometric states and capability to completely model the underlying dynamics
inducing trajectory distributions with negligible error. Experimental evaluations
across various real-world scenarios show that GDB surpasses existing state-of-theart approaches, opening up a new pathway for accurately bridging geometric states
and tackling crucial scientific challenges with improved accuracy and applicability.

1

Introduction

Predicting the evolution of the geometric state of a system is essential across various scientific
domains [46, 88, 55, 17, 20, 101], offering valuable insights into difficult tasks such as drug discovery [25, 29], reaction modeling [9, 24], and catalyst analysis [13, 105]. Despite its critical importance,
accurately predicting future geometric states of interest is challenging. Experimental approaches often
face obstacles due to strict environmental requirements and physical limits of instruments [102, 3, 69].
Computational approaches seek to solve the problem by simulating the dynamics based on underlying
equations [81, 88]. Though providing greater flexibility, such calculations are typically driven by
first-principle methods or empirical laws, either requiring extensive computational costs [68] or
sacrificing accuracy [40].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Di He<dihe@pku.edu.cn>, Liwei Wang <wanglw@pku.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

