Federated Ensemble-Directed
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Desik Rengarajan∗ Nitin Ragothaman Dileep Kalathil Srinivas Shakkottai
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University

Abstract
We consider the problem of federated offline reinforcement learning (RL), a
scenario under which distributed learning agents must collaboratively learn a
high-quality control policy only using small pre-collected datasets generated according to different unknown behavior policies. Naïvely combining a standard
offline RL approach with a standard federated learning approach to solve this
problem can lead to poorly performing policies. In response, we develop the
Federated Ensemble-Directed Offline Reinforcement Learning Algorithm (FEDORA), which distills the collective wisdom of the clients using an ensemble
learning approach. We develop the FEDORA codebase to utilize distributed
compute resources on a federated learning platform. We show that FEDORA
significantly outperforms other approaches, including offline RL over the combined data pool, in various complex continuous control environments and realworld datasets. Finally, we demonstrate the performance of FEDORA in the
real-world on a mobile robot. We provide our code and a video of our experiments
at https://github.com/DesikRengarajan/FEDORA.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is an approach wherein clients learn collaboratively by sharing their locally
trained models (not their data) with a federating agent, which periodically combines their models
and returns the federated model to the clients for further refinement [10, 30]. Federated learning
has seen recent success in supervised learning applications due to its ability to generate well-trained
models using small amounts of data at each client, while preserving privacy and reducing the usage of
communication resources. There has also been interest in federated learning for online reinforcement
learning (RL), wherein clients learn via sequential interactions with their environments and federating
learned policies across clients [12, 21, 23]. However, such online interactions with real-world systems
are often infeasible, and each client might only posses pre-collected operational data generated
according to a client-specific behavior policy. The fundamental problem of federated offline RL is on
how to learn the optimal policy only using such offline data collected by heterogeneous policies at
clients, without actually sharing any of the data.
Offline RL algorithms [17], such as CQL [15] and TD3-BC [5] offer an actor-critic learning approach
that only utilizes existing datasets at each client. However, in our case, this approach taken across
many small datasets at clients will produce an ensemble of policies of heterogeneous (unknown)
qualities across the clients, along with their corresponding critics of variable accuracy. We will
see that naïvely federating such offline RL trained policies and critics using a standard federation
approach, such as FedAvg [20] can lead to a policy that is even worse than the constituent policies.
We hence identify the following basic challenges of federated offline RL: (i) Ensemble heterogeneity:
Heterogeneous client datasets will generate policies of different performance levels. It is vital to
capture the collective wisdom of this ensemble of policies, not average them. (ii) Pessimistic value
∗

Corresponding author. Email:desik.29@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

