EyeGraph: Modularity-aware Spatio Temporal Graph
Clustering for Continuous Event-based Eye Tracking

Nuwan Bandara† , Thivya Kandappu† , Argha Sen∗ , Ila Gokarn‡ , Archan Misra†
†
Singapore Management University, ∗ Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
‡
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART)
{pmnsbandara, thivyak}@smu.edu.sg, arghasen10@gmail.com,
ila.gokarn@smart.mit.edu, archanm@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Continuous tracking of eye movement dynamics plays a significant role in developing a broad spectrum of human-centered applications, such as cognitive skills
modeling, biometric user authentication, and foveated rendering. Recently neuromorphic cameras have garnered significant interest in the eye-tracking research
community, owing to their sub-microsecond latency in capturing intensity changes
resulting from eye movements. Nevertheless, the existing approaches for eventbased eye tracking suffer from several limitations: dependence on RGB frames,
label sparsity, and training on datasets collected in controlled lab environments
that do not adequately reflect real-world scenarios. To address these limitations, in
this paper, we propose a dynamic graph-based approach that uses the event stream
for high-fidelity tracking of pupillary movement. We first present EyeGraph, a
large-scale, multi-modal near-eye tracking dataset collected using a wearable event
camera attached to a head-mounted device from 40 participants – the dataset was
curated while mimicking in-the-wild settings, with variations in user movement
and ambient lighting conditions. Subsequently, to address the issue of label sparsity, we propose an unsupervised topology-aware spatio-temporal graph clustering
approach as a benchmark. We show that our unsupervised approach achieves performance comparable to more onerous supervised approaches while consistently
outperforming the conventional clustering-based unsupervised approaches.

1

Introduction

Fine-grained, high-frequency eye tracking is increasingly of interest as an enabler of a wide variety
of applications, such as biometric user authentication [30, 40, 57], foveated rendering for augmented
and virtual reality [27, 43], and monitoring of cognitive attention/overload [15]. However, rapid and
intricate eye movements [32] (with pupillary acceleration reaching values as high as 24, 000◦ /s2 [1]),
such as fixations (moments when the eyes are stationary and focused on a particular point), saccades
(quick movements of both eyes between fixation points in the same direction), and microsaccades
(small involuntary eye movements within fixation points) are difficult to capture with conventional
RGB cameras [2, 35] due to their poor temporal resolution, susceptibility to motion blur, and
constrained capability to accurately detect and track pupils under low lighting conditions. In this
paper, we explore the possibility of using Neuromorphic event cameras [37, 20] as an alternative
to traditional RGB-based eye tracking. Neuromorphic vision sensors capture changes in the visual
scene asynchronously, only recording data when a significant event occurs, leading to a more efficient,
high-frequency, and finer-grained depiction of eye movement dynamics.
Recent approaches for event-based eye-tracking predominantly adopt a supervised learning approach
that uses either (i) RGB frames to guide pupil localization in event streams [59, 2, 73, 9] or (ii)
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

