ETO:Efficient Transformer-based Local Feature
Matching by Organizing Multiple Homography
Hypotheses
Junjie Ni1

Guofeng Zhang1∗

Xinyang Liu1
1

Guanglin Li1

Zhaoyang Huang2

Yijin Li1

Hujun Bao1∗

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

2

CUHK MMLab

Abstract
Recent developments have led to the emergence of transformer-based approaches
for local feature matching, resulting in enhanced accuracy of matches. However, the
time required for transformer-based feature enhancement is excessively long, which
limits their practical application. In this paper, we propose methods to reduce the
computational load of transformers during both the coarse matching and refinement
stages. During the coarse matching phase, we organize multiple homography
hypotheses to approximate continuous matches. Each hypothesis encompasses
several features to be matched, significantly reducing the number of features
that require enhancement via transformers. In the refinement stage, we reduce
the bidirectional self-attention and cross-attention mechanisms to unidirectional
cross-attention, thereby substantially decreasing the cost of computation. Overall,
our method demonstrates at least 4 times faster compared to other transformerbased feature matching algorithms. Comprehensive evaluations on other open
datasets such as Megadepth, YFCC100M, ScanNet, and HPatches demonstrate our
method’s efficacy, highlighting its potential to significantly enhance a wide array
of downstream applications.

1

Introduction

Local feature matching [1, 2] is a fundamental problem in the field of computer vision and plays
a significant role in downstream applications, including but not limited to SLAM [3–8], 3D reconstruction [9, 10], visual localization [11–13], and object pose estimation [14, 15]. However,
traditional CNN-based methods [16, 17] often fail under extreme conditions due to the lack of a
global receptive field, thus meeting failure under dramatic changes in scale, illumination, viewpoint,
or weakly-textured scenes.
Recently, some methods [18–20] forgo traditional CNN-based approaches and base on Transformer [21] for better modeling the long-range dependencies. However, Transformer is widely
known for its high computational complexity especially when it is applied in vision tasks where the
computational complexity grows quadratically in the number of the input image tokens (i.e., patches).
To reduce the inherent complexity associated with the Transformer, these methods generally adopt
the coarse-to-fine strategy and incorporate more computationally efficient variants of the Transformer,
such as the Linear Transformer [22]. Nevertheless, the computational overhead remains substantial
and severely hinders the application demanding low-latency operations, such as tracking [23–25], or
those requiring the processing of extensive datasets, such as large-scale mapping [26].
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

