DOPPLER: Differentially Private Optimizers with
Low-pass Filter for Privacy Noise Reduction

Xinwei Zhang∗
University of Southern California

Zhiqi Bu†
Amazon

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota

Meisam Razaviyayn∗
University of Southern California

Abstract
Privacy is a growing concern in modern deep-learning systems and applications.
Differentially private (DP) training prevents the leakage of sensitive information
in the collected training data from the trained machine learning models. DP optimizers, including DP stochastic gradient descent (DPSGD) and its variants, privatize the training procedure by gradient clipping and DP noise injection. However, in practice, DP models trained using DPSGD and its variants often suffer
from significant model performance degradation. Such degradation prevents the
application of DP optimization in many key tasks, such as foundation model pretraining. In this paper, we provide a novel signal processing perspective to the
design and analysis of DP optimizers. We show that a “frequency domain” operation called low-pass filtering can be used to effectively reduce the impact of DP
noise. More specifically, by defining the “frequency domain” for both the gradient
and differential privacy (DP) noise, we have developed a new component, called
DOPPLER. This component is designed for DP algorithms and works by effectively amplifying the gradient while suppressing DP noise within this frequency
domain. As a result, it maintains privacy guarantees and enhances the quality of
the DP-protected model. Our experiments show that the proposed DP optimizers
with a low-pass filter outperform their counterparts without the filter by 3%−10%
in test accuracy on various models and datasets. Both theoretical and practical evidence suggest that the DOPPLER is effective in closing the gap between DP and
non-DP training.

1

Introduction

A rapidly growing number of modern machine learning applications in computer vision, natural
language processing, and their mixtures rely on the development of large foundation models, whose
performance heavily depends on the huge amounts of data collected from individual users. The
leakage of potentially sensitive information in training data has become an increasingly critical
issue when releasing and using machine learning models. Unfortunately, modern complex models
have a strong ability to memorize the exact training data during the training processing Carlini et al.
(2021); Pan et al. (2020). To alleviate the possible privacy leakage in the model training procedure,
privacy-preserving optimization has attracted both researchers’ and practitioners’ interests.
Differential Privacy (DP) Dwork and Roth (2014) provides a strong theoretical guarantee with an
easy and nearly plug-and-play mechanism, i.e., gradient clipping and noise injection, for existing
optimization algorithms to guarantee the privacy of training procedures Abadi et al. (2016). By
directly applying the DP mechanism to existing optimizers, DP optimizers have achieved decent
performance in fine-tuning foundation models (Yu et al., 2021; Bu et al., 2024) or training small
∗
xinweiz,razaviya@usc.edu, † This work is not affiliated with Zhiqi Bu’s position at Amazon.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

