Arctique: An artificial histopathological dataset
unifying realism and controllability for uncertainty
quantification

Jannik Franzen1,2,6,∗, , Claudia Winklmayr1,∗ , Vanessa E. Guarino1,5,∗ , Christoph Karg1,∗ ,
Xiaoyan Yu1,5 , Nora Koreuber1 , Jan P. Albrecht1,5 ,
Philip Bischoff2,3,4 , Dagmar Kainmueller1,6,
1

Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association
and Helmholtz Imaging, Berlin, Germany
2
Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin
and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institute of Pathology, Berlin, Germany
3
Berlin Institute of Health at Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin
4
German Cancer Consortium, German Cancer Research Center, Partner Site Berlin
5
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Berlin, Germany
6
Digital Engineering Faculty of the University of Potsdam
{firstname.lastname}@mdc-berlin.de

∗

equal contribution

Abstract
Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) is crucial for reliable image segmentation. Yet,
while the field sees continual development of novel methods, a lack of agreedupon benchmarks limits their systematic comparison and evaluation: Current UQ
methods are typically tested either on overly simplistic toy datasets or on complex
real-world datasets that do not allow to discern true uncertainty. To unify both
controllability and complexity, we introduce Arctique, a procedurally generated
dataset modeled after histopathological colon images. We chose histopathological
images for two reasons: 1) their complexity in terms of intricate object structures
and highly variable appearance, which yields challenging segmentation problems,
and 2) their broad prevalence for medical diagnosis and respective relevance of
high-quality UQ. To generate Arctique, we established a Blender-based framework
for 3D scene creation with intrinsic noise manipulation. Arctique contains up to
50,000 rendered images with precise masks as well as noisy label simulations. We
show that by independently controlling the uncertainty in both images and labels,
we can effectively study the performance of several commonly used UQ methods.
Hence, Arctique serves as a critical resource for benchmarking and advancing
UQ techniques and other methodologies in complex, multi-object environments,
bridging the gap between realism and controllability. All code is publicly available,
allowing re-creation and controlled manipulations of our shipped images as well as
creation and rendering of new scenes.

1

Introduction

The crucial importance of reliable UQ for the deployment of segmentation algorithms to safetycritical real-world settings has long been recognized by the machine learning community, and the
field has seen substantial development of methodology over past years (see e.g. [12, 1, 31]). However,
there is a glaring lack of comprehensive evaluation of UQ methods, which makes it difficult to
contextualize new methods within the existing paradigms, and renders the choice of suitable UQ
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

