Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by
Combining Weak Instruments and Observational Data

Miruna Oprescu
Cornell University
amo78@cornell.edu

Nathan Kallus
Cornell University
kallus@cornell.edu

Abstract
Accurately predicting conditional average treatment effects (CATEs) is crucial
in personalized medicine and digital platform analytics. Since the treatments of
interest often cannot be directly randomized, observational data is leveraged to learn
CATEs, but this approach can incur significant bias from unobserved confounding.
One strategy to overcome these limitations is to leverage instrumental variables
(IVs) as latent quasi-experiments, such as randomized intent-to-treat assignments
or randomized product recommendations. This approach, on the other hand, can
suffer from low compliance, i.e., IV weakness. Some subgroups may even exhibit
zero compliance, meaning we cannot instrument for their CATEs at all. In this
paper we develop a novel approach to combine IV and observational data to
enable reliable CATE estimation in the presence of unobserved confounding in the
observational data and low compliance in the IV data, including no compliance for
some subgroups. We propose a two-stage framework that first learns biased CATEs
from the observational data, and then applies a compliance-weighted correction
using IV data, effectively leveraging IV strength variability across covariates. We
characterize the convergence rates of our method and validate its effectiveness
through a simulation study. Additionally, we demonstrate its utility with real data
by analyzing the heterogeneous effects of 401(k) plan participation on wealth.

1

Introduction

The use of observational data for individual-level causal analyses is becoming increasingly common
in personalized medicine, online platforms, and any setting where understanding individualized
responses is crucial and/or presents an opportunity for personalization. The key quantity for such
analyses is the conditional average treatment effect (CATE), which captures how treatment effects vary
according to baseline covariates (features). This measure provides insight into effect heterogeneity
and enables personalization.
Using observational data can nonetheless introduce bias from unobserved confounding, where the
observed relationship between outcomes and interventions is influenced not only by treatment effects
but also by variables that influence both outcome and treatment, such as socioeconomic status, health,
user mood, etc., which are not captured by baseline covariates. These biases can skew causal effect
estimates, resulting in unreliable analyses or even harmful policy decisions.
Randomized trials are the gold standard for causal inference, but they are often infeasible. For
instance, digital services cannot force users to view or buy a product, and clinical trials cannot require
invasive treatments. A common alternative is to randomize the encouragement of certain actions,
such as recommending a product or treatment. These encouragements can serve as instrumental
variables (IVs) which, under certain conditions, enable unbiased estimation of treatment effects [4].
Identification of CATEs using IVs crucially hinges on the premise that compliance – the correlation
between the treatment received and the intent/encouragement – is nonzero across all baseline-covariate
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

