FVEL: Interactive Formal Verification Environment
with Large Language Models via Theorem Proving

Xiaohan Lin1∗ Qingxing Cao1∗ Yinya Huang2∗ Haiming Wang3∗ Jianqiao Lu4
Zhengying Liu5 Linqi Song2 Xiaodan Liang1,6†
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 City Univeristy of Hong Kong
3
Sun Yat-sen University 4 The University of Hong Kong
5
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 6 DarkMatter AI Research

Abstract
Formal verification (FV) has witnessed growing significance with emerging program synthesis by the evolving large language models (LLMs). However, current
formal verification mainly resorts to symbolic verifiers or hand-craft rules, resulting
in limitations for extensive and flexible verification. On the other hand, formal
systems for automated theorem proving, such as Isabelle, serve as another line
of rigorous verification, upheld by extensive rules and theorems. In this paper,
we propose FVEL3 , an interactive Formal Verification Environment with LLMs.
Specifically, FVEL transforms a given code to be verified into Isabelle, and then
conducts verification via neural automated theorem proving with an LLM. The
joined paradigm leverages the rigorous yet abundant formulated and organized
rules in Isabelle and is also convenient for introducing and adjusting cutting-edge
LLMs. To achieve this goal, we extract a large-scale dataset for automated formal
verification named FVEL ER3 . The FVEL ER dataset includes code dependencies
and verification processes that are formulated in Isabelle, containing 758 theories,
29,304 lemmas, and 201,498 proof steps with in-depth dependencies. We benchmark FVEL ER in the FVEL environment by fine-tuning LLMs with FVEL ER and
then evaluating them on Code2Inv and SV-COMP. The results show that FVEL
with FVEL ER fine-tuned Llama3-8B solves 17.39% (69→81) more problems, and
Mistral-7B 12% (75→84) more problems in SV-COMP. And the proportion of
proof errors is reduced. Project page: https://fveler.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Formal verification (FV), or automated program verification [36, 2] checks if a code meets a specific
demand and is correct to implement. As the code synthesis ability of current models [27, 24, 8] evolves
rapidly, there is a growing demand for automated verification of diverse and abundant synthesis
programs. However, current formal verification mainly resorts to symbolic verifiers [10, 6, 21] or
hand-craft rules [40]. However, symbolic verification can not leverage the advanced reasoning ability
of current large language models (LLMs), while hand-craft rules with limited execution on specific
code cases have restricted abilities to general verification.
On the other hand, automated theorem proving (ATP) [43, 1, 13] is a line of work on rigorous
verification with formal languages (e.g., Isabelle [29], Lean [5]) and interactive proof environments
(e.g., PISA [15], LeanDojo [41]). Such formal languages and toolkits maintain corresponding
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
3
FVEL: Pronounced as fuel. FVEL ER: Pronounced as fueler. FVEL environment resource.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

