Evaluation of Text-to-Video Generation Models: A
Dynamics Perspective
Mingxiang Liao1∗ Hannan Lu2∗ Xinyu Zhang3,4∗ Fang Wan1† Tianyu Wang1
Yuzhong Zhao1 Wangmeng Zuo2 Qixiang Ye1 Jingdong Wang4
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Harbin Institute of Technology
3
The University of Adelaide 4 Baidu Inc.
{liaomingxiang20, wangtianyu21, zhaoyuzhong20}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{wanfang, qxye}@ucas.ac.cn, {luhannan, wmzuo}@hit.edu.cn
xinyu.zhang02@adelaide.edu.au, wangjingdong@baidu.com

Abstract
Comprehensive and constructive evaluation protocols play an important role when
developing sophisticated text-to-video (T2V) generation models. Existing evaluation protocols primarily focus on temporal consistency and content continuity, yet
largely ignore dynamics of video content. Such dynamics is an essential dimension
measuring the visual vividness and the honesty of video content to text prompts.
In this study, we propose an effective evaluation protocol, termed DEVIL, which
centers on the dynamics dimension to evaluate T2V generation models, as well as
improving existing evaluation metrics. In practice, we define a set of dynamics
scores corresponding to multiple temporal granularities, and a new benchmark of
text prompts under multiple dynamics grades. Upon the text prompt benchmark,
we assess the generation capacity of T2V models, characterized by metrics of
dynamics ranges and T2V alignment. Moreover, we analyze the relevance of
existing metrics to dynamics metrics, improving them from the perspective of
dynamics. Experiments show that DEVIL evaluation metrics enjoy up to about
90% consistency with human ratings, demonstrating the potential to advance T2V
generation models. Project page: t2veval.github.io/DEVIL/.

1

Introduction

With the rapid progress of video generation technology, the demand of comprehensively evaluating
model performance continues to grow. Recent benchmarks [27, 24] have included various metrics,
e.g., generation quality, video-text alignment degree, and video content continuity, to evaluate T2V
generation models. Despite of the great efforts made, an essential characteristic of video, i.e.,
dynamics, remains ignored.
Dynamics is a crucial dimension when evaluating video generation models for the following two
reasons: (i) In practical applications, it is expected that generated video content is honest to text
prompts, e.g., dramatic text prompts result in videos of high dynamics. (ii) In real-world scenarios,
dynamics are negatively relevant to commonly used evaluation metrics, as observed by recent
benchmark studies [24, 27]. This allows T2V models to ‘cheat’ by generating low-dynamic video
content in many cases to achieve high scores upon these metrics.
In this study, we introduce DEVIL, a comprehensive evaluation protocol, which assesses T2V
generation models from a perspective of dynamics. DEVIL treats dynamics as a primary dimension
for T2V model evaluation, as well as enhancing the completeness of existing metrics. To fulfill
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

