Deep Learning for Computing Convergence Rates of
Markov Chains
Yanlin Qu Jose Blanchet Peter Glynn
Department of Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
{quyanlin,jose.blanchet,glynn}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Convergence rate analysis for general state-space Markov chains is fundamentally important in operations research (stochastic systems) and machine learning
(stochastic optimization). This problem, however, is notoriously difficult because
traditional analytical methods often do not generate practically useful convergence
bounds for realistic Markov chains. We propose the Deep Contractive Drift Calculator (DCDC), the first general-purpose sample-based algorithm for bounding the
convergence of Markov chains to stationarity in Wasserstein distance. The DCDC
has two components. First, inspired by the new convergence analysis framework in
(Qu et al., 2023), we introduce the Contractive Drift Equation (CDE), the solution
of which leads to an explicit convergence bound. Second, we develop an efficient
neural-network-based CDE solver. Equipped with these two components, DCDC
solves the CDE and converts the solution into a convergence bound. We analyze
the sample complexity of the algorithm and further demonstrate the effectiveness
of the DCDC by generating convergence bounds for realistic Markov chains arising from stochastic processing networks as well as constant step-size stochastic
optimization.

1

Introduction

General state-space Markov chains are indispensable in a wide array of fields due to their flexibility
and applicability in modeling random dynamical systems. To analyze the long-term behavior of these
Markovian models, estimating the rate of convergence to equilibrium is critical. When designing
reliable real-world systems (e.g. cloud platforms and manufacturing lines), the faster the convergence,
the faster the recovery after disturbances. When designing efficient sample-based algorithms (e.g.
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) variants and MCMC), the faster the convergence, the faster the goal
attainment. The rate of convergence also appears in MDP-related sample complexity results under
the name "mixing time". Although convergence rate estimation is critically important, estimating the
convergence rate of even a mildly complex chain can be extremely difficult.
Over the last three decades, significant efforts have been made to bound the convergence of general
state-space Markov chains. Most of these works utilize a pair of drift and minorization conditions
(D&M) to bound the convergence in terms of the total variation (TV) distance (Meyn et al., 1994;
Rosenthal, 1995; Jarner and Roberts, 2002; Douc et al., 2004; Baxendale, 2005; Andrieu et al.,
2015). The drift condition forces the chain to move towards a selected region. On such a region, the
minorization condition allows the chain to regenerate or to couple with a stationary version of the
chain. This analysis tends to produce overly conservative TV bounds, especially in high-dimensional
settings; see (Qin and Hobert, 2021) for a discussion.
The Wasserstein distance, as a measure of convergence to equilibrium, can exhibit better dimension
dependence (Qin and Hobert, 2022b). In addition, many Markov chains of interest (e.g. constant
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

