How does Architecture Influence the Base Capabilities
of Pre-trained Language Models? A Case Study Based
on FFN-Wider and MoE Transformers

1

Xin Lu1 , Yanyan Zhao1,∗, Bing Qin1 , Liangyu Huo2 , Qing Yang2 , Dongliang Xu2
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Du Xiaoman (Beijing) Science Technology Co., Ltd.
1
{xlu, yyzhao, qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn
2
{huoliangyu, yangqing, xudongliang}@duxiaoman.com

Abstract
Pre-trained language models have been proven to possess strong base capabilities,
which not only excel in in-distribution language modeling but also show powerful
abilities in out-of-distribution language modeling, transfer learning and few-shot
learning. Unlike existing work focusing on the influence of scale on base capabilities, our work examines the influence of architecture on those. Specifically, our
concern is: How does architecture influence the base capabilities of pre-trained
language models? In this work, we attempt to explain and reverse the decline in
base capabilities caused by the architecture of FFN-Wider Transformers, seeking to
provide some insights. Through analysis, we found the contribution ratio of MultiHead Attention (a combination function) to pre-trained language modeling is a key
factor affecting base capabilities. FFN-Wider Transformers reduce the contribution
ratio of this combination function, leading to a decline in base capabilities. We
confirmed this by experiments and proposed Combination Enhanced Architecture
(CEA) to address the decline in base capabilities of such models. Significantly,
we extended our explanation and CEA to Mixture of Experts (MoE) Transformers. We successfully achieved significant improvements in base capabilities on a
14B parameter MoE model, demonstrating the practical application value of our
work. This also indicates that our analysis has a certain guiding significance for
architecture analysis, architecture improvement and architecture design.

1

Introduction

Recent research has discovered that pre-trained language models possess strong base capabilities [24,
7, 3, 22]. They can not only address in-distribution language modeling which is usually their pretraining objective, but also unexpectedly excel in out-of-distribution language modeling, transfer
learning, few-shot learning, etc. This has attracted the attention of many researchers.
However, it has also been observed that the cost of pre-training a language model is substantial,
with the trial-and-error approach based on empirical improvements proving to be very expensive.
Consequently, there is a desire to gain insights into the final performance by analyzing factors like
scale and architecture that directly determine the base capabilities of models.
In this process, much attention has been focused on analyzing scale, leading to the formulation of
compelling scaling laws [14, 11] that drive the trend of enhancing base capability by increasing
parameter numbers, data volume and training tokens. In contrast, the impact of architecture has not
∗

Email corresponding.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

