Oracle-Efficient Differentially Private Learning with
Public Data
Adam Block
Department of Mathematics
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
ablock@mit.edu

Mark Bun
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
mbun@bu.edu

Rathin Desai
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
rathin@bu.edu

Abhishek Shetty
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
shetty@berkeley.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Abstract
Due to statistical lower bounds on the learnability of many function classes under privacy constraints, there has been recent interest in leveraging public data
to improve the performance of private learning algorithms. In this model, algorithms must always guarantee differential privacy with respect to the private samples while also ensuring learning guarantees when the private data distribution is
sufficiently close to that of the public data. Previous work has demonstrated that
when sufficient public, unlabelled data is available, private learning can be made
statistically tractable, but the resulting algorithms have all been computationally
inefficient. In this work, we present the first computationally efficient, algorithms
to provably leverage public data to learn privately whenever a function class is
learnable non-privately, where our notion of computational efficiency is with respect to the number of calls to an optimization oracle for the function class. In
addition to this general result, we provide specialized algorithms with improved
sample complexities in the special cases when the function class is convex or when
the task is binary classification.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2006] is a standard guarantee of individual-level privacy for
statistical data analysis. Algorithmic research on differential privacy aims to understand what statistical tasks are compatible with the definition, and at what cost, e.g., in terms of sample complexity
or computational efficiency. Unfortunately, it is known that some tasks may become more expensive
or outright impossible to conduct with differential privacy. For example, in the setting of binary
classification, there is no differentially private algorithm for solving the simple problem of learning
a one-dimensional classifier over the real numbers [Bun et al., 2015, Alon et al., 2019].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

