Learning to Discuss Strategically:
A Case Study on One Night Ultimate Werewolf
Xuanfa Jin∗,1,3 , Ziyan Wang∗,2 , Yali Du†,2 , Meng Fang4 , Haifeng Zhang†,1,3,5 , Jun Wang†,6
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Cooperative AI Lab, Department of Informatics, King’s College London,
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
4
University of Liverpool, 5 Nanjing Artificial Intelligence Research of IA,
6
AI Centre, Department of Computer Science, UCL
2

Abstract
Communication is a fundamental aspect of human society, facilitating the exchange
of information and beliefs among people. Despite the advancements in large language models (LLMs), recent agents built with these often neglect the control
over discussion tactics, which are essential in communication scenarios and games.
As a variant of the famous communication game Werewolf, One Night Ultimate
Werewolf (ONUW) requires players to develop strategic discussion policies due
to the potential role changes that increase the uncertainty and complexity of the
game. In this work, we first present the existence of the Perfect Bayesian Equilibria (PBEs) in two scenarios of the ONUW game: one with discussion and one
without. The results showcase that the discussion greatly changes players’ utilities
by affecting their beliefs, emphasizing the significance of discussion tactics. Based
on the insights obtained from the analyses, we propose an RL-instructed language
agent framework, where a discussion policy trained by reinforcement learning
(RL) is employed to determine appropriate discussion tactics to adopt. Our experimental results on several ONUW game settings demonstrate the effectiveness
and generalizability of our proposed framework. The project page of our paper:
one-night-ultimate-werewolf.github.io.

1

Introduction

Many games such as StarCraft [1, 2], Diplomacy [3, 4] can approximate various fundamental issues
in real life, and studying these games contributes to a better understanding of the functioning of our
society [5]. Designing artificial intelligence (AI) agents that can play these games well has attracted
a lot of attention [6, 2, 3]. Fortunately, recent large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated
significant potential in constructing intelligent agents in numerous tasks [7–10] due to their impressive
reasoning and emergent generalization abilities [11–13]. Moreover, LLM-based agents have achieved
approaching or even surpassing human performance in games like Chess[14], Minecraft [15–17],
Avalon [18–20] and Werewolf [21–23], etc.
In the game Werewolf [24], the hidden roles and uncertain discussions greatly influence the gameplay,
making it challenging for players. Compared to it, the One Night Ultimate Werewolf (ONUW) game
adds roles that can change the roles of players, and all players only have one nighttime to take action
and one daytime to discuss and vote. Therefore, the key challenge of the ONUW game is to deduce
∗
†

Equal contribution. Author ordering is determined by coin flip.
Correspondence to: 〈yali.du@kcl.ac.uk〉, 〈haifeng.zhang@ia.ac.cn〉, 〈jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk〉.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

