SpeechForensics: Audio-Visual Speech Representation
Learning for Face Forgery Detection
Yachao Liang1,2 Min Yu1,2∗ Gang Li3 Jianguo Jiang1,2 Boquan Li4∗
Feng Yu5 Ning Zhang6 Xiang Meng1,2 Weiqing Huang1,2
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Deakin University 4 Harbin Engineering University
5
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Institute of Forensic Science, Ministry of Public Security
{liangyachao, yumin}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Detection of face forgery videos remains a formidable challenge in the field of
digital forensics, especially the generalization to unseen datasets and common
perturbations. In this paper, we tackle this issue by leveraging the synergy between
audio and visual speech elements, embarking on a novel approach through audiovisual speech representation learning. Our work is motivated by the finding that
audio signals, enriched with speech content, can provide precise information effectively reflecting facial movements. To this end, we first learn precise audio-visual
speech representations on real videos via a self-supervised masked prediction task,
which encodes both local and global semantic information simultaneously. Then,
the derived model is directly transferred to the forgery detection task. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
in terms of cross-dataset generalization and robustness, without the participation of
any fake video in model training. The code is available here.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of generative models enables synthetic realistic facial images [20, 39, 35], and
they have significantly enhanced face manipulation techniques, allowing for the replacement of facial
identities and the modification of attributes such as expressions [60, 59] and lip movements[1, 3].
While these advancements offer vast potential for entertainment and filmmaking, they also harbor the
risk of misuse for deceptive purposes.
In response to these concerns, there has been a surge in the development of face forgery detection
methodologies grounded in deep learning [4, 55, 63, 71, 43, 70, 30, 64]. Despite these efforts, it is
widely acknowledged that face forgery detectors frequently experience a decline in effectiveness
when confronted with novel manipulation techniques [19, 12, 45]. This vulnerability poses significant
hurdles to the reliable application of these detection systems, highlighting a critical area for ongoing
research and innovation.
To enhance the generalization capabilities of face forgery detectors, researchers have proposed
various methods aimed at mining more discriminative clues [70, 62, 71, 29, 64]. Some works focus
on detecting spatial artifacts left in the process of facial manipulation [12, 43, 70, 9], especially
blending boundaries [43, 57]. However, these methods are sensitive to common perturbations,
making them difficult to generalize to real-life scenarios. Another line of research resorts to model
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

