SG-Nav: Online 3D Scene Graph Prompting for
LLM-based Zero-shot Object Navigation

Hang Yin1∗, Xiuwei Xu1∗† , Zhenyu Wu2 , Jie Zhou1 , Jiwen Lu1‡
1
Tsinghua University
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{yinh23, xxw21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
wuzhenyu@bupt.edu.cn, {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new framework for zero-shot object navigation. Existing
zero-shot object navigation methods prompt LLM with the text of spatially closed
objects, which lacks enough scene context for in-depth reasoning. To better
preserve the information of environment and fully exploit the reasoning ability of
LLM, we propose to represent the observed scene with 3D scene graph. The scene
graph encodes the relationships between objects, groups and rooms with a LLMfriendly structure, for which we design a hierarchical chain-of-thought prompt to
help LLM reason the goal location according to scene context by traversing the
nodes and edges. Moreover, benefit from the scene graph representation, we further
design a re-perception mechanism to empower the object navigation framework
with the ability to correct perception error. We conduct extensive experiments on
MP3D, HM3D and RoboTHOR environments, where SG-Nav surpasses previous
state-of-the-art zero-shot methods by more than 10% SR on all benchmarks, while
the decision process is explainable. To the best of our knowledge, SG-Nav is
the first zero-shot method that achieves even higher performance than supervised
object navigation methods on the challenging MP3D benchmark. Project page.

1

Introduction

Object navigation, which requires an agent to navigate to an object specified by its category in
unknown environment [3], is a fundamental problem in a wide range of robotic tasks. Thanks to the
advancements in deep learning and reinforcement learning (RL), modular-based object navigation
approaches [6; 32; 48] have achieved impressive performance in recent years, which caches the visual
perception results of the RGB-D observation into semantic map and learns a policy to predict actions
according to this map. However, conventional methods rely on time-consuming training in simulation
environment, which only works well on specific datasets and can only handle limited categories of
goal object.
In order to solve above limitations and enhance the generalization ability of object navigation, zeroshot object navigation has received increasing attention. In the zero-shot setting, the system does
not require any training or finetuning before applied to real-world scenarios, and the goal category
can be freely specified by text in an open-vocabulary manner. Since training data is unavailable,
recent zero-shot object navigation methods [46; 52] leverage large language models (LLM) [36; 1]
instead of RL agent to perform decision-making processes, where the extensive knowledge in LLM
helps to address various common-sense reasoning problems in zero-shot. In these works, the LLM is
required to select a frontier for the agent to explore the unobserved area. As LLM cannot perceive the
∗

Equal contribution. † Project lead. ‡ Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

