Adaptive Preference Scaling for Reinforcement
Learning with Human Feedback

Ilgee Hong∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
ihong39@gatech.edu
Alexander Bukharin
Georgia Institute of Technology
abukharin3@gatech.edu

Zichong Li∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
zli911@gatech.edu

Yixiao Li
Georgia Institute of Technology
yixiaoli@gatech.edu

Tianbao Yang
Texas A&M University
tianbao-yang@tamu.edu

Haoming Jiang
Amazon
jhaoming@amazon.com

Tuo Zhao
Georgia Institute of Technology
tourzhao@gatech.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is a prevalent approach to
align AI systems with human values by learning rewards from human preference
data. Due to various reasons, however, such data typically takes the form of rankings over pairs of trajectory segments, which fails to capture the varying strengths
of preferences across different pairs. In this paper, we propose a novel adaptive
preference loss, underpinned by distributionally robust optimization (DRO), designed to address this uncertainty in preference strength. By incorporating an
adaptive scaling parameter into the loss for each pair, our method increases the
flexibility of the reward function. Specifically, it assigns small scaling parameters
to pairs with ambiguous preferences, leading to more comparable rewards, and
large scaling parameters to those with clear preferences for more distinct rewards.
Computationally, our proposed loss function is strictly convex and univariate with
respect to each scaling parameter, enabling its efficient optimization through a simple second-order algorithm. Our method is versatile and can be readily adapted to
various preference optimization frameworks, including direct preference optimization (DPO). Our experiments with robotic control and natural language generation
with large language models (LLMs) show that our method not only improves policy
performance but also aligns reward function selection more closely with policy
optimization, simplifying the hyperparameter tuning process.

1

Introduction

In the field of artificial intelligence, aligning AI systems with human preferences has become
increasingly crucial, particularly for applications involving complex data and models like large
language models (LLMs) in natural language processing [38, 28]. Reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) has gained popularity for customizing AI systems [12, 3, 47]. RLHF
involves learning a reward function from human preference data, then using a reinforcement learning
algorithm to train a policy to optimize the learned reward model.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

