Matrix Denoising with Doubly Heteroscedastic Noise:
Fundamental Limits and Optimal Spectral Methods

Yihan Zhang
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
zephyr.z798@gmail.com

Marco Mondelli
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
marco.mondelli@ist.ac.at

Abstract
We study the matrix denoising problem of estimating the singular vectors of a
rank-1 signal corrupted by noise with both column and row correlations. Existing
works are either unable to pinpoint the exact asymptotic estimation error or, when
they do so, the resulting approaches (e.g., based on whitening or singular value
shrinkage) remain vastly suboptimal. On top of this, most of the literature has
focused on the special case of estimating the left singular vector of the signal
when the noise only possesses row correlation (one-sided heteroscedasticity). In
contrast, our work establishes the information-theoretic and algorithmic limits of
matrix denoising with doubly heteroscedastic noise. We characterize the exact
asymptotic minimum mean square error, and design a novel spectral estimator
with rigorous optimality guarantees: under a technical condition, it attains positive
correlation with the signals whenever information-theoretically possible and, for
one-sided heteroscedasticity, it also achieves the Bayes-optimal error. Numerical
experiments demonstrate the significant advantage of our theoretically principled
method with the state of the art. The proofs draw connections with statistical
physics and approximate message passing, departing drastically from standard
random matrix theory techniques.

1

Introduction

Matrix denoising is a central primitive in statistics and machine learning, and the problem is to
recover a signal X ∈ Rn×d from an observation A = X + W corrupted by additive noise W . This
finds applications across multiple domains of sciences, e.g., imaging [24, 63], biology [14, 46] and
astronomy [70, 5]. When X has low rank and W i.i.d. entries, A is the standard model for principal
component analysis, typically referred to as the Johnstone spiked covariance model [42]. When
n, d are both large and proportional, which corresponds to the most sample-efficient regime, its
Bayes-optimal limits are well understood [52], and it has been established how to achieve them
efficiently [56]. Minimax/non-asymptotic guarantees are also available in special cases, such as
sparse PCA [18], Gaussian mixtures [72] and certain joint scalings of (n, d) [57].
However, in most applications, noise is highly structured and correlated, thereby calling for more
realistic assumptions on W than having i.i.d. entries. A recent line of work addresses this concern
by studying matrix denoising with heteroscedastic noise [1, 69, 33, 44, 26], resting on two basic
ideas: whitening and singular value shrinkage. Whitening refers to multiplying the data matrix by
the square root of the inverse covariance, in order to reduce the model to one with i.i.d. noise; and
singular value shrinkage retains the singular vectors of the data while deflating the singular values to
correct for the noise. Though the exact asymptotic performance of these algorithms has been derived
[69, 33, 44, 26], their optimality is yet to be determined from a Bayesian standpoint. In fact, we will
prove that whitening and shrinkage are not the correct way to approach Bayes optimality.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

