Towards Visual Text Design Transfer
Across Languages

Yejin Choi∗

Jiwan Chung∗ Sumin Shim Giyeong Oh
Yonsei University
yejinchoi@yonsei.ac.kr

Youngjae Yu

MuST-Bench : Multilingual dataset, Multimodal Style Transfer
“a typography of
‘KING’ / ‘王’”
Visual Text Transfer

Multimodal
Style Prompt

Chinese

Multilingual
Transfer
PPO

Generator

Corrector

Figure 1: Generating multilingual visual text following a prompt with typography in the style of an
input image from SIGIL for a multilingual film poster. The film poster is from the movie "Red Shoes
and the 7 Dwarfs" by Locus Corporation.

Abstract
Visual text design plays a critical role in conveying themes, emotions, and atmospheres in multimodal formats such as film posters and album covers. Translating
these visual and textual elements across languages extends the concept of translation beyond mere text, requiring the adaptation of aesthetic and stylistic features.
To address this, we introduce a novel task of Multimodal Style Translation (MuSTBench), a benchmark designed to evaluate the ability of visual text generation
models to perform translation across different writing systems while preserving
design intent. Our initial experiments on MuST-Bench reveal that existing visual
text generation models struggle with the proposed task due to the inadequacy of
textual descriptions in conveying visual design. In response, we introduce SIGIL,
a framework for multimodal style translation that eliminates the need for style
descriptions. SIGIL enhances image generation models through three innovations:
glyph latent for multilingual settings, pre-trained VAEs for stable style guidance,
and an OCR model with reinforcement learning feedback for optimizing readable
character generation. SIGIL outperforms existing baselines by achieving superior
style consistency and legibility while maintaining visual fidelity, setting itself apart
from traditional description-based approaches. We release MuST-Bench publicly
for broader use and exploration1 .
* denotes equal contribution
1

https://huggingface.co/datasets/yejinc/MuST-Bench

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

