GaussianCut: Interactive Segmentation
via Graph Cut for 3D Gaussian Splatting

Umangi Jain, Ashkan Mirzaei, and Igor Gilitschenski
University of Toronto
{umangi, ashkan, gilitschenski}@cs.toronto.edu

Foreground Gaussians
Multiview Images

Pretrained 3DGS

Or

Sparse Point Clicks

Or

Scribbles

GaussianCut

“A Truck”

Text Prompt

Background Gaussians

Figure 1: Our method, GaussianCut, enables interactive object(s) selection. Given an optimized 3D
Gaussian Splatting model for a scene with user inputs (clicks, scribbles, or text) on any viewpoint,
GaussianCut partitions the set of Gaussians as foreground and background.

Abstract
We introduce GaussianCut, a new method for interactive multiview segmentation
of scenes represented as 3D Gaussians. Our approach allows for selecting the
objects to be segmented by interacting with a single view. It accepts high-level user
input, such as point clicks, coarse scribbles, or text. Using 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) as the underlying scene representation simplifies the extraction of objects
of interest which are considered to be a subset of the scene’s Gaussians. Our
key idea is to represent the scene as a graph and use the graph-cut algorithm to
minimize an energy function to effectively partition the Gaussians into foreground
and background. To achieve this, we construct a graph based on scene Gaussians
and devise a segmentation-aligned energy function on the graph to combine user
inputs with scene properties. To obtain an initial coarse segmentation, we leverage
2D image/video segmentation models and then use graph cut to further refine these
coarse estimates. Our empirical evaluations show the adaptability of GaussianCut
across a diverse set of scenes. GaussianCut achieves competitive performance with
state-of-the-art approaches for 3D segmentation without requiring any changes
to the underlying Gaussian-based scene representation. Project page: https:
//umangi-jain.github.io/gaussiancut/.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

