Targeted Sequential Indirect Experiment Design

Elisabeth Ailer
Technical University of Munich
Helmholtz Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
Jason Hartford
Valence Labs

Niclas Dern
Technical University of Munich

Niki Kilbertus
Technical University of Munich
Helmholtz Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)

Abstract
Scientific hypotheses typically concern specific aspects of complex, imperfectly
understood or entirely unknown mechanisms, such as the effect of gene expression
levels on phenotypes or how microbial communities influence environmental health.
Such queries are inherently causal (rather than purely associational), but in many
settings, experiments can not be conducted directly on the target variables of
interest, but are indirect. Therefore, they perturb the target variable, but do not
remove potential confounding factors. If, additionally, the resulting experimental
measurements are multi-dimensional and the studied mechanisms nonlinear, the
query of interest is generally not identified. We develop an adaptive strategy
to design indirect experiments that optimally inform a targeted query about the
ground truth mechanism in terms of sequentially narrowing the gap between an
upper and lower bound on the query. While the general formulation consists of
a bi-level optimization procedure, we derive an efficiently estimable analytical
kernel-based estimator of the bounds for the causal effect, a query of key interest,
and demonstrate the efficacy of our approach in confounded, multivariate, nonlinear
synthetic settings.

1

Introduction

Experimentation is the ultimate arbiter of scientific discovery. While advances in machine learning
(ML) and ever increasing amounts of observational data promise to accelerate scientific discovery
in virtually all scientific disciplines, all hypotheses ultimately have to be supported or falsified by
experiments. But the space of possible experiments is combinatorial, and as a result, experimentation
in the physical world may become a major bottleneck of the scientific process and critically inhibit,
for example, fast turnaround in drug discovery loops even in fully automated labs. Efficient adaptive
data-driven strategies to propose the most useful experiments are thus of vital importance.
Targeted experimentation requires a well-formed hypothesis about the underlying system. We focus
on hypotheses that are typically expressed in terms of causal effects or properties of functional
relationships. For example, we may posit that there is some ground truth mechanism/function f that
describes how a given phenotype depends on gene expression levels in a cell, or how the composition
of microbes affects certain environmental health indicators. In the natural sciences, such mechanisms
are typically (a) nonlinear, (b) dependent on multi-variate inputs, and (c) confounded by additional,
unobserved quantities. For example, the way in which the gut microbiome composition affects energy
metabolism in humans is likely confounded by various environmental and lifestyle choices. Due to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

