FUSE: Fast Unified Simulation and Estimation for
PDEs
Dana Grund
Institute for Atmospheric
and Climate Science, ETH Zurich
dana.grund@ethz.ch

Levi E. Lingsch
Seminar for Applied Mathematics
& AI Center, ETH Zurich
levi.lingsch@ai.ethz.ch
Siddhartha Mishra
Seminar for Applied Mathematics
& AI Center, ETH Zurich
siddhartha.mishra@ethz.ch

Georgios Kissas
AI Center
ETH Zurich
gkissas@ai.ethz.ch

Abstract
The joint prediction of continuous fields and statistical estimation of the underlying
discrete parameters is a common problem for many physical systems governed by
PDEs. Hitherto, it has been separately addressed by employing operator learning
surrogates for field prediction while using simulation-based inference (and its
variants) for statistical parameter determination. Here, we argue that solving both
problems within the same framework can lead to consistent gains in accuracy and
robustness. To this end, we propose a novel and flexible formulation of the operator
learning problem that allows jointly predicting infinite-dimensional quantities and
inferring distributions of finite-dimensional parameters and thus amortizing the
cost of both the inverse and the surrogate models to a joint training step. We
present the capabilities of the proposed methodology for predicting continuous and
discrete biomarkers in full-body haemodynamics simulations under different levels
of missing information, and in a test case for atmospheric large-eddy simulation of a
two-dimensional dry cold bubble, predicting continuous time-series measurements
from inferred system conditions. For both cases, we present comparisons against
different baselines to demonstrate significantly increased accuracy in both the
inverse and surrogate tasks.

1

Introduction

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) describe the propagation of system conditions for a very wide
range of physical systems. Parametric PDEs consider different system conditions as well as an
underlying solution operator characterized by a set of finite-dimensional parameters. Traditional
numerical methods based on different discretization schemes such as Finite Differences, Finite
Volumes, and Finite Elements have been developed along with fast and parallelizable implementations
to tackle complex problems, such as atmospheric modeling and cardiovascular biomechanics. For
parametric PDEs, these methods define maps from the underlying set of parameters, which describe
the dynamics and the boundary/initial conditions and which we assume to be finite-dimensional here,
to physical quantities such as velocity or pressure that are continuous in the spatio-temporal domain.
Despite their successful application, there still exist well-known drawbacks of traditional solvers. To
describe a particular physical phenomenon, PDE parameters and solvers need to be calibrated on
precise conditions that are not known a priori and cannot easily be measured in realistic applications.
Therefore, iterative and thus expensive calibration procedures are considered in the cases where
the parameters and conditions are inferred from data [2]. Even after the solvers are calibrated, an
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

