Dynamic 3D Gaussian Fields for Urban Areas

Tobias Fischer1

Jonas Kulhanek1,3
Samuel Rota Bulò2
Lorenzo Porzi2
1
2
Marc Pollefeys
Peter Kontschieder
1
ETH Zürich 2 Meta Reality Labs 3 CTU Prague
https://tobiasfshr.github.io/pub/4dgf/

Inputs

Geometry

Novel views in varying conditions

3D Gaussians

Dynamic
Composition
Appearance

Neural Fields

Figure 1: Summary. Given a set of heterogeneous input sequences that capture a common geographic area in
varying environmental conditions (e.g. weather, season, and lighting) with distinct dynamic objects (e.g. vehicles,
pedestrians, and cyclists), we optimize a single dynamic scene representation that permits rendering of arbitrary
viewpoints and scene configurations at interactive speeds.

Abstract
We present an efficient neural 3D scene representation for novel-view synthesis
(NVS) in large-scale, dynamic urban areas. Existing works are not well suited
for applications like mixed-reality or closed-loop simulation due to their limited
visual quality and non-interactive rendering speeds. Recently, rasterization-based
approaches have achieved high-quality NVS at impressive speeds. However, these
methods are limited to small-scale, homogeneous data, i.e. they cannot handle
severe appearance and geometry variations due to weather, season, and lighting
and do not scale to larger, dynamic areas with thousands of images. We propose
4DGF, a neural scene representation that scales to large-scale dynamic urban areas,
handles heterogeneous input data, and substantially improves rendering speeds. We
use 3D Gaussians as an efficient geometry scaffold while relying on neural fields
as a compact and flexible appearance model. We integrate scene dynamics via a
scene graph at global scale while modeling articulated motions on a local level
via deformations. This decomposed approach enables flexible scene composition
suitable for real-world applications. In experiments, we surpass the state-of-the-art
by over 3 dB in PSNR and more than 200× in rendering speed.

1

Introduction

The problem of synthesizing novel views from a set of images has received widespread attention
in recent years due to its importance for technologies like AR/VR and robotics. In particular,
obtaining interactive, high-quality renderings of large-scale, dynamic urban areas under varying
weather, lighting, and seasonal conditions is a key requirement for closed-loop robotic simulation
and immersive VR experiences. To achieve this goal, sensor-equipped vehicles act as a frequent data
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

