Large Language Model Unlearning

Yuanshun Yao∗
Meta GenAI
kevinyao@meta.com

Xiaojun Xu
ByteDance Research
xiaojun.xu@bytedance.com

YangLiu∗
UC Santa Cruz
yangliu@ucsc.edu

Abstract
We study how to perform unlearning, i.e. forgetting undesirable (mis)behaviors,
on large language models (LLMs). We show at least three scenarios of aligning
LLMs with human preferences can benefit from unlearning: (1) removing harmful
responses, (2) erasing copyright-protected content as requested, and (3) reducing
hallucinations. Unlearning, as an alignment technique, has three advantages. (1) It
only requires negative (e.g. harmful) examples, which are much easier and cheaper
to collect (e.g. via red teaming or user reporting) than positive (e.g. helpful and
often human-written) examples required in the standard alignment process. (2) It
is computationally efficient. (3) It is especially effective when we know which
training samples cause the misbehavior. To the best of our knowledge, our work
is among the first to explore LLM unlearning. We are also among the first to
formulate the settings, goals, and evaluations in LLM unlearning. Despite only
having negative samples, our ablation study shows that unlearning can still achieve
better alignment performance than RLHF with just 2% of its computational time.

1

Introduction

Making sure large language models (LLMs) generate safe outputs that align with human values
and policy regulation is currently a major task for LLM practitioners. The common tasks include:
(1) removing harmful responses [54, 1, 25], (2) erasing copyrighted contents [5, 44, 20, 9, 25], (3)
reducing hallucinations, (4) removing a user’s data from the trained LLMs after they stop giving
consents, (5) quickly re-enforcing compliance [41, 43, 12] after policy updates.
Though those tasks seem different, the central technical question is identical: How to quickly remove
the impact of certain training samples on LLMs? To this end, we study how to perform large language
model unlearning. If an LLM learns unwanted (mis)behaviors in its pretraining stage, we aim to
unlearn them with samples that represent those problematic behaviors, i.e. with only negative samples.
The benefits of LLM unlearning include: (1) It only requires negative examples that we want the LLM
to forget, which are cheaper and easier to collect through user reporting or red teaming than positive
examples (that are required in the standard RLHF). In addition, discovering negative examples is
highly automatable given the pretrained (unaligned) LLM. (2) It is computationally efficient; the
cost is similar to finetuning LLMs. (3) Unlearning is particularly efficient in removing unwanted
behaviors if practitioners already know which training samples cause them. Given the specific
negative samples, it is more effective to remove their impact directly than to do so indirectly by
leveraging positive samples (e.g. in RLHF) – if the goal is to not generate undesirable outputs, e.g.
generating non-harmful outputs (e.g. nonsensical strings or responses unrelated to prompts) rather
than helpful outputs. If we only have limited resources, unlearning provides a promising alternative
to RLHF to align LLMs when the first priority is to stop LLMs from generating undesirable outputs
since undesirable outputs often cause far more damage than what can be offset by the benefits of
desirable outputs.
∗

Work done while at ByteDance Research.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

