Partial Transportability for Domain Generalization

Kasra Jalaldoust˚ Alexis Bellot˚:
Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Lab
Columbia University
{kasra, eb}@cs.columbia.edu, abellot95@gmail.com

Abstract
A fundamental task in AI is providing performance guarantees for predictions made
in unseen domains. In practice, there can be substantial uncertainty about the distribution of new data, and corresponding variability in the performance of existing
predictors. Building on the theory of partial identification and transportability, this
paper introduces new results for bounding the value of a functional of the target
distribution, such as the generalization error of a classifier, given data from source
domains and assumptions about the data generating mechanisms, encoded in causal
diagrams. Our contribution is to provide the first general estimation technique for
transportability problems, adapting existing parameterization schemes such Neural
Causal Models to encode the structural constraints necessary for cross-population
inference. We demonstrate the expressiveness and consistency of this procedure
and further propose a gradient-based optimization scheme for making scalable
inferences in practice. Our results are corroborated with experiments.

1

Introduction

In the empirical sciences, the value of scientific theories arguably depends on their ability to make
predictions in a domain different from where the theory was initially learned. Understanding when
and how a conclusion in one domain, such as a statistical association, can be generalized to a novel,
unseen domain has taken a fundamental role in the philosophy of biological and social sciences in
the early 21st century. As Campbell and Stanley [8, p. 17] observed in an early discussion on the
interpretation of statistical inferences, “Generalization always turns out to involve generalization into
a realm not represented in one’s sample” where, in particular, statistical associations and distributions
might differ, presenting a fundamental challenge.
As society transitions to become more AI centric, many of the every-day tasks based on predictions
are increasingly delegated to automated systems. Such developments make various parts of society
more efficient, but also require a notion of performance guarantee that is critical for the safety of AI,
in which the problem of generalization appears under different forms. For instance, one critical task
in the field is domain generalization, where one tries to learn a model (e.g. classifier, regressor) on
data sampled from a distribution that differs in several aspects from that expected when deploying the
model in practice. In this context, generalization guarantees must build on knowledge or assumptions
on the “relatedness” of different training and testing domains; for instance, if training and testing
domains are arbitrarily different, no generalization guarantees can be expected from any predictor
[12, 40]. The question becomes how to link the domains of data that are used to train a model (a.k.a.,
the source domains) to the domain where this model is deployed in practice (a.k.a., the target domain).
˚
:

Equal Contribution.
Now at Google DeepMind.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

