PAC-Bayes-Chernoff bounds for unbounded losses

Ioar Casado
Machine Learning Group
Basque Center for Applied Mathematics (BCAM)
icasado@bcamath.org

Luis A. Ortega
Machine Learning Group
Computer Science Dept. - EPS.
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
luis.ortega@uam.es

Aritz Pérez
Machine Learning Group
Basque Center for Applied Mathematics (BCAM)
aperez@bcamath.org

Andrés R. Masegosa
Department of Computer Science
Aalborg University
arma@cs.aau.dk

Abstract
We introduce a new PAC-Bayes oracle bound for unbounded losses that extends
Cramér-Chernoff bounds to the PAC-Bayesian setting. The proof technique relies
on controlling the tails of certain random variables involving the Cramér transform
of the loss. Our approach naturally leverages properties of Cramér-Chernoff bounds,
such as exact optimization of the free parameter in many PAC-Bayes bounds. We
highlight several applications of the main theorem. Firstly, we show that our
bound recovers and generalizes previous results. Additionally, our approach allows
working with richer assumptions that result in more informative and potentially
tighter bounds. In this direction, we provide a general bound under a new modeldependent assumption from which we obtain bounds based on parameter norms
and log-Sobolev inequalities. Notably, many of these bounds can be minimized
to obtain distributions beyond the Gibbs posterior and provide novel theoretical
coverage to existing regularization techniques.

1

Introduction

PAC-Bayes theory provides powerful tools to analyze the generalization performance of randomized
learning algorithms —for an introduction to the subject see the recent surveys of Guedj (2019);
Alquier (2024) and Hellström et al. (2023)—. Let Θ be a model class parametrized by θ ∈ Rd . With
a small abuse of notation, θ ∈ Θ will represent both a model and its parameters. Instead of learning a
single model, we consider the set of probability measures over our class, M1 (Θ), and aim to find the
optimal distribution ρ∗ ∈ M1 (Θ). This approach is more robust than finding the single best model
in Θ, and is tightly related to Bayesian and ensemble methods. The learning algorithm infers this
distribution from a sequence of n training data points D = {xi }ni=1 , which are assumed to be i.i.d.
sampled from an unknown distribution ν(x) with support in X ⊆ Rk .
Given a loss function ℓ : Θ × X → R+ , bounding the gap between the population risk L(θ) :=
Pn
Eν [ℓ(θ, X)] and the empirical risk L̂(θ, D) := n1 i=1 ℓ(θ, xi ) of individual models is the standard
approach in statistical learning theory. In contrast, PAC-Bayes theory provides high-probability
bounds over the population Gibbs risk Eρ [L(θ)] in terms of the empirical Gibbs risk Eρ [L̂(θ, D)]
and an extra term measuring the dependence of ρ to the dataset D. This second term involves
an information measure —usually the Kullback-Leibler divergence KL(ρ|π)— between the data

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

