Rough Transformers: Lightweight and Continuous
Time Series Modelling through Signature Patching

Fernando Moreno-Pino1,∗ Álvaro Arroyo1,2,∗ Harrison Waldon1,∗
Xiaowen Dong1,2 Álvaro Cartea1,3
1

2

Oxford-Man Institute, University of Oxford
Machine Learning Research Group, University of Oxford
3
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford

Abstract
Time-series data in real-world settings typically exhibit long-range dependencies
and are observed at non-uniform intervals. In these settings, traditional sequencebased recurrent models struggle. To overcome this, researchers often replace
recurrent architectures with Neural ODE-based models to account for irregularly
sampled data and use Transformer-based architectures to account for long-range
dependencies. Despite the success of these two approaches, both incur very high
computational costs for input sequences of even moderate length. To address this
challenge, we introduce the Rough Transformer, a variation of the Transformer
model that operates on continuous-time representations of input sequences and
incurs significantly lower computational costs. In particular, we propose multi-view
signature attention, which uses path signatures to augment vanilla attention and to
capture both local and global (multi-scale) dependencies in the input data, while
remaining robust to changes in the sequence length and sampling frequency and
yielding improved spatial processing. We find that, on a variety of time-seriesrelated tasks, Rough Transformers consistently outperform their vanilla attention
counterparts while obtaining the representational benefits of Neural ODE-based
models, all at a fraction of the computational time and memory resources.

1

Introduction

Real-world sequential data in areas such as healthcare [65], finance [36], and biology [28] often are
irregularly sampled, of variable length, and exhibit long-range dependencies. Furthermore, these
data, which may be drawn from financial limit order books [8] or EEG readings [85], are often
sampled at high frequency, yielding long sequences of data. Hence, many popular machine learning
models struggle to model real-world sequential data, due to input dimension inflexibility, memory
constraints, and computational bottlenecks. Rather than treating these data as discrete sequences,
effective theoretical models often assume data are generated from some underlying continuous-time
process [53, 66]. Hence, there is an increased interest in developing machine learning methods that
use continuous-time representations to analyze sequential data.
One recent approach to modelling continuous-time data involves the development of continuous-time
analogues of standard deep learning models, such as Neural ODEs [12] and Neural CDEs [45],
which extend ResNets [37] and RNNs [30], respectively, to continuous-time settings. Instead of
processing discrete data directly, these models operate on a latent continuous-time representation
∗

Equal contribution.
Email: {fernando.moreno-pino, alvaro.arroyo}@eng.ox.ac.uk
Code available at: https://github.com/AlvaroArroyo/RFormer

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

