Validating Climate Models with Spherical
Convolutional Wasserstein Distance

1

Robert C. Garrett1 Trevor Harris2 Zhuo Wang1 Bo Li1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Texas A&M University
{rcg4, zhuowang, libo}@illinois.edu
tharris@stat.tamu.edu

Abstract
The validation of global climate models is crucial to ensure the accuracy and
efficacy of model output. We introduce the spherical convolutional Wasserstein
distance to more comprehensively measure differences between climate models
and reanalysis data. This new similarity measure accounts for spatial variability
using convolutional projections and quantifies local differences in the distribution
of climate variables. We apply this method to evaluate the historical model outputs
of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) members by comparing
them to observational and reanalysis data products. Additionally, we investigate
the progression from CMIP phase 5 to phase 6 and find modest improvements in
the phase 6 models regarding their ability to produce realistic climatologies.

1

Introduction

Climate Model Validation General Circulation Models, or climate models, are mathematical
representations of the climate system that describe interactions between matter and energy through
the ocean, atmosphere, and land [Washington and Parkinson, 2005]. Climate models are the primary
tool for investigating the response of the climate system to changes in forcing, such as increases in
CO2 , and projecting future climate states [Flato et al., 2014]. To assess the plausibility of climate
models, climate scientists compare output from model simulations against observational data [Rood,
2019]. This comparison is the focus of climate model validation techniques for ensuring that climate
models capture the dynamics of the climate system [Roca et al., 2021].
The Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) was initiated in 1995 as a comprehensive and
systematic program for assessing climate models against each other and observational data [Eyring
et al., 2016]. Each model in CMIP participates in a wide variety of experiments such as performing
a historical simulation, a pre-industrial control simulation, and various simulations representing
different scenarios for CO2 emissions [Eyring et al., 2016]. Because historical simulations coincide
with observational measurements, we can compare each model’s synthetic climate distribution to the
distribution of observational or quasi-observational data products [Raäisaänen, 2007], to assess their
reconstructive skill. For complete spatial coverage we compare against reanalysis data, a blend of
observations and short-range weather forecasts through data assimilation [Bengtsson et al., 2004].
This has become one popular climate model validation method [Flato et al., 2014].
Previous approaches Many statistical and machine learning-based methods have been applied to
assess climate model output against reanalysis fields. The most common approach is to compute
the root mean square error (RMSE) between long-term means of the climate model output and the
reanalysis field [Li et al., 2021, Zamani et al., 2020, Karim et al., 2020, Ayugi et al., 2021]. RMSE
provides a direct measure of the differences between two climate fields but does not take into account
internal variability, so we should use it with caution in evaluating climate models. Another approach,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

