Stability and Generalization of Adversarial Training
for Shallow Neural Networks with Smooth Activation
Kaibo Zhang
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
kzhang90@jhu.edu

Yunjuan Wang
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
ywang509@jhu.edu

Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Adversarial training has emerged as a popular approach for training models that are
robust to inference-time adversarial attacks. However, our theoretical understanding
of why and when it works remains limited. Prior work has offered generalization
analysis of adversarial training, but they are either restricted to the Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK) regime or they make restrictive assumptions about data such as
(noisy) linear separability or robust realizability. In this work, we study the stability
and generalization of adversarial training for two-layer networks without any
data distribution assumptions and beyond the NTK regime. Our findings
suggest that for networks with any given initialization and sufficiently large width,
the generalization bound can be effectively controlled via early stopping. We
further improve the generalization bound by leveraging smoothing using Moreau’s
envelope.

1

Introduction

Despite the remarkable performance of over-parameterized deep networks in real-world applications,
recent studies have revealed that they are highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks. These attacks
use maliciously crafted imperceptible perturbations designed to deceive trained neural networks
during inference [Szegedy et al., 2013, Biggio et al., 2013]. The lack of adversarial robustness has
raised significant concerns for deploying neural network-based models in safety-critical applications.
Therefore, it is crucial to design algorithms to learn robust models that can make reliable predictions
on test data even in the presence of adversarial perturbations.
One principal approach to robust learning, adversarial training [Madry et al., 2018] (along with its
variants [Zhang et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2020]), has proven to be an effective empirical defense
mechanism against adversarial attacks. Naturally, this puts an emphasis on also developing a
theoretical understanding of robust learning. To study the generalization performance of robust
learning, one traditional approach is via uniform convergence [Khim and Loh, 2018, Yin et al.,
2019, Awasthi et al., 2020, Mustafa et al., 2022], which provides the worst-case type uniform
bounds for a given hypothesis class and are algorithm independent. Another line of work focuses
on analyzing the convergence and generalization guarantees of adversarial training, yet they either
focus on linear classifiers [Charles et al., 2019, Li et al., 2020, Zou et al., 2021, Chen et al., 2023], or
introduce restrictive distribution assumptions such as (noisy) linear separability [Wang et al., 2024b]
or robust realizability [Mianjy and Arora, 2024]. Therefore, it remains unclear whether we can derive
theoretical results for adversarial training that extend beyond these simplifying assumptions.
In this work, we leverage a different machinery by analyzing adversarial training algorithm through
the lens of uniform stability. Stability is a classical tool in learning theory that has been extensively
studied in the literature [Bousquet and Elisseeff, 2002, Hardt et al., 2016]. Uniform argument stability
measures the difference in output parameters when an algorithm is run on two training sets that
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

