An Equivalence Between Static and Dynamic Regret
Minimization
Andrew Jacobsen∗
Università degli Studi di Milano
Politecnico di Milano
contact@andrew-jacobsen.com

Francesco Orabona
KAUST
francesco@orabona.com

Abstract
We study the problem of dynamic regret minimization in online convex optimization, in which the objective is to minimize the difference between the cumulative loss of an algorithm and that of an arbitrary sequence of comparators. While the literature on this topic is very rich, a unifying framework for
the analysis and design of these algorithms is still missing. In this paper we
show that for linear losses, dynamic regret minimization is equivalent to static
regret minimization in an extended decision space. Using this simple observation, we show that there is a frontier of lower bounds trading off penalties due
to the variance of the losses and penalties due to variability of the comparator
sequence, and provide a framework for achieving any of the guarantees along
this frontier. As a result, we also prove for the first time that adapting to the
squared path-length ofp
an arbitrary
sequence of comparators to achieve regret
P
RT (u1 , . . . , uT ) ≤ O( T t ∥ut − ut+1 ∥2 ) is impossible. However, using our
framework we introduce an alternative notion of variability based on a locallysmoothed comparator sequence ū1 , . . . , ūT , and providep
an algorithm guaranteee T P ∥ūi − ūi+1 ∥2 ),
ing dynamic regret of the form RT (u1 , . . . , uT ) ≤ O(
i
while still matching in the worst case the usual path-length dependencies up to
polylogarithmic terms.

1

Introduction

This paper introduces new techniques for Online Convex Optimization (OCO), a framework for
designing and analyzing algorithms which learn on-the-fly from a stream of data [14, 51, 5, 31, 6].
Formally, consider T rounds of interaction between the learner and their environment. In each
round, the learner chooses wt ∈ W from a convex feasible set W ⊆ Rd , the environment reveals a
G-Lipschitz convex loss function ℓt : W → R, and the learner incurs a loss of ℓt (wt ). The classic
objective in this setting is to minimize the learner’s regret relative to any fixed benchmark u ∈ W:
RT (u) :=

T
X

(ℓt (wt ) − ℓt (u)) .

t=1

In this paper, we study the more general problem of minimizing the learner’s regret relative to any
sequence of benchmarks u1 , . . . , uT ∈ W [17, 18]:
RT (u1 , . . . , uT ) :=

T
X

(ℓt (wt ) − ℓt (ut )) .

t=1
∗

Work done while visiting Optimal Lab at KAUST.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

