Biomedical Visual Instruction Tuning
with Clinician Preference Alignment

Hejie Cui1∗, Lingjun Mao3∗, Xin Liang3 , Jieyu Zhang4 ,
Hui Ren5,6 , Quanzheng Li5,6 , Xiang Li5,6†, Carl Yang2†
1
Stanford University 2 Emory University 3 University of California, Berkeley
4
University of Washington 5 Massachusetts General Hospital 6 Harvard Medical School

Abstract
Recent advancements in multimodal foundation models have showcased impressive
capabilities in understanding and reasoning with visual and textual information.
Adapting these foundation models trained for general usage to specialized domains
like biomedicine requires large-scale domain-specific instruction datasets. While
existing works have explored curating such datasets automatically, the resultant
datasets are not explicitly aligned with domain expertise. In this work, we propose
a data-centric framework, Biomedical Visual Instruction Tuning with Clinician
Preference Alignment (BioMed-VITAL), that incorporates clinician preferences
into both stages of generating and selecting instruction data for tuning biomedical
multimodal foundation models. First, during the generation stage, we prompt
the GPT-4V generator with a diverse set of clinician-selected demonstrations for
preference-aligned data candidate generation. Then, during the selection phase, we
train a separate selection model, which explicitly distills clinician and policy-guided
model preferences into a rating function to select high-quality data for medical
instruction tuning. Results show that the model tuned with the instruction data from
our method demonstrates a significant improvement in open visual chat (18.5%
relatively) and medical VQA (win rate up to 81.73%). Our instruction-following
data, models, and code are available at https://BioMed-VITAL.github.io.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in large pre-trained multimodal models, such as GPT-4V [1], have demonstrated
impressive performance on various language and vision tasks. However, when directly applied to
specialized domains like biomedicine, these models may fall short due to their primary focus on
general usage rather than domain-specific expertise [44, 32]. To bridge this gap and adapt general
domain models to specialized domains, researchers have explored various techniques. Instruction
tuning has emerged as a promising approach, involving the fine-tuning of large foundation models
to follow explicit, natural language instructions [43, 29, 48]. These instructions are composed of
task-specific prompts and their corresponding response, enabling the models to learn and generalize
to a wide range of tasks within the target domain.
Although instruction tuning has proven to be an effective method for adapting models to target
domains and performing various downstream tasks, its success heavily depends on large-scale
instruction-following datasets. Curating large-scale instructional datasets in specialized domains,
such as biomedicine, can be expensive and time-consuming, often requiring significant domain
expertise. Previous work proposes to use strong language models to generate instruction data
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
co-corresponding: xli60@mgh.harvard.edu, j.carlyang@emory.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

