DISP-LLM: Dimension-Independent Structural
Pruning for Large Language Models

Shangqian Gao ˚
Florida State University
Tang Zheng
Samsung Research America

Chi-Heng Lin
Samsung Research America
Yilin Shen
Samsung Research America

Ting Hua
Samsung Research America
Hongxia Jin
Samsung Research America

Yen-Chang Hsu
Samsung Research America

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success in various natural language processing tasks, including language modeling, understanding, and
generation. However, the increased memory and computational costs associated
with these models pose significant challenges for deployment on resource-limited
devices. Structural pruning has emerged as a promising solution to reduce the
costs of LLMs without requiring post-processing steps. Prior structural pruning
methods either follow the dependence of structures at the cost of limiting flexibility,
or introduce non-trivial additional parameters by incorporating different projection
matrices. In this work, we propose a novel approach that relaxes the constraint
imposed by regular structural pruning methods and eliminates the structural dependence along the embedding dimension. Our dimension-independent structural
pruning method offers several benefits. Firstly, our method enables different blocks
to utilize different subsets of the feature maps. Secondly, by removing structural
dependence, we facilitate each block to possess varying widths along its input
and output dimensions, thereby significantly enhancing the flexibility of structural
pruning. We evaluate our method on various LLMs, including OPT, LLaMA,
LLaMA-2, Phi-1.5, and Phi-2. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach
outperforms other state-of-the-art methods, showing for the first time that structural
pruning can achieve an accuracy similar to semi-structural pruning.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized the field of natural language processing by
leveraging deep learning techniques to process and generate human-like text. Compared to smaller
models, LLMs exhibit unique characteristics and demonstrate remarkable abilities in tackling a wide
range of complex tasks [40]. Despite their impressive capabilities, the vast number of parameters
in LLMs often hinders their deployment on resource-constrained devices, such as mobile phones.
Consequently, there is significant interest in reducing the computational and memory requirements of
LLMs.
Existing compression techniques for large language models (LLMs) include weight sparsification
[9], structural pruning [30], and quantization [10]. In this work, we focus on structural pruning and
˚

Part of this project was completed at Samsung Research America. Correspondence to sgao@cs.fsu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

