How does Inverse RL Scale to Large State Spaces?
A Provably Efficient Approach

Filippo Lazzati
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy
filippo.lazzati@polimi.it

Mirco Mutti
Technion
Haifa, Israel

Alberto Maria Metelli
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy

Abstract
In online Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL), the learner can collect samples
about the dynamics of the environment to improve its estimate of the reward function. Since IRL suffers from identifiability issues, many theoretical works on online
IRL focus on estimating the entire set of rewards that explain the demonstrations,
named the feasible reward set. However, none of the algorithms available in the
literature can scale to problems with large state spaces. In this paper, we focus on
the online IRL problem in Linear Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). We show
that the structure offered by Linear MDPs is not sufficient for efficiently estimating
the feasible set when the state space is large. As a consequence, we introduce the
novel framework of rewards compatibility, which generalizes the notion of feasible
set, and we develop CATY-IRL, a sample efficient algorithm whose complexity is
independent of the cardinality of the state space in Linear MDPs. When restricted
to the tabular setting, we demonstrate that CATY-IRL is minimax optimal up to
logarithmic factors. As a by-product, we show that Reward-Free Exploration
(RFE) enjoys the same worst-case rate, improving over the state-of-the-art lower
bound. Finally, we devise a unifying framework for IRL and RFE that may be of
independent interest.

1

Introduction

Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is the problem of inferring the reward function given demonstrations of an optimal behavior, i.e., from an expert agent. [49, 42]. Since its formulation, much of
the research effort has been put into the design of efficient algorithms for solving the IRL problem
[6, 4]. Indeed, the solution of the IRL problem opens the door to a variety of interesting applications,
including Apprenticeship Learning (AL) [2, 1], reward design [16], interpretability of the expert’s
behavior [17], and transferability to new environments [15].
Nowadays, the factor that most negatively impacts the adoption of IRL solutions in real-world
applications is the intrinsic ill-posedness of its formulation. The IRL problem has been historically
defined as the problem of recovering the reward function underlying the demonstrations [49, 42],
even though mere demonstrations can be equivalently explained by a variety of rewards. In other
words, the IRL problem is underconstrained, even in the limit of infinite demonstrations [42, 39].
To overcome this weakness and to come up with a single reward function, three main approaches
are commonly adopted in the literature. (i) The first approach consists of the use of a heuristic
to select a specific reward function from the set of all the rewards that explain the demonstrations.
Implicitly, these works re-define IRL as the problem of recovering the reward function explaining
the demonstrations and complying with the heuristic. As an example, [42, 48] select the reward
that maximizes some notion of margin, and [70] implicitly chooses the reward returned by the
optimization algorithm among those that maximize the likelihood. However, these approaches may
generate issues in applications [56, 15]. (ii) In the second approach, additional constraints beyond
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

