Finding NeMo : Localizing Neurons Responsible For
Memorization in Diffusion Models
Dominik Hintersdorf ∗1,2 Lukas Struppek∗ 1,2
Kristian Kersting1,2,3,4 Adam Dziedzic5 Franziska Boenisch5
1
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)
2
Computer Science Department, Technical University of Darmstadt
3
Hessian Center for AI (Hessian.AI)
4
Centre for Cognitive Science, Technical University of Darmstadt
5
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) produce very detailed and high-quality images. Their
power results from extensive training on large amounts of data—usually scraped
from the internet without proper attribution or consent from content creators. Unfortunately, this practice raises privacy and intellectual property concerns, as DMs
can memorize and later reproduce their potentially sensitive or copyrighted training
images at inference time. Prior efforts prevent this issue by either changing the
input to the diffusion process, thereby preventing the DM from generating memorized samples during inference, or removing the memorized data from training
altogether. While those are viable solutions when the DM is developed and deployed in a secure and constantly monitored environment, they hold the risk of
adversaries circumventing the safeguards and are not effective when the DM itself
is publicly released. To solve the problem, we introduce N E M O, the first method
to localize memorization of individual data samples down to the level of neurons
in DMs’ cross-attention layers. Through our experiments, we make the intriguing
finding that in many cases, single neurons are responsible for memorizing particular
training samples. By deactivating these memorization neurons, we can avoid the
replication of training data at inference time, increase the diversity in the generated
outputs, and mitigate the leakage of private and copyrighted data. In this way, our
N E M O contributes to a more responsible deployment of DMs.

1

Introduction

In recent years, diffusion models (DMs) have made remarkable advances in image generation. In
particular, text-to-image DMs, such as Stable Diffusion [32], DALL-E [30], or Deep Floyd [38] enable
the generation of complex images given a textual input prompt. Yet, DMs carry a significant risk to
privacy and intellectual property, as the models have been shown to generate verbatim copies of their
potentially sensitive or copyrighted training data at inference time [8, 36]. This ability has often been
linked to their memorization of training data [48, 12, 1, 5]. Memorization in DMs recently received
a lot of attention [16, 47, 49, 8], and several mitigations have been proposed [46, 31, 36]. Those
mitigations usually focus on either identifying potentially highly memorized samples and excluding
them from training, monitoring inference and preventing their generation, or altering the inputs to
prevent the verbatim output of training data [31, 36, 46]. While mitigations that rely on preventing
the generation of memorized samples are effective when the DM is developed and deployed in a secure
∗

equal contribution, corresponding authors: {hintersdorf, struppek}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
Code: https://github.com/ml-research/localizing_memorization_in_diffusion_models

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

