Enhancing Semi-Supervised Learning via
Representative and Diverse Sample Selection

Qian Shao1,3∗ , Jiangrui Kang2∗ , Qiyuan Chen1,3∗ , Zepeng Li4 , Hongxia Xu1,3 ,
Yiwen Cao2 , Jiajuan Liang2† , and Jian Wu1†
1
College of Computer Science & Technology and Liangzhu Laboratory, Zhejiang University
2
BNU-HKBU United International College 3 WeDoctor Cloud
4
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
{qianshao, qiyuanchen, lizepeng, einstein, wujian2000}@zju.edu.cn
{kangjiangrui, yiwencao, jiajuanliang}@uic.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) has become a preferred paradigm in many deep
learning tasks, which reduces the need for human labor. Previous studies primarily focus on effectively utilising the labelled and unlabeled data to improve
performance. However, we observe that how to select samples for labelling also significantly impacts performance, particularly under extremely low-budget settings.
The sample selection task in SSL has been under-explored for a long time. To fill
in this gap, we propose a Representative and Diverse Sample Selection approach
(RDSS). By adopting a modified Frank-Wolfe algorithm to minimise a novel criterion α-Maximum Mean Discrepancy (α-MMD), RDSS samples a representative
and diverse subset for annotation from the unlabeled data. We demonstrate that
minimizing α-MMD enhances the generalization ability of low-budget learning.
Experimental results show that RDSS consistently improves the performance of
several popular SSL frameworks and outperforms the state-of-the-art sample selection approaches used in Active Learning (AL) and Semi-Supervised Active
Learning (SSAL), even with constrained annotation budgets. Our code is available
at RDSS.

1

Introduction

Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) is a popular paradigm which reduces reliance on large amounts
of labeled data in many deep learning tasks [40, 59]. Previous SSL research mainly focuses on
effectively utilising labelled and unlabeled data. Specifically, labelled data directly supervise model
learning, while unlabeled data help learn a desirable model that makes consistent and unambiguous
predictions [53]. Besides, we also find that how to select samples for annotation will greatly affect
model performance, particularly under extremely low-budget settings (see Section 7.2).
The prevailing sample selection methods in SSL have many shortcomings. For example, random
sampling may introduce imbalanced class distributions and inadequate coverage of the overall data
distribution, resulting in poor performance. Stratified sampling randomly selects samples within
each class, which is impractical in real-world scenarios where the label for each sample is unknown.
Existing researchers also employ representativeness and diversity strategies to select appropriate
samples for annotation. Representativeness [13] ensures that the selected subset distributes similarly
with the entire dataset, and diversity [54] is designed to select informative samples by pushing away
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

