Neural network learns low-dimensional polynomials
with SGD near the information-theoretic limit
Jason D. Lee1, Kazusato Oko2,4, Taiji Suzuki3,4, Denny Wu5,6
1

Princeton University, 2 University of California, Berkeley, 3 University of Tokyo
4
RIKEN AIP, 5 New York University, 6 Flatiron Institute
jasonlee@princeton.edu, oko@berkeley.edu,
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, dennywu@nyu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of gradient descent learning of a single-index target function
f∗ (x) = σ∗ (⟨x, θ⟩) under isotropic Gaussian data in Rd , where the unknown link
function σ∗ : R → R has information exponent p (defined as the lowest degree in
the Hermite expansion). Prior works showed that gradient-based training of neural
networks can learn this target with n ≳ dΘ(p) samples, and such complexity is predicted to be necessary by the correlational statistical query lower bound. Surprisingly, we prove that a two-layer neural network optimized by an SGD-based algorithm (on the squared loss) learns f∗ with a complexity that is not governed by the
information exponent. Specifically, for arbitrary polynomial single-index models, we establish a sample and runtime complexity of n ≃ T = Θ(d·polylogd),
where Θ(·) hides a constant only depending on the degree of σ∗ ; this dimension
dependence matches the information theoretic limit up to polylogarithmic factors.
More generally, we show that n ≳ d(p∗ −1)∨1 samples are sufficient to achieve low
generalization error, where p∗ ≤ p is the generative exponent of the link function.
Core to our analysis is the reuse of minibatch in the gradient computation, which
gives rise to higher-order information beyond correlational queries.

1

Introduction

Single-index models are a classical class of functions that capture low-dimensional structure in the
learning problem. To efficiently estimate such functions, the learning algorithm should extract the
relevant (one-dimensional) subspace from high-dimensional observations; hence this problem setting has been extensively studied in deep learning theory [BL20, BES+ 22, BBSS22, MHPG+ 23,
MZD+ 23, WWF24], to examine the adaptivity to low-dimensional targets and benefit of representation learning in neural networks (NNs) optimized by gradient descent (GD). In this work we study
the learning of a single-index target function under isotropic Gaussian data:
yi = f∗ (xi ) + ςi ,

f∗ (xi ) = σ∗ (⟨xi , θ⟩),

i.i.d.

xi ∼ N (0, I d ),

(1.1)

where ςi is i.i.d. label noise, θ ∈ Rd is the direction of index features, and we assume the link
function σ∗ : R → R has information exponent p ∈ N+ defined as the index of the first non-zero
coefficient in the Hermite expansion (see Definition 1).
Equation (1.1) requires the estimation of the one-dimensional link function σ∗ and the relevant direction θ; it is known that learning is information theoretically possible with n ≳ d training examples
[DH24, DPVLB24]. Indeed, when σ∗ is polynomial, such statistical complexity can be achieved
up to logarithmic factors by a tailored algorithm that exploit the structure of low-dimensional target
[CM20]. On the other hand, for gradient-based training of two-layer NNs, existing works established a sample complexity of n ≳ dΘ(p) [BAGJ21, BBSS22, DNGL23], which presents a gap
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

