Estimating the Hallucination Rate of Generative AI

Andrew Jesson∗ †
Jannik Kossen§

Nicolas Beltran-Velez* ‡
Yarin Gal§

Quentin Chu‡

John P. Cunningham†

Sweta Karlekar‡
David Blei†‡

Abstract
This paper presents a method for estimating the hallucination rate for in-context
learning (ICL) with generative AI. In ICL, a conditional generative model (CGM) is
prompted with a dataset and a prediction question and asked to generate a response.
One interpretation of ICL assumes that the CGM computes the posterior predictive
of an unknown Bayesian model, which implicitly defines a joint distribution over
observable datasets and latent mechanisms. This joint distribution factorizes into
two components: the model prior over mechanisms and the model likelihood of
datasets given a mechanism. With this perspective, we define a hallucination as a
generated response to the prediction question with low model likelihood given the
mechanism. We develop a new method that takes an ICL problem and estimates
the probability that a CGM will generate a hallucination. Our method only requires
generating prediction questions and responses from the CGM and evaluating its
response log probability. We empirically evaluate our method using large language
models for synthetic regression and natural language ICL tasks.

1

Introduction

This work presents a method to estimate the hallucination rate for in-context learning (ICL). In
ICL, we feed a dataset to a conditional generative model (CGM) and ask it to make a prediction
based on that dataset [1, 2]. This practice is useful because it allows us to use pre-trained models to
solve problems they may not have been explicitly optimized for. For example, ICL can improve the
prediction accuracy of large language models (LLMs) for benchmark tasks in math, translation, and
time series prediction [3, 4]. However, understanding the errors—commonly termed hallucinations
[5]—a particular ICL application might make is difficult.
We develop a new method that takes an ICL problem—a CGM, a dataset, and a prediction question—
and estimates the probability that a model will generate a hallucination in response to the prediction
question. Figure 1a shows an ICL problem with news snippets classified as World, Sports, Business,
or Science [6]. The correct answer to the last snippet is Sports. Figure 1b displays responses generated
by Llama-2-7B. Six of the twenty-four generated responses are incorrect, indicating that the model
hallucinates at a rate of 25%.
Our approach takes a Bayesian perspective of ICL. This perspective assumes that the CGM generates
samples from the posterior predictive distribution of an (unknown) Bayesian model that defines a
joint distribution over observable data and latent mechanisms [7, 8]. We then define the posterior
hallucination rate (PHR) under this model, which conditions on the observed data—in our case, this
is the "context" provided. Finally, we show how to estimate the posterior hallucination rate using the
predictive distribution of a CGM.
∗

Denotes equal contribution. Correspondence to {adj2147, nb2838}@columbia.edu. † Department of Statistics, Columbia University. ‡ Department of Computer Science, Columbia University. § OATML, Department of
Computer Science, University of Oxford.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

