When are dynamical systems learned from time series
data statistically accurate?

Jeongjin (Jayjay) Park
School of Computational Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
jpark3141@gatech.edu

Nicole Tianjiao Yang
Department of Mathematics
Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322
tianjiao.yang@emory.edu

Nisha Chandramoorthy∗
Department of Statistics
The University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
nishac@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Conventional notions of generalization often fail to describe the ability of learned
models to capture meaningful information from dynamical data. A neural network
that learns complex dynamics with a small test error may still fail to reproduce
its physical behavior, including associated statistical moments and Lyapunov exponents. To address this gap, we propose an ergodic theoretic approach to generalization of complex dynamical models learned from time series data. Our main
contribution is to define and analyze generalization of a broad suite of neural representations of classes of ergodic systems, including chaotic systems, in a way that
captures emulating underlying invariant, physical measures. Our results provide
theoretical justification for why regression methods for generators of dynamical
systems (Neural ODEs) fail to generalize, and why their statistical accuracy improves upon adding Jacobian information during training. We verify our results
on a number of ergodic chaotic systems and neural network parameterizations,
including MLPs, ResNets, Fourier Neural layers, and RNNs.

1

Introduction

Learning a dynamical system from time series data is a pervasive challenge across scientific domains.
Such data come from expensive experiments and high-fidelity numerical models that simulate the
underlying nonlinear, often chaotic, processes. The learning challenge is to train on available
data to produce output models that i) provably preserve known symmetries and invariances (e.g.,
conservation principles); and ii) are inexpensive surrogates for use in downstream computations
such as optimization and uncertainty quantification. The field of physics-guided machine learning
[vdGSB+ 20, FO22, LK22, KKLL21, RPK19, KKL+ 21] has emerged in response, rapidly integrating
neural networks into data-driven modeling and prediction workflows for a wide variety of complex
dynamics, from geophysical fluid flows to phase transitions in materials (see [KMA+ 21, CCC+ 19]
for surveys). Yet rigorous generalization analyses of neural parameterizations in these applications,
wherein the underlying dynamics can exhibit chaotic behavior, have been underexplored.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

