JiuZhang3.0: Efficiently Improving Mathematical
Reasoning by Training Small Data Synthesis Models

Kun Zhou1∗, Beichen Zhang2∗ , Jiapeng Wang2 , Zhipeng Chen2 , Wayne Xin Zhao2†,
Jing Sha3 , Zhichao Sheng3 , Shijin Wang3,4† , Ji-Rong Wen2
1
School of Information, Renmin University of China
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
3
iFLYTEK Research 4 iFLYTEK AI Research (Central China)
francis_kun_zhou@163.com, {zhangbeichen724,batmanfly}@gmail.com,
{wangjp1010,zhipeng_chen,jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn, {jingsha,sjwang3}@iflytek.com

Abstract
Mathematical reasoning is an important capability of large language models (LLMs)
for real-world applications. To enhance this capability, existing work either collects
large-scale math-related texts for pre-training, or relies on stronger LLMs (e.g.,
GPT-4) to synthesize massive math problems. Both types of work generally lead
to large costs in training or synthesis. To reduce the cost, based on open-source
available texts, we propose an efficient way that trains a small LLM for math
problem synthesis, to efficiently generate sufficient high-quality pre-training data.
To achieve it, we create a dataset using GPT-4 to distill its data synthesis capability
into the small LLM. Concretely, we craft a set of prompts based on human education
stages to guide GPT-4, to synthesize problems covering diverse math knowledge
and difficulty levels. Besides, we adopt the gradient-based influence estimation
method to select the most valuable math-related texts. The both are fed into GPT-4
for creating the knowledge distillation dataset to train the small LLM. We leverage
it to synthesize 6 million math problems for pre-training our JiuZhang3.0 model.
The whole process only needs to invoke GPT-4 API 9.3k times and use 4.6B data
for training. Experimental results have shown that JiuZhang3.0 achieves state-ofthe-art performance on several mathematical reasoning datasets, under both natural
language reasoning and tool manipulation settings. Our code and data will be
publicly released in https://github.com/RUCAIBox/JiuZhang3.0.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities on a variety of tasks [1–3].
However, they still struggle in solving complex mathematical problems [4]. Recent work has shown
that it is an effective approach to training LLMs on math-related data for improving the mathematical
reasoning ability [5, 6]. Typically, they either collect the math-related data from the available corpora
(e.g., webpages and books) for pre-training [7–9], or rely on stronger LLMs to synthesize high-quality
math problems for fine-tuning [10–12]. Despite the success, existing approaches would generally
cause large training or inference costs. Due to the complexity and diversity of mathematical problems,
the former type of work mostly needs to collect a large-scale corpus (e.g., 120B data for DeepseekMath) for training, which greatly increases the training cost [5, 7, 8]. Similarly, to guarantee the
knowledge coverage and effectiveness of the synthetic problems, the latter type of work relies on
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

