Unveiling the Hidden Structure of Self-Attention
via Kernel Principal Component Analysis

Rachel S.Y. Teo
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
rachel.tsy@u.nus.edu

Tan M. Nguyen
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
tanmn@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The remarkable success of transformers in sequence modeling tasks, spanning
various applications in natural language processing and computer vision, is attributed to the critical role of self-attention. Similar to the development of most
deep learning models, the construction of these attention mechanisms relies on
heuristics and experience. In our work, we derive self-attention from kernel principal component analysis (kernel PCA) and show that self-attention projects its
query vectors onto the principal component axes of its key matrix in a feature
space. We then formulate the exact formula for the value matrix in self-attention,
theoretically and empirically demonstrating that this value matrix captures the
eigenvectors of the Gram matrix of the key vectors in self-attention. Leveraging
our kernel PCA framework, we propose Attention with Robust Principal Components (RPC-Attention), a novel class of robust attention that is resilient to data
contamination. We empirically demonstrate the advantages of RPC-Attention over
softmax attention on the ImageNet-1K object classification, WikiText-103 language
modeling, and ADE20K image segmentation task. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/rachtsy/KPCA_code.

1

Introduction

Transformers [83] have emerged as the preeminent model for tackling a myriad of challenging
problems in natural language processing [4, 20, 1, 66, 9, 39, 17], computer vision [22, 78, 43, 63, 38,
24], reinforcement learning [13, 35, 94, 40], and other applications [93, 68, 36, 88]. The effectiveness
of transformers is rooted in their ability to learn from unlabeled data and take advantage of pre-trained
models for downstream tasks that involve diverse data modalities with limited supervision [64, 65,
90, 97, 67]. At the core of the transformer’s success lies the self-attention mechanism, which serves
as the fundamental building block of a transformer model. This mechanism enables each token in
a sequence to aggregate information from other tokens by computing a weighted average based on
similarity scores between their feature representations. Facilitating dynamic interactions among
tokens, this attention mechanism allows tokens to selectively attend to others, thereby attaining a
contextual representation [5, 56, 60, 42]. The flexibility in capturing diverse syntactic and semantic
relationships is an important factor contributing to the success of transformers [77, 85, 33, 84, 53].
Self-Attention. For a given input sequence X := [x1 , · · · , xN ]⊤ ∈ RN ×Dx of N feature vectors,
self-attention transforms X into the output sequence H in the following two steps:
Step 1: The input sequence X is projected into the query matrix Q, the key matrix K, and the value
matrix V via three linear transformations
⊤
Q = XWQ⊤ ; K = XWK
; V = XWV⊤ ,

Please correspond to: tanmn@nus.edu.sg
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

(1)

