Sample Complexity of Interventional Causal
Representation Learning

Burak Varıcı∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Emre Acartürk
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Karthikeyan Shanmugam
Google DeepMind

Ali Tajer
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract
Consider a data-generation process that transforms low-dimensional latent causallyrelated variables to high-dimensional observed variables. Causal representation
learning (CRL) is the process of using the observed data to recover the latent
causal variables and the causal structure among them. Despite the multitude
of identifiability results under various interventional CRL settings, the existing
guarantees apply exclusively to the infinite-sample regime (i.e., infinite observed
samples). This paper establishes the first sample-complexity analysis for the
finite-sample regime, in which the interactions between the number of observed
samples and probabilistic guarantees on recovering the latent variables and structure
are established. This paper focuses on general latent causal models, stochastic
soft interventions, and a linear transformation from the latent to the observation
space. The identifiability results ensure graph recovery up to ancestors and latent
variables recovery up to mixing with parent variables. Specifically, O((log 1δ )4 )
samples suffice for latent graph recovery up to ancestors with probability 1 − δ, and
O(( 1ϵ log 1δ )4 ) samples suffice for latent causal variables recovery that is ϵ close to
the identifiability class with probability 1 − δ.

1

Introduction

The observed data generated in a wide range of technological, social, and biological domains has
high-dimensional, complex, and often unexplainable structures. Nevertheless, sometimes, such
complex structures can be explained by latent generating factors that often form lower-dimensional
structures. The field of causal representation learning (CRL) is motivated by this premise and focuses
on disentangling the causally-related latent generating factors that underlie a given high-dimensional
observable dataset. In particular, given a high-dimensional dataset, the objective of CRL is to learn
(i) the underlying latent causal variables and (ii) the causal relationships among the latent variables.
The learned representations then provide an explainable structure for the observed data and facilitate
informed reasoning for the downstream tasks [1].
Formally, CRL consists of a data generation and data transformation pipeline as follows. There
exists a set of high-level latent variables Z ∈ Rn that are causally related. The causal interactions
are captured by a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G. The latent variables Z go through an unknown
transformation g and generate the observed variables X ∈ Rd , i.e., X = g(Z). The objective of
CRL is to use the observed variables X and learn the latent graph G and latent variables Z. The
primary question facing CRL is identifiability, which refers to establishing the conditions under which
recovering Z and G are possible.
∗

Work was done while BV was a Ph.D. student at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

