Connectivity Shapes Implicit Regularization in Matrix
Factorization Models for Matrix Completion

1

Zhiwei Bai1 , Jiajie Zhao1 , Yaoyu Zhang1∗
School of Mathematical Sciences, Institute of Natural Sciences, MOE-LSC,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, P.R. China.
{bai299, zjj0216, zhyy.sjtu}@sjtu.edu.cn.

Abstract
Matrix factorization models have been extensively studied as a valuable test-bed
for understanding the implicit biases of overparameterized models. Although both
low nuclear norm and low rank regularization have been studied for these models,
a unified understanding of when, how, and why they achieve different implicit
regularization effects remains elusive. In this work, we systematically investigate
the implicit regularization of matrix factorization for solving matrix completion
problems. We empirically discover that the connectivity of observed data plays
a crucial role in the implicit bias, with a transition from low nuclear norm to low
rank as data shifts from disconnected to connected with increased observations. We
identify a hierarchy of intrinsic invariant manifolds in the loss landscape that guide
the training trajectory to evolve from low-rank to higher-rank solutions. Based on
this finding, we theoretically characterize the training trajectory as following the
hierarchical invariant manifold traversal process, generalizing the characterization
of Li et al. (2020) to include the disconnected case. Furthermore, we establish
conditions that guarantee minimum nuclear norm, closely aligning with our experimental findings, and we provide a dynamics characterization condition for ensuring
minimum rank. Our work reveals the intricate interplay between data connectivity,
training dynamics, and implicit regularization in matrix factorization models.

1

Introduction

Overparameterized models have the capacity to easily fit data with random labels (Zhang et al., 2017,
2021). However, in real-world applications, models with more parameters than training samples
still generalize well. This has led researchers to hypothesize that overparameterized models undergo
implicit regularization, favoring certain functions as outputs. Overparameterized matrix factorization
models, fθ = AB with θ = (A, B), A, B ∈ Rd×d , have served as a simplified test-bed for
studying this implicit regularization. In the context of matrix completion problems like the Netflix
challenge, these models aim to find a low-rank completion of a partially observed matrix M ∈ Rd×d .
Prior works have offered seemingly conflicting perspectives on the implicit regularization at play,
with some claiming it promotes low nuclear norm (Gunasekar et al., 2017) and others arguing for low
rank (Arora et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Razin and Cohen, 2020). However, a unified understanding
of when, how, and why they achieve different implicit regularization effects remains elusive.
Unlike previous works that focus on either low rank or low nuclear norm regularization„ we systematically investigate the training dynamics and implicit regularization of matrix factorization for
matrix completion. Through extensive experiments, we found that a certain connectivity property
of observed data plays a key role in the implicit regularization effects. Data connectivity, in the
context of this paper, refers to the way observed entries in the matrix are linked through shared rows
∗

Corresponding author: zhyy.sjtu@sjtu.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

