TARSS-Net: Temporal-Aware Radar Semantic
Segmentation Network
Youcheng Zhang1∗ Liwen Zhang1∗† Zijun Hu1 Pengcheng Pi1
Teng Li2 Yuanpei Chen1 Shi Peng1 Zhe Ma1†
1
Intelligent Science and Technology Academy of CASIC
2
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
youcheng17@163.com∗ lwzhang9161@126.com∗† mazhe_thu@163.com†

Abstract
Radar signal interpretation plays a crucial role in remote detection and ranging.
With the gradual display of the advantages of neural network technology in signal processing, learning-based radar signal interpretation is becoming a research
hot-spot and made great progress. And since radar semantic segmentation (RSS)
can provide more fine-grained target information, it has become a more concerned
direction in this field. However, the temporal information, which is an important
clue for analyzing radar data, has not been exploited sufficiently in present RSS
frameworks. In this work, we propose a novel temporal information learning
paradigm, i.e., data-driven temporal information aggregation with learned
target-history relations. Following this idea, a flexible learning module, called
Temporal Relation-Aware Module (TRAM) is carefully designed. TRAM contains
two main blocks: i) an encoder for capturing the target-history temporal relations
(TH-TRE) and ii) a learnable temporal relation attentive pooling (TRAP) for aggregating temporal information. Based on TRAM, an end-to-end Temporal-Aware
RSS Network (TARSS-Net) is presented, which has outstanding performance on
publicly available and our collected real-measured datasets. Code and supplementary materials are available at https://github.com/zlw9161/TARSS-Net.

1

Introduction

Radar is a reliable remote sensing device for its robustness in adverse weather and illumination
conditions. It is widely used for applications like the autonomous driving [33, 21, 36], Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) surveillance [9, 19], sea monitoring [31, 24, 32], etc. However, the received
scattered radar signals are high-entropy information body coupled with environmental clutters from a
large spatial range, device noise and moving target information (i.e., distance/range, direction/angle
and velocity/Doppler shift). These components are additionally condensed into the received echoes,
which is inherently a gap in understanding of radar signals to human perception, as opposed to visible
light images, which are modalities aligned with human visual perception, and natural language texts
that are naturally based on human semantic understanding. This human-unfriendly perception gap
causes great difficulty in semantic perception of scenes and objects [22]. More information on radar
signals and processing is in Appendix A.
Encouraged by the success of deep learning techniques in computer vision, in especial, object
detection [11, 17, 27, 26] and semantic segmentation [20, 28, 2, 10], some efforts have been made
recently to better understand complex radar data. Compared with detection models [33, 6] using
bounding boxes, the segmentation models [1, 14, 21, 36, 35] can provide pixel-wise (a unit of the
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

