Rethinking the Evaluation of Out-of-Distribution
Detection: A Sorites Paradox

1

Xingming Long1,2 , Jie Zhang1,2∗ , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Laboratory of AI Safety of CAS, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

Abstract
Most existing out-of-distribution (OOD) detection benchmarks classify samples
with novel labels as the OOD data. However, some marginal OOD samples actually
have close semantic contents to the in-distribution (ID) sample, which makes determining the OOD sample a Sorites Paradox. In this paper, we construct a benchmark
named Incremental Shift OOD (IS-OOD) to address the issue, in which we divide
the test samples into subsets with different semantic and covariate shift degrees
relative to the ID dataset. The data division is achieved through a shift measuring
method based on our proposed Language Aligned Image feature Decomposition
(LAID). Moreover, we construct a Synthetic Incremental Shift (Syn-IS) dataset
that contains high-quality generated images with more diverse covariate contents to
complement the IS-OOD benchmark. We evaluate current OOD detection methods
on our benchmark and find several important insights: (1) The performance of most
OOD detection methods significantly improves as the semantic shift increases; (2)
Some methods like GradNorm may have different OOD detection mechanisms as
they rely less on semantic shifts to make decisions; (3) Excessive covariate shifts
in the image are also likely to be considered as OOD for some methods. Our code
and data are released in https://github.com/qqwsad5/IS-OOD.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks achieve excellent results in many areas like computer vision and natural
language understanding. However, though these well-trained models perform well on in-distribution
(ID) test data sampled from the same distribution with the training set, they tend to struggle when
confronted with the data drawn from out-of-distribution (OOD). For example, encountering previously
unseen classes can result in the model making overly confident predictions [1]. This highlights the
importance of ensuring the model’s safety on such OOD data. An important research focus is OOD
detection, which aims to enable models to detect such OOD samples rather than making incorrect
judgments about them. There has already been considerable research and notable progress in the field
of OOD detection [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Compared to works on OOD generalization that focus on
models’ robustness to covariate shifts (such as changes in data style), these OOD detection works are
mainly dedicated to capturing the semantic shifts (such as the novel classes).
Simultaneously, various benchmarks are constructed to study the performance of the above OOD
detection methods [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. Most of these works use two datasets with nonoverlapping semantic labels as the ID and OOD data to construct their benchmarks. The ID dataset is
divided into two parts: the first part serves as the training set, and the second part is mixed with the
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

