MMScan: A Multi-Modal 3D Scene Dataset with
Hierarchical Grounded Language Annotations
Ruiyuan Lyu1,2∗ , Jingli Lin1,3,7∗ , Tai Wang1∗ , Shuai Yang1,4∗ , Xiaohan Mao1,3 , Yilun Chen1 ,
Runsen Xu1,5 , Haifeng Huang1,4 , Chenming Zhu1,6 , Dahua Lin1,5,8 , Jiangmiao Pang1†
1

4

Shanghai AI Laboratory, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Zhejiang University, 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 6 The University of Hong Kong,
7
Zhiyuan College, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 8 CPII under InnoHK
∗
Equal contribution † Corresponding author

Figure 1: MMScan provides the largest ever multi-modal 3D scene dataset with 6.9M hierarchical
grounded language annotations, covering holistic aspects on both object- and region-level.

Abstract
With the emergence of LLMs and their integration with other data modalities,
multi-modal 3D perception attracts more attention due to its connectivity to the
physical world and makes rapid progress. However, limited by existing datasets,
previous works mainly focus on understanding object properties or inter-object
spatial relationships in a 3D scene. To tackle this problem, this paper builds the
first largest ever multi-modal 3D scene dataset and benchmark with hierarchical
grounded language annotations, MMScan. It is constructed based on a top-down
logic, from region to object level, from a single target to inter-target relationships, covering holistic aspects of spatial and attribute understanding. The overall
pipeline incorporates powerful VLMs via carefully designed prompts to initialize
the annotations efficiently and further involve humans’ correction in the loop to
ensure the annotations are natural, correct, and comprehensive. Built upon existing 3D scanning data, the resulting multi-modal 3D dataset encompasses 1.4M
meta-annotated captions on 109k objects and 7.7k regions as well as over 3.04M
diverse samples for 3D visual grounding and question-answering benchmarks. We
evaluate representative baselines on our benchmarks, analyze their capabilities in
different aspects, and showcase the key problems to be addressed in the future.
Furthermore, we use this high-quality dataset to train state-of-the-art 3D visual
grounding and LLMs and obtain remarkable performance improvement both on
existing benchmarks and in-the-wild evaluation. Codes, datasets, and benchmarks
will be available at https://github.com/OpenRobotLab/EmbodiedScan.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

