VideoTetris:
Towards Compositional Text-to-Video Generation

Ye Tian1∗ Ling Yang1†∗ Haotian Yang2 Yuan Gao2 Yufan Deng1 Jingmin Chen1
Xintao Wang2 Zhaochen Yu1 Xin Tao2 Pengfei Wan2 Di Zhang2 Bin Cui1†
1
Peking University 2 Kuaishou Technology
Project: videotetris.github.io Code: https://github.com/YangLing0818/VideoTetris

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated great success in text-to-video (T2V) generation. However, existing methods may face challenges when handling complex
(long) video generation scenarios that involve multiple objects or dynamic changes
in object numbers. To address these limitations, we propose VideoTetris, a novel
framework that enables compositional T2V generation. Specifically, we propose
spatio-temporal compositional diffusion to precisely follow complex textual semantics by manipulating and composing the attention maps of denoising networks
spatially and temporally. Moreover, we propose an enhanced video data preprocessing to enhance the training data regarding motion dynamics and prompt
understanding, equipped with a new reference frame attention mechanism to improve the consistency of auto-regressive video generation. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our VideoTetris achieves impressive qualitative and quantitative
results in compositional T2V generation.

1

Introduction

With the significant development of diffusion models [1–3] recently, advanced text-to-video models
[4–7] have emerged and demonstrated impressive results. However, these models often struggle with
generating complex scenes following compositional prompts, such as "A man on the left walking
his dog on the right", which requires the model to compose various objects spatially and temporally.
Moreover, with a growing interest in generating long videos, existing methods [8–10] try to explore
multi-prompt long video generation, which is typically limited to simple single-object scene changes.
These methods fail to manage scenarios where the number of objects changes dynamically, often
resulting in bizarre transformations that do not accurately follow the input text.
To overcome these challenges, we introduce VideoTetris, a novel and effective diffusion-based
framework to enable compositional text-to-video generation. Firstly, we define compositional video
generation as encompassing two primary tasks: (i) Video Generation with Compositional Prompts,
which involves integrating objects with various attributes and relationships into a complex and coherent video; and (ii) Long Video Generation with Progressive Compositional Prompts, where
’progressive’ refers to the continuous changes in the position, quantity, and presence of objects with
different attributes and relationships. Then, we introduce a novel Spatio-Temporal Compositional
Diffusion, which manipulates the cross-attention value of denoising network temporally and spatially, synthesizing videos that faithfully follow complex or progressive instructions. Subsequently,
to enhance the ability of long video generation models to grasp complex semantics and generate
intricate scenes encompassing various attributes and relationships, we propose an Enhanced Video
∗
†

Contributed equally. Contact: yangling0818@163.com
Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

