PINNacle: A Comprehensive Benchmark of
Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Solving PDEs

Zhongkai Hao1∗, Jiachen Yao1∗ , Chang Su1∗ , Hang Su1 , Ziao Wang1 ,
Fanzhi Lu1 , Zeyu Xia1 , Yichi Zhang1 , Songming Liu1 , Lu Lu2 , Jun Zhu1†
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University
hzj21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
While significant progress has been made on Physics-Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs), a comprehensive comparison of these methods across a wide range of
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) is still lacking. This study introduces PINNacle, a benchmarking tool designed to fill this gap. PINNacle provides a diverse
dataset, comprising over 20 distinct PDEs from various domains, including heat
conduction, fluid dynamics, biology, and electromagnetics. These PDEs encapsulate key challenges inherent to real-world problems, such as complex geometry,
multi-scale phenomena, nonlinearity, and high dimensionality. PINNacle also offers a user-friendly toolbox, incorporating about 10 state-of-the-art PINN methods
for systematic evaluation and comparison. We have conducted extensive experiments with these methods, offering insights into their strengths and weaknesses. In
addition to providing a standardized means of assessing performance, PINNacle
also offers an in-depth analysis to guide future research such as domain decomposition methods and loss reweighting for handling multi-scale problems. To the best
of our knowledge, it is the largest benchmark with a diverse and comprehensive
evaluation that will undoubtedly foster further research in PINNs.

1

Introduction

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are of paramount importance in science and engineering, as
they often underpin our understanding of intricate physical systems such as fluid flow, heat transfer,
and stress distribution [37]. The computational simulation of PDE systems has been a focal point
of research for an extensive period, leading to the development of numerical methods such as finite
difference [6], finite element [45], and finite volume methods [14].
Recent advancements have led to the use of deep neural networks to solve forward and inverse
problems involving PDEs [44, 62, 11, 54]. Among these, Physics-Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs) have emerged as a promising alternative to traditional numerical methods in solving such
problems [44, 25]. PINNs leverage the underlying physical laws and available data to effectively
handle various scientific and engineering applications. The growing interest in this field has spurred
the development of numerous PINN variants, each tailored to overcome specific challenges or to
enhance the performance of the original framework.
∗

Equal contribution.

†

The corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

