INDICT: Code Generation with Internal Dialogues of
Critiques for Both Security and Helpfulness

Hung Le∗, Yingbo Zhou, Caiming Xiong, Silvio Savarese, Doyen Sahoo
Salesforce Research

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) for code are typically trained to align with natural
language instructions to closely follow their intentions and requirements. However,
in many practical scenarios, it becomes increasingly challenging for these models to
navigate the intricate boundary between helpfulness and safety, especially against
highly complex yet potentially malicious instructions. In this work, we introduce
INDICT: a new framework that empowers LLMs with Internal Dialogues of Critiques for both safety and helpfulness guidance. The internal dialogue is a dual
cooperative system between a safety-driven critic and a helpfulness-driven critic.
Each critic provides analysis against the given task and corresponding generated
response, equipped with external knowledge queried through relevant code snippets
and tools like web search and code interpreter. We engage the dual critic system in
both code generation stage as well as code execution stage, providing preemptive
and post-hoc guidance respectively to LLMs. We evaluated INDICT on 8 diverse
tasks across 8 programming languages from 5 benchmarks, using LLMs from 7B
to 70B parameters. We observed that our approach can provide an advanced level
of critiques of both safety and helpfulness analysis, significantly improving the
quality of output codes (+10% absolute improvements in all models).2

1

Introduction

Extending from the natural language domain, Large Language Models (LLMs) like [Koubaa, 2023,
Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021, Radford et al., 2019] have demonstrated great potential in code
generation tasks [Svyatkovskiy et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2021, Hendrycks et al., 2021]. However,
when instructed with tasks containing malicious intentions or ambiguous requirements, LLMs are
subject to generating code that could facilitate harmful attacks or code that contains obscure security
problems [Khoury et al., 2023, Bhatt et al., 2023, Siddiq et al., 2022]. For instance, in a study of
Github’s Copilot, Pearce et al. [2022] observed that about 40% of generated programs are vulnerable.
Despite previous efforts in addressing the safety of LLMs through finetuning [Bai et al., 2022, Korbak
et al., 2023, Dai et al., 2024], this strategy alone is often not sufficient and scalable enough against
prompts that are increasingly optimised for highly sophisticated attacks [Zhuo et al., 2023, Mazeika
et al., 2024, Bhatt et al., 2024]. Furthermore, in the domain of code generation, creating quality
safety-related data for finetuning often incurs great costs, involving programming experts with a deep
understanding of code and related cyber-security and vulnerability concerns.
Note that code itself is often not inherently malicious. For example, as noted by Bhatt et al. [2023], a
program for an encryption method could be very useful to create a secure personal file system. Yet
the encryption method can also be exploited for a ransomware attack. Therefore, it is important to
develop an efficient method for LLMs to achieve the intricate balance between helpfulness and safety
∗
2

Corresponding author: hungle@salesforce.com
We released our code at https://github.com/SalesforceAIResearch/indict_code_gen

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

