FlexCap: Describe Anything in Images in Controllable Detail

Vidhi Jain∗
Carnegie Mellon University
vidhij@andrew.cmu.edu

Debidatta Dwibedi
Google Deepmind
debidatta@google.com
Jonathan Tompson
Google Deepmind
tompson@google.com

Andrew Zisserman
Google Deepmind
zisserman@google.com

Yusuf Aytar
Google Deepmind
yusufaytar@google.com

Abstract
We introduce FlexCap, a vision-language model that generates region-specific
descriptions of varying lengths. FlexCap is trained to produce length-conditioned
captions for input boxes, enabling control over information density, with descriptions ranging from concise object labels to detailed captions. To achieve this,
we create large-scale training datasets of image region descriptions with varying
lengths from captioned web images. We demonstrate FlexCap’s effectiveness
in several applications: first, it achieves strong performance in dense captioning
tasks on the Visual Genome dataset. Second, we show how FlexCap’s localized
descriptions can serve as input to a large language model to create a visual question
answering (VQA) system, achieving state-of-the-art zero-shot performance on
multiple VQA benchmarks. Our experiments illustrate FlexCap’s utility for tasks
including image labeling, object attribute recognition, and visual dialog. Project
webpage: https://flex-cap.github.io.

1

Introduction

How does one describe the world around us, not just in broad strokes but with the ability to zoom in
and out, capturing both the grand scene and the minute details? Imagine pointing at a bustling market
scene and asking, "What’s happening here?" and receiving a vivid description, not just of the market
as a whole, but also a detailed account of the interactions between vendors and customers, the vibrant
colors of the goods on display, or even a specific item held by a passerby. This ability to controllably
focus and describe visual content is what we call flexible captioning.
Traditional image captioning models, while adept at capturing the gist of an image, often struggle to
pinpoint specific objects or attributes. On the other hand, object detection systems excel at localizing
elements but may lack the vocabulary to describe them comprehensively. Dense captioning [26]
attempts to bridge this gap by generating captions for multiple regions, but its expressiveness is
limited by existing datasets. In this work, we introduce a model called FlexCap that bridges the gap
between holistic image understanding and localized inquiry. This enables the generation of captions
that are both spatially precise and semantically rich (see Fig. 1 (left)) by specifying a region of interest
and the desired level of detail in terms of number of words in the predicted caption. This allows us to
integrate the strengths of image captioning, object detection, and dense captioning into one model.
To be able to train such a model, we require a dataset of images where many boxes are labeled with
short and long descriptions. We propose a method to generate triplets of (i) image, (ii) a proposed
region within the image, and (iii) a caption of a particular length, by using an open-vocabulary object
detector to label regions from captions of an image-text pair dataset. We demonstrate this at two
∗

Work done as a student researcher at Google Deepmind.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

