AlphaPruning: Using Heavy-Tailed Self
Regularization Theory for Improved Layer-wise
Pruning of Large Language Models

Haiquan Lu1∗, Yefan Zhou2∗ , Shiwei Liu3 , Zhangyang Wang4 , Michael W. Mahoney5,6,7 , Yaoqing Yang2
1
Nankai University, 2 Dartmouth College, 3 University of Oxford
4
University of Texas at Austin, 5 International Computer Science Institute
6
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 7 University of California at Berkeley

Abstract
Recent work on pruning large language models (LLMs) has shown that one can
eliminate a large number of parameters without compromising performance, making pruning a promising strategy to reduce LLM model size. Existing LLM pruning
strategies typically assign uniform pruning ratios across layers, limiting overall
pruning ability; and recent work on layerwise pruning of LLMs is often based
on heuristics that can easily lead to suboptimal performance. In this paper, we
leverage Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization (HT-SR) Theory, in particular the shape
of empirical spectral densities (ESDs) of weight matrices, to design improved
layerwise pruning ratios for LLMs. Our analysis reveals a wide variability in
how well-trained, and thus relatedly how prunable, different layers of an LLM are.
Based on this, we propose AlphaPruning, which uses shape metrics to allocate
layerwise sparsity ratios in a more theoretically-principled manner. AlphaPruning
can be used in conjunction with multiple existing LLM pruning methods. Our
empirical results show that AlphaPruning prunes LLaMA-7B to 80% sparsity
while maintaining reasonable perplexity, marking a first in the literature on LLMs.
We have open-sourced our code.2

1

Introduction

Recent work on pruning large language models (LLMs) [Jaiswal et al., 2023, Frantar and Alistarh,
2023a, Sun et al., 2023] has shown the ability to reduce the number of parameters significantly,
without compromising performance, resulting in notable savings in memory footprint, computing
time, and energy consumption. Unlike pre-LLM pruning methods [Sanh et al., 2020, Kurtic et al.,
2022], existing LLM pruning approaches typically allocate the “sparsity budget” (i.e., the number of
pruned parameters or pruning ratios) uniformly across layers, making it difficult to increase sparsity
to very high levels. Relatively little effort has been put into developing theoretically-principled ways
to compute layerwise pruning ratios. For example, the Outlier Weighed Layerwise sparsity (OWL)
method [Yin et al., 2023] uses a nonuniform layerwise sparsity based on the distribution of outlier
activations. However, OWL relies on heuristics related to the presence of outliers [Kovaleva et al.,
2021, Puccetti et al., 2022, Dettmers et al., 2022]. This can lead to suboptimal performance in the
absence of outliers, and this can make it difficult to achieve very aggressive levels of sparsity. For
example, Yin et al. [2023] shows that pruning LLMs to 80% sparsity often significantly degrades the
prediction performance of LLMs.
In developing a principled approach to allocate sparsity budgets across layers, we draw inspiration
from Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization (HT-SR) Theory [Martin et al., 2021, Martin and Mahoney,
∗
2

First two authors contributed equally.
https://github.com/haiquanlu/AlphaPruning

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

