Differentiable Task Graph Learning:
Procedural Activity Representation and Online
Mistake Detection from Egocentric Videos

Luigi Seminara

Giovanni Maria Farinella

Antonino Furnari

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Catania, Italy
luigi.seminara@phd.unict.it,{giovanni.farinella,antonino.furnari}@unict.it

Abstract
Procedural activities are sequences of key-steps aimed at achieving specific goals.
They are crucial to build intelligent agents able to assist users effectively. In this
context, task graphs have emerged as a human-understandable representation of
procedural activities, encoding a partial ordering over the key-steps. While previous
works generally relied on hand-crafted procedures to extract task graphs from
videos, in this paper, we propose an approach based on direct maximum likelihood
optimization of edges’ weights, which allows gradient-based learning of task graphs
and can be naturally plugged into neural network architectures. Experiments on the
CaptainCook4D dataset demonstrate the ability of our approach to predict accurate
task graphs from the observation of action sequences, with an improvement of
+16.7% over previous approaches. Owing to the differentiability of the proposed
framework, we also introduce a feature-based approach, aiming to predict task
graphs from key-step textual or video embeddings, for which we observe emerging
video understanding abilities. Task graphs learned with our approach are also
shown to significantly enhance online mistake detection in procedural egocentric
videos, achieving notable gains of +19.8% and +7.5% on the Assembly101-O and
EPIC-Tent-O datasets. Code for replicating the experiments is available at https:
//github.com/fpv-iplab/Differentiable-Task-Graph-Learning.

1

Introduction

Procedural activities are fundamental for humans to organize tasks, improve efficiency, and ensuring
consistency in the desired outcomes, but require time and effort to be learned and achieved effectively.
This makes the design of artificial intelligent agents able to assist users to correctly perform a task
appealing [21, 31]. Achieving these abilities requires building a flexible representation of a procedure,
encapsulating knowledge on the partial ordering of key-steps arising from the specific context at
hand. For example, a virtual assistant needs to understand that it is necessary to break eggs before
mixing them or that the bike’s brakes need to be released before removing the wheel. Importantly, for
a system to be scalable, this representation should be automatically learned from observations (e.g.,
humans making a recipe many times) rather than explicitly programmed by an expert.
Previous approaches focused on directly tackling tasks requiring procedural knowledge such as
action anticipation [16, 14, 34] and mistake detection [37, 13, 7, 41, 15] without developing explicit
representations of the procedure. Other works proposed neural models able to develop implicit
representations of the procedure by learning how to recover missing actions [43, 28], discover keysteps [11, 4, 5], or grounding them to video [10, 25]. A different approach [3, 10, 18] consists in
representing the structure of a procedure in the form of a task graph, i.e., a Directed Acyclic Graph
(DAG) in which nodes represent key-steps, and directed edges impose a partial ordering over key-steps,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

