On the Computational Landscape of
Replicable Learning
Alkis Kalavasis
Yale University
alvertos.kalavasis@yale.edu

Amin Karbasi
Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Grigoris Velegkas
Yale University
grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu

Felix Zhou
Yale University
felix.zhou@yale.edu

Abstract
We study computational aspects of algorithmic replicability, a notion of stability
introduced by Impagliazzo, Lei, Pitassi, and Sorrell [2022]. Motivated by a recent
line of work that established strong statistical connections between replicability
and other notions of learnability such as online learning, private learning, and
SQ learning, we aim to understand better the computational connections between
replicability and these learning paradigms. Our first result shows that there is
a concept class that is efficiently replicably PAC learnable, but, under standard
cryptographic assumptions, no efficient online learner exists for this class. Subsequently, we design an efficient replicable learner for PAC learning parities when
the marginal distribution is far from uniform, making progress on a question posed
by Impagliazzo et al. [2022]. To obtain this result, we design a replicable lifting
framework inspired by Blanc, Lange, Malik, and Tan [2023] that transforms in a
black-box manner efficient replicable PAC learners under the uniform marginal
distribution over the Boolean hypercube to replicable PAC learners under any
marginal distribution, with sample and time complexity that depends on a certain
measure of the complexity of the distribution. Finally, we show that any pure DP
learner can be transformed to a replicable one in time polynomial in the accuracy,
confidence parameters and exponential in the representation dimension of the
underlying hypothesis class.

1

Introduction

The replicability crisis is omnipresent in many scientific disciplines including biology, chemistry,
and, importantly, AI [Baker, 2016, Pineau et al., 2019]. A recent article that appeared in Nature
[Ball, 2023] explains how the reproducibility crisis witnessed in AI has a cascading effect across
many other scientific areas due to its widespread applications in other fields, like medicine. Thus, a
pressing task is to design a formal framework through which we can argue about the replicability of
experiments in ML. Such an attempt was initiated recently by the pioneering work of Impagliazzo
et al. [2022], who proposed a definition of replicability as a property of learning algorithms.
Definition 1.1 (Replicable Algorithm; Impagliazzo et al., 2022). Let R be a distribution over random
strings. A learning algorithm A is n-sample ρ-replicable under distribution D if for two independent
sets S, S ′ ∼ Dn it holds that PrS,S ′ ∼Dn ,r∼R [A(S, r) ̸= A(S ′ , r)] ≤ ρ. We will say that A is
replicable if the above holds uniformly over all distributions D.
We emphasize that the random string r is shared across the two executions and this aspect of the
definition is crucial in designing algorithms that have the same output under two different i.i.d. inputs.
Indeed, both Dixon et al. [2023] and Chase et al. [2023b] demonstrated learning tasks for which there
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

