Bayesian Optimization of Functions
over Node Subsets in Graphs

Huidong Liang Xingchen Wan˚ Xiaowen Dong
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{huidong.liang,xiaowen.dong}@eng.ox.ac.uk, xingchenw@google.com

Abstract
We address the problem of optimizing over functions defined on node subsets
in a graph. The optimization of such functions is often a non-trivial task given
their combinatorial, black-box and expensive-to-evaluate nature. Although various
algorithms have been introduced in the literature, most are either task-specific or
computationally inefficient and only utilize information about the graph structure
without considering the characteristics of the function. To address these limitations, we utilize Bayesian Optimization (BO), a sample-efficient black-box solver,
and propose a novel framework for combinatorial optimization on graphs. More
specifically, we map each k-node subset in the original graph to a node in a new
combinatorial graph and adopt a local modeling approach to efficiently traverse the
latter graph by progressively sampling its subgraphs using a recursive algorithm.
Extensive experiments under both synthetic and real-world setups demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed BO framework on various types of graphs and
optimization tasks, where its behavior is analyzed in detail with ablation studies.
The experiment code can be found at github.com/LeonResearch/GraphComBO.

1

Introduction

In the analysis and optimization of transportation, social, and epidemiological networks, one is
often interested in finding a node subset that leads to the maximization of a utility. For example,
incentivizing an initial set of users in a social network such that it leads to the maximum adoption of
certain products; protecting a set of key individuals in an epidemiological contact network such that
it maximally slows down the transmission of disease; identifying the most vulnerable junctions in a
power grid or a road network such that interventions can be made to improve the resilience of these
infrastructure networks.
The scenarios described above can be mathematically formulated as optimizing over a utility function
defined on node subsets in a graph, which is a non-trivial task for several reasons. First, most
conventional optimization algorithms are designed for continuous space and are hence not directly
applicable to functions defined on discrete domains such as graphs. Second, optimizing over a
k-node subset leads to a large search space even for moderate graphs, which are not even fully
observable in certain scenarios (e.g. offline social networks). Finally, the objective functions are
usually black-box and expensive to evaluate in many applications, such as the outcome of a diffusion
process on the network [56] or the output of a graph neural network [50], making sample-efficient
queries a necessary requirement.
Assuming the graph structure is fully available, the optimization task described above shares similarities with those encountered in the literature on network-based diffusion. In that literature, greedy
˚

Now at Google.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

