ADOPT: Modified Adam Can Converge with Any β2
with the Optimal Rate

Shohei Taniguchi
The University of Tokyo
taniguchi@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Keno Harada
The University of Tokyo
keno.harada@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Gouki Minegishi
The University of Tokyo
minegishi@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yuta Oshima
The University of Tokyo
yuta.oshima@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Seong Cheol Jeong
The University of Tokyo
jeong@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Go Nagahara
The University of Tokyo
nagaharago@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Tomoshi Iiyama
The University of Tokyo
iiyama@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Masahiro Suzuki
The University of Tokyo
masa@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yusuke Iwasawa
The University of Tokyo
iwasawa@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yutaka Matsuo
The University of Tokyo
matsuo@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Adam is one of the most popular optimization algorithms in deep learning. However,
it is known that Adam does not converge in theory unless choosing a hyperparameter, i.e., β2 , in a problem-dependent manner. There have been many attempts to fix
the non-convergence (e.g., AMSGrad), but they require an impractical assumption
that the gradient noise is uniformly bounded. In this paper, we propose a new
adaptive gradient
√ method named ADOPT, which achieves the optimal convergence
rate of O(1/ T ) with any choice of β2 without depending on the bounded noise
assumption. ADOPT addresses the non-convergence issue of Adam by removing
the current gradient from the second moment estimate and changing the order
of the momentum update and the normalization by the second moment estimate.
We also conduct intensive numerical experiments, and verify that our ADOPT
achieves superior results compared to Adam and its variants across a wide range
of tasks, including image classification, generative modeling, natural language
processing, and deep reinforcement learning. The implementation is available at
https://github.com/iShohei220/adopt.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization algorithms, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD), play a central role in
deep learning. In particular, adaptive gradient methods based on exponential moving averages, such
as Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014], are widely used in practice. Despite the empirical success, it is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

