Image Textualization
: An Automatic Framework
for Creating Accurate and Detailed Image Descriptions

Renjie Pi1∗, Jianshu Zhang2∗, Jipeng Zhang1 , Rui Pan1 , Zhekai Chen3 , Tong Zhang4
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Wuhan University, 3 Zhejiang University
4
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{rpi,rpan,jzhanggr}@ust.hk, jianshu.zhang@whu.edu.cn, chenzhekai@zju.edu.cn
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
Image description datasets play a crucial role in the advancement of various applications such as image understanding, text-to-image generation, and text-image retrieval. Currently, image description datasets primarily originate from two sources.
One source is the scraping of image-text pairs from the web. Despite their abundance, these descriptions are often of low quality and noisy. Another is through
human labeling. Datasets such as COCO are generally very short and lack details.
Although detailed image descriptions can be annotated by humans, the high annotation cost limits the feasibility. These limitations underscore the need for more
efficient and scalable methods to generate accurate and detailed image descriptions.
In this paper, we propose an innovative framework termed Image Textualization
(IT), which automatically produces high-quality image descriptions by leveraging
existing multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) and multiple vision expert
models in a collaborative manner, which maximally convert the visual information
into text. To address the current lack of benchmarks for detailed descriptions,
we propose several benchmarks for comprehensive evaluation, which verifies the
quality of image descriptions created by our framework. Furthermore, we show
that LLaVA-7B, benefiting from fine-tuning on IT-curated descriptions, acquire
improved capability to generate richer image descriptions, substantially increasing
the length and detail of their output with less hallucination.

1

Introduction

In recent years, multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) have witnessed significant progresses.
Such models start to reach super-human performances in a variety of areas, such as image understanding [2, 15, 34, 41, 80], text-to-image generation [13, 54, 55, 57, 58] and text-image retrieval [33, 53, 69, 77]. One of the primary reasons for these successes is the training data, which
consists of image-description pairs. Recent studies highlight that the quality of image descriptions
is crucial for MLLM performance. For example, Yin et al. [74] note that low-quality descriptions
often cause hallucinations in image understanding tasks, while Betker et al. [4] show that detailed
descriptions with richer visual concepts significantly enhance generation models’ performance. Thus,
∗

Equal Contribution. Code and data are available at the following links:
https://github.com/sterzhang/image-textualization/
https://huggingface.co/datasets/Sterzhang/image-textualization/.
The code and data are released under MIT and apache2.0 licenses, respectively.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

