Adapting to Unknown Low-Dimensional Structures
in Score-Based Diffusion Models
Gen Li∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
genli@cuhk.edu.hk

Yuling Yan∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yuling.yan@wisc.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates score-based diffusion models when the underlying target
distribution is concentrated on or near low-dimensional manifolds within the
higher-dimensional space in which they formally reside, a common characteristic
of natural image distributions. Despite previous efforts to understand the data
generation process of diffusion models, existing theoretical support remains highly
suboptimal in the presence of low-dimensional structure, which we strengthen in
this paper. For the popular Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM), we
find that the dependency of the error incurred within each denoising step on the
ambient dimension d is in general unavoidable. We further identify √
a unique design
of coefficients that yields a converges rate at the order of O(k 2 / T ) (up to log
factors), where k is the intrinsic dimension of the target distribution and T is the
number of steps. This represents the first theoretical demonstration that the DDPM
sampler can adapt to unknown low-dimensional structures in the target distribution,
highlighting the critical importance of coefficient design. All of this is achieved by
a novel set of analysis tools that characterize the algorithmic dynamics in a more
deterministic manner.

1

Introduction

Score-based diffusion models are a class of generative models that have gained prominence in the
field of machine learning and artificial intelligence for their ability to generate high-quality new data
instances from complex distributions, such as images, audio, and text [23, 11, 25, 24, 9]. These models
operate by gradually transforming noise into samples from the target distribution through a denoising
process guided by pre-trained neural networks that approximate the score functions. In practice,
score-based diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable performance in generating realistic and
diverse content across various domains [19, 20, 21, 7], achieving state-of-the-art performance in
generative AI.
1.1

Diffusion models

The development of score-based diffusion models is deeply rooted in the theory of stochastic processes.
At a high level, we consider a forward process:
X0

add noise

−→ X1

add noise

add noise

−→ · · · −→ XT ,

(1.1)

which draws a sample from the target data distribution (i.e., X0 ∼ pdata ), then progressively diffuses
it to Gaussian noise over time. The key aspect of the diffusion model is to construct a reverse process:
denoise

denoise

denoise

YT −→ YT −1 −→ · · · −→ Y0
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding author: Yuling Yan (Email: yuling.yan@wisc.edu).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

(1.2)

