Mixture of Experts Meets
Prompt-Based Continual Learning

Minh Le3

An Nguyen2∗

Trang Pham3∗
2

Huy Nguyen1∗
Linh Van Ngo2

Trang Nguyen3∗
Nhat Ho1

1
The University of Texas at Austin
Hanoi University of Science and Technology
3
VinAI Research

Abstract
Exploiting the power of pre-trained models, prompt-based approaches stand out
compared to other continual learning solutions in effectively preventing catastrophic
forgetting, even with very few learnable parameters and without the need for a
memory buffer. While existing prompt-based continual learning methods excel in
leveraging prompts for state-of-the-art performance, they often lack a theoretical
explanation for the effectiveness of prompting. This paper conducts a theoretical
analysis to unravel how prompts bestow such advantages in continual learning,
thus offering a new perspective on prompt design. We first show that the attention
block of pre-trained models like Vision Transformers inherently encodes a special
mixture of experts architecture, characterized by linear experts and quadratic gating
score functions. This realization drives us to provide a novel view on prefix tuning,
reframing it as the addition of new task-specific experts, thereby inspiring the
design of a novel gating mechanism termed Non-linear Residual Gates (NoRGa).
Through the incorporation of non-linear activation and residual connection, NoRGa
enhances continual learning performance while preserving parameter efficiency.
The effectiveness of NoRGa is substantiated both theoretically and empirically
across diverse benchmarks and pretraining paradigms. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/Minhchuyentoancbn/MoE_PromptCL.

1

Introduction

Humans possess a remarkable ability to learn continuously by integrating new skills and knowledge
while retaining past experiences. However, current AI models often fail to retain this ability. Unlike
humans, they often suffer from catastrophic forgetting [28, 30, 32, 38], a phenomenon where they
struggle to retain knowledge from previous tasks while learning new ones. Inspired by human
learning, Continual Learning [2, 28, 43, 1, 12] is an ongoing field that aims to train a model across
a sequence of tasks while mitigating this challenge. Traditional continual learning methods often
rely on storing past data for fine-tuning, which can raise concerns about memory usage and privacy
[5, 39, 51]. To address these limitations, prompt-based approaches have emerged as a promising
alternative within rehearsal-free continual learning. By attaching prompts - small sets of learnable
parameters - to a frozen pre-trained model, these approaches enable efficient adaptation to new tasks
with minimal modifications to the underlying model [56, 26, 61]. The effectiveness of prompt-based
methods has been demonstrated by several recent works achieving state-of-the-art performance on
various continual learning benchmarks [49, 53, 54].
While prompt-based methods have demonstrably achieved impressive results, their emphasis largely
lies on prompt utility, leaving a gap in our theoretical comprehension of their effectiveness. This
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

