No-Regret Learning for Fair Multi-Agent
Social Welfare Optimization

Mengxiao Zhang
University of Iowa
mengxiao-zhang@uiowa.edu

Ramiro Deo-Campo Vuong
Cornell University
ramdcv@cs.cornell.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of online multi-agent Nash social welfare (NSW) maximization. While previous works of Hossain et al. [2021], Jones et al. [2023]
study√similar problems in stochastic multi-agent multi-armed bandits and show
that T -regret is possible after T rounds, their fairness measure is the product of
all agents’ rewards, instead of their NSW (that is, their geometric mean). Given the
fundamental role of NSW in the fairness literature, it is more than natural to ask
whether no-regret fair learning with NSW as the objective is possible. In this work,
we provide a complete answer to this question in various settings. Specifically, in
e N2 T NN−1 )
stochastic N -agent K-armed bandits, we develop an algorithm with O(K
regret
and prove that the dependence on T is tight, making it a sharp contrast to the
√
T -regret bounds of Hossain et al. [2021], Jones et al. [2023]. We then consider a
more challenging version of the problem with adversarial rewards. Somewhat surprisingly, despite NSW being a concave function, we prove that no algorithm can
achieve sublinear regret. To circumvent such negative results, we further√consider a
setting with full-information feedback and design two algorithms with T -regret:
the first one has no dependence on N at all and is applicable to not just NSW but a
broad class of welfare functions, while the second one has better dependence on K
and is preferable when N is small. Finally, we also show that logarithmic regret is
possible whenever there exists one agent who is indifferent about different arms.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study online multi-agent Nash social welfare (NSW) maximization, which is a
generalization of the classic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem [Thompson, 1933, Lai and Robbins,
1985]. Different from MAB, in which the learner makes her decisions sequentially in order to
maximize her own reward, in online multi-agent NSW maximization, the learner’s decision affects
multiple agents and the goal is to maximize the NSW over all the agents. Specifically, NSW is
defined as the geometric mean of the expected utilities over all agents [Moulin, 2004], which can be
viewed as a measure of fairness among the agents. This problem includes many important real-life
applications such as resource allocation [Jones et al., 2023], where the learner needs to guarantee fair
allocations among multiple agents. We refer the readers to [Hossain et al., 2021, Jones et al., 2023]
for more applications of NSW maximization.
Recent work by Hossain et al. [2021], Jones et al. [2023] studies a similar problem but with NSWprod
as the objective, a variant of NSW that is defined as the product of the utilities over agents instead of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

