Learning Social Welfare Functions

Kanad Shrikar Pardeshi
Carnegie Mellon University
kpardesh@andrew.cmu.edu

Itai Shapira
Harvard University
itaishapira@g.harvard.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Aarti Singh
Carnegie Mellon University
aarti@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Is it possible to understand or imitate a policy maker’s rationale by looking at past
decisions they made? We formalize this question as the problem of learning social
welfare functions belonging to the well-studied family of power mean functions.
We focus on two learning tasks; in the first, the input is vectors of utilities of an
action (decision or policy) for individuals in a group and their associated social
welfare as judged by a policy maker, whereas in the second, the input is pairwise
comparisons between the welfares associated with a given pair of utility vectors. We
show that power mean functions are learnable with polynomial sample complexity
in both cases, even if the social welfare information is noisy. Finally, we design
practical algorithms for these tasks and evaluate their performance.

1

Introduction

Consider a standard decision making setting that includes a set of possible actions (decisions or
policies), and a set of individuals who assign utilities to the actions. A social welfare function
aggregates the utilities into a single number, providing a measure for the evaluation of actions with
respect to the entire group. Utilitarian social welfare, for example, is the sum of utilities, whereas
egalitarian social welfare is the minimum utility. Given two actions that induce the utility vectors
(3, 0) and (1, 1) for two individuals, the former is preferred when measured by utilitarian social
welfare, whereas the latter is preferred according to egalitarian social welfare.
When competent decision makers adopt policies that affect groups or even entire societies, they may
have a social welfare function in mind, but it is typically implicit. Our goal is to learn a social welfare
function that is consistent with the decision maker’s rationale. This learned social welfare function
has at least two compelling applications: first, understanding the decision maker’s priorities and ideas
of fairness, and second, potentially imitating a successful decision maker’s policy choices in future
dilemmas or in other domains.
As a motivating example, consider the thousands of decisions made by public health officials in
the United States during the Covid-19 pandemic: opening and closing schools, restaurants, and
gyms, requirements for masking and social distancing, lockdown recommendations, and so on. Each
decision induces utilities for individuals in the population; closing schools, for instance, provides
higher utility to medically vulnerable individuals compared to opening them, but arguably has much
lower utility for students and parents. Assuming that healthcare officials were acting in the public
interest and (approximately) optimizing a social welfare function, which one did they have in mind?
Our goal is to answer such questions by learning from example decisions.
Another example we consider in this paper is that of allocating food resources in a community by a
US-based nonprofit to hundreds of recipient organizations. Working with a dataset of utility of 18
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

