HYDRA: Model Factorization Framework for Black-Box
LLM Personalization
Yuchen Zhuang1 , Haotian Sun1 , Yue Yu1 , Rushi Qiang1 , Qifan Wang2 , Chao Zhang1 , Bo Dai1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Meta AI
{yczhuang, haotian.sun, yueyu, rqiang6, chaozhang}@gatech.edu,
wqfcr@fb.com, bodai@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Personalization has emerged as a critical research area in modern intelligent systems, focusing on mining users’ behavioral history and adapting to their preferences
for delivering tailored experiences. Despite the remarkable few-shot capabilities
exhibited by black-box large language models (LLMs), the inherent opacity of
their model parameters presents significant challenges in aligning the generated
output with individual expectations. Existing solutions have primarily focused on
prompt design to incorporate user-specific profiles and behaviors; however, such
approaches often struggle to generalize effectively due to their inability to capture
shared knowledge among all users. To address these challenges, we propose HYDRA,
a model factorization framework that captures both user-specific behavior patterns
from historical data and shared general knowledge among all users to deliver personalized generation. In order to capture user-specific behavior patterns, we first
train a reranker to prioritize the most useful information from top-retrieved relevant
historical records. By combining the prioritized history with the corresponding
query, we train an adapter to align the output with individual user-specific preferences, eliminating the reliance on access to inherent model parameters of black-box
LLMs. Both the reranker and the adapter can be decomposed into a base model
with multiple user-specific heads, resembling a hydra. The base model maintains
shared knowledge across users, while the multiple personal heads capture userspecific preferences. Experimental results demonstrate that HYDRA outperforms
existing state-of-the-art prompt-based methods by an average relative improvement
of 9.01% across five diverse personalization tasks in the LaMP benchmark. Our
implementation is available at https://github.com/night-chen/HYDRA.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained large language models (LLMs) [35, 36, 2, 31, 4, 30] have revolutionized various natural
language processing (NLP) tasks, ranging from traditional recommendation systems [62, 12, 8, 6]
to modern virtual assistants [9, 23, 63, 66, 44, 65, 47]. Despite their strong capabilities, LLMs
require further customization to consistently demonstrate desirable behaviors to each user and achieve
optimal performance in specific use cases [48, 43, 61, 10, 13, 14, 24, 57, 58, 45, 59]. As a result, LLM
personalization has emerged as a rapidly evolving area of research [20], with the goal of tailoring the
emergent abilities of LLMs to meet the unique needs of individual users.
Several existing studies have shown effectiveness in personalizing LLMs, including (1) fine-tuning
personalized LLMs for each user [50, 54] and (2) aligning LLMs to personalized preferences through
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [22, 55, 17]. However, both fine-tuning and
RLHF-based methods require access to model parameters, restricting their use to white-box LLMs
only (e.g., LLaMA-2 [51]). These models tend to be less capable than black-box LLMs (e.g., GPT-3.5
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

