Approximation Rate of the Transformer Architecture
for Sequence Modeling

Haotian Jiang ∗
haotian.jiang@cnrsatcreate.sg

Qianxiao Li ∗†
qianxiao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The Transformer architecture is widely applied in sequence modeling applications,
yet the theoretical understanding of its working principles remains limited. In
this work, we investigate the approximation rate results for the Transformer architectures on general sequence to sequence target relationships. We begin by
establishing a representation theorem for the target space and introduce a novel
notion of complexity measures to construct approximation spaces. These measures
encapsulate both pairwise and pointwise interactions among input tokens. Based on
this framework, we derive an explicit Jackson-type approximation rate estimate for
the Transformer. This rate sheds light on the underlying structural characteristics
of the Transformer, thereby delineating the types of sequential relationships they
excel in approximating. Notably, our findings on approximation rates facilitate a
concrete comparison between the Transformer and traditional sequence modeling
approaches, such as recurrent neural networks.

1

Introduction

The Transformer architecture, as introduced by Vaswani et al. [30] has become immensely popular
in the field of sequence modeling. Variants such as BERT [8] and GPT [6] have achieved excellent performance, becoming the default choices for natural language processing (NLP) problems.
Concurrently, Dosovitskiy et al. [11] successfully applied the Transformer to image classification
problems by flattening the image into a sequence of patches. Despite its success across various fields
of practical application, many theoretical questions remain unanswered. Among these, we focus on
two essential questions in this work: firstly, the approximation rate of the Transformer on sequence
modeling; secondly, the comparative advantages and disadvantages of the Transformer with recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) on different temporal structures.
The concept of Jackson-type approximation rates is derived from the Jackson Theorem for polynomials [15], and is further elaborated in the work of DeVore [9] for addressing general forward
approximation problems. To illustrate this, consider classic polynomial approximation. It involves
defining an appropriate approximation space, accompanied by specific complexity measures, precisely
the Sobolev space. According to the Jackson theorem, a function with a small Sobolev norm can be
efficiently approximated by a polynomial. We aim to establish similar approximation rate results for
the Transformer. This identifies the type of targets that the Transformer can efficiently learn. We
examine general non-linear sequence-to-sequence target relationships, extending the linear target
form explored in previous studies of the approximation results for linear RNNs and linear temporal
convolution networks [24, 16]. We introduce a novel notion of complexity, establishing a concrete
target space from which approximation rates can be deduced. This enables us to identify the types
of sequential relationships that Transformer can approximate efficiently. Based on our theoretical
analysis, we identify concrete classes of temporal structures where the Transformer outperforms
∗
†

CNRS@CREATE LTD, 1 Create Way, #08-01 CREATE Tower, Singapore 138602
Department of Mathematics, Institute for Functional Intelligent Materials, National University of Singapore

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

