CRAG – Comprehensive RAG Benchmark
Xiao Yang˚1 , Kai Sun˚1 , Hao Xin˚3 , Yushi Sun˚3 , Nikita Bhalla1 , Xiangsen Chen4 , Sajal
Choudhary1 , Rongze Daniel Gui1 , Ziran Will Jiang1 , Ziyu Jiang4 , Lingkun Kong1 , Brian Moran1 ,
Jiaqi Wang1 , Yifan Ethan Xu1 , An Yan1 , Chenyu Yang4 , Eting Yuan1 , Hanwen Zha1 , Nan Tang3,4 ,
Lei Chen3,4 , Nicolas Scheffer1 , Yue Liu1 , Nirav Shah1 , Rakesh Wanga1 , Anuj Kumar1 , Wen-tau Yih2 ,
and Xin Luna Dong1
1

Meta Reality Labs, 2 FAIR, Meta, 3 HKUST, 4 HKUST (GZ)

Abstract
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has recently emerged as a promising solution to alleviate Large Language Model (LLM)’s deficiency in lack of knowledge.
Existing RAG datasets, however, do not adequately represent the diverse and dynamic nature of real-world Question Answering (QA) tasks. To bridge this gap, we
introduce the Comprehensive RAG Benchmark (CRAG), a factual question answering benchmark of 4,409 question-answer pairs and mock APIs to simulate web
and Knowledge Graph (KG) search. CRAG is designed to encapsulate a diverse
array of questions across five domains and eight question categories, reflecting
varied entity popularity from popular to long-tail, and temporal dynamisms ranging
from years to seconds. Our evaluation of this benchmark highlights the gap to
fully trustworthy QA. Whereas most advanced LLMs achieve ď 34% accuracy
on CRAG, adding RAG in a straightforward manner improves the accuracy only
to 44%. State-of-the-art industry RAG solutions only answer 63% of questions
without any hallucination. CRAG also reveals much lower accuracy in answering questions regarding facts with higher dynamism, lower popularity, or higher
complexity, suggesting future research directions. The CRAG benchmark laid the
groundwork for a KDD Cup 2024 challenge and attracted thousands of participants
and submissions. We commit to maintaining CRAG to serve research communities
in advancing RAG solutions and general QA solutions. CRAG is available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/CRAG/.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have transformed the landscape of Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tasks, especially in Question Answering (QA) [20, 22, 38, 39]. Despite the advancements,
the issue of hallucination persists as a significant challenge; LLMs may generate answers that lack
factual accuracy or grounding [14,27,30,32]. Studies have shown that GPT-4’s accuracy in answering
questions referring to slow-changing or fast-changing facts is below 15% [36]; even for stable (neverchanging) facts, GPT-4’s accuracy in answering questions referring to torso-to-tail (less popular)
entities is below 35% [29]. Overcoming hallucinations thus becomes a priority in building reliable
QA systems [13, 14].
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [6, 8, 12, 19] has recently emerged as a promising solution to
alleviate LLM’s deficiency in lack of knowledge and attracted a lot of attention from both academia
research and industry. Given a question, a RAG system searches external sources to retrieve relevant
information and then provides grounded answers [7, 12, 19] (see Figure 1 for an illustration). Despite
˚

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Xiao Yang (xiaoyangfb@meta.com).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

