Second-order forward-mode optimization of recurrent
neural networks for neuroscience
Youjing Yu

Rui Xia

Qingxi Ma

Máté Lengyel

Guillaume Hennequin

Computational and Biological Learning Lab
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
{yy471, rx220, qm218}@cam.ac.uk, {m.lengyel, g.hennequin}@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Training recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to perform neuroscience tasks can be
challenging. Unlike in machine learning where any architectural modification of an
RNN (e.g. GRU or LSTM) is acceptable if it facilitates training, the RNN models
trained as models of brain dynamics are subject to plausibility constraints that fundamentally exclude the usual machine learning hacks. The “vanilla” RNNs commonly
used in computational neuroscience find themselves plagued by ill-conditioned loss
surfaces that complicate training and significantly hinder our capacity to investigate
the brain dynamics underlying complex tasks. Moreover, some tasks may require
very long time horizons which backpropagation cannot handle given typical GPU
memory limits. Here, we develop SOFO, a second-order optimizer that efficiently
navigates loss surfaces whilst not requiring backpropagation. By relying instead
on easily parallelized batched forward-mode differentiation, SOFO enjoys constant
memory cost in time. Moreover, unlike most second-order optimizers which involve inherently sequential operations, SOFO’s effective use of GPU parallelism
yields a per-iteration wallclock time essentially on par with first-order gradientbased optimizers. We show vastly superior performance compared to Adam on
a number of RNN tasks, including a difficult double-reaching motor task and the
learning of an adaptive Kalman filter algorithm trained over a long horizon.

1

Introduction

In recent years, trained recurrent neural networks (RNN) have gained increasing adoption as models
of brain circuits dynamics [47, 1]. As flexible parametric models of sequential dynamics, RNNs
can be trained to perform specific computations or reproduce certain behaviors [31, 50, 20, 13],
and be subsequently probed for insights into the distributed computations that give rise to those
behaviors [2, 53]. RNNs are also often used as expressive models of the latent dynamics underlying
the spatiotemporal structure of neural recordings [39, 44, 21, 12].
Despite their flexibility, RNNs are notoriously difficult to train [40, 51, 9, 36]. In addition to the
classic problem of vanishing gradients in temporally extended tasks, the loss surfaces that arise from
RNN dynamics in complex tasks often exhibit pathological curvature that first-order gradient-based
optimization techniques struggle to handle. These problems are normally addressed in multiple ways.
First, the RNNs used in machine learning are modified from their standard (“vanilla”) formulation to
include specific gate variables [18, 8] that largely mitigate the vanishing gradient problem. However,
there is little biological support for the existence of such gating mechanisms, such that computational
neuroscience studies have typically restricted themselves to vanilla RNNs [46]. Second, second-order
optimizers such as Hessian-free optimization [32, 33, 50] or KFAC [34] can be used to dramatically
accelerate training. However, those are difficult to scale, often much slower in wall-clock time, and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

