Provable Partially Observable Reinforcement
Learning with Privileged Information

Yang Cai1
Xiangyu Liu2
Argyris Oikonomou1
Kaiqing Zhang2
1
2
Yale University
University of Maryland, College Park
yang.cai@yale.edu, xyliu999@umd.edu
argyris.oikonomou@yale.edu, kaiqing@umd.edu

Abstract
Partial observability of the underlying states generally presents significant challenges for reinforcement learning (RL). In practice, certain privileged information,
e.g., the access to states from simulators, has been exploited in training and has
achieved prominent empirical successes. To better understand the benefits of privileged information, we revisit and examine several simple and practically used
paradigms in this setting. Specifically, we first formalize the empirical paradigm
of expert distillation (also known as teacher-student learning), demonstrating its
pitfall in finding near-optimal policies. We then identify a condition of the partially
observable environment, the deterministic filter condition, under which expert distillation achieves sample and computational complexities that are both polynomial.
Furthermore, we investigate another successful empirical paradigm of asymmetric
actor-critic, and focus on the more challenging setting of observable partially
observable Markov decision processes. We develop a belief-weighted asymmetric
actor-critic algorithm with polynomial sample and quasi-polynomial computational
complexities, in which one key component is a new provable oracle for learning
belief states that preserves filter stability under a misspecified model, which may
be of independent interest. Finally, we also investigate the provable efficiency of
partially observable multi-agent RL (MARL) with privileged information. We
develop algorithms featuring centralized-training-with-decentralized-execution,
a popular framework in empirical MARL, with polynomial sample and (quasi)polynomial computational complexities in both paradigms above. Compared with
a few recent related theoretical studies, our focus is on understanding practically
inspired algorithmic paradigms, without computationally intractable oracles.

1

Introduction

In most real-world applications of reinforcement learning (RL), e.g., perception-based robot learning
[46, 3], autonomous driving [73, 41], dialogue systems [88], and clinical trials [77], only partial
observations of the environment state are available for sequential decision-making. Such partial
observability presents significant challenges for efficient decision-making and learning, with known
computational [66] and statistical [43, 36] barriers under the general model of partially observable
Markov decision processes (POMDPs). The curse of partial observability becomes severer when
multiple RL agents interact, where not only the environment state, but also other agents’ information,
are not fully-observable in decision-making [85, 80].
On the other hand, a flurry of empirical paradigms has made partially observable (multi-agent) RL
promising in practice. One notable example is to exploit the privileged information that may be
available (only) during training. The privileged information usually includes direct access to the
underlying states, as well as access to other agents’ observations/actions in multi-agent RL (MARL),
due to the use of simulators and/or high-precision sensors for training. The latter is also known as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

