Smoothed Online Classification can be Harder than
Batch Classification
Vinod Raman ∗
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
vkraman@umich.edu

Unique Subedi ∗
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
subedi@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
We study online classification under smoothed adversaries. In this setting, at each
time point, the adversary draws an example from a distribution that has a bounded
density with respect to a fixed base measure, which is known apriori to the learner.
For binary classification and scalar-valued regression, previous works [Haghtalab
et al., 2020, Block et al., 2022] have shown that smoothed online learning is as
easy as learning in the iid batch setting under PAC model. However, we show that
smoothed online classification can be harder than the iid batch classification when
the label space is unbounded. In particular, we construct a hypothesis class that is
learnable in the iid batch setting under the PAC model but is not learnable under the
smoothed online model. Finally, we identify a condition that ensures that the PAC
learnability of a hypothesis class is sufficient for its smoothed online learnability.

1

Introduction

Classification is a canonical machine learning task where the goal is to classify examples in X into
one of the possible classes in Y. There are two common classification settings based on how the
data is available to the learner: batch and online. In the batch setting, the learner is provided with
a fixed set of training samples that are used to train a classifier, which is then deployed to make
predictions on new, real-world examples [Vapnik and Chervonenkis, 1971, Natarajan, 1989]. On
the other hand, data arrives sequentially in the online setting and predictions need to be made in
each round [Littlestone, 1987, Daniely et al., 2011]. The batch setting is often studied under the iid
assumption, whereas the stream can be fully adversarial in the online setting.
For binary classification (i.e. |Y| = 2), the batch learnability of a hypothesis class H ⊆ Y X under the
PAC model [Valiant, 1984] is characterized in terms of a combinatorial parameter called the VapnikChervonenkis (VC) dimension of H. On the other hand, the Littlestone dimension characterizes the
learnability of H under the adversarial online model [Littlestone, 1987, Ben-David et al., 2009]. As
Haghtalab et al. [2020] remark, the latter characterization is often interpreted as an impossibility
result because even simple classes like 1-dimensional thresholds have infinite Littlestone dimension.
This hardness result arises mainly because the adversary can deterministically choose hard examples,
even possibly adapting to the learner’s strategy. One way to circumvent this hardness result is to
consider a smoothed online model, where the adversary has to choose and draw examples from
sufficiently anti-concentrated distributions [Rakhlin et al., 2011, Haghtalab, 2018, Haghtalab et al.,
2020, Block et al., 2022]. This idea is inspired from the seminal work by Spielman and Teng [2004],
who showed that the smoothed analysis of the simplex method yields a polynomial time complexity
in the input size, instead of the known worst-case exponential time complexity.
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

