HYDRA-FL: Hybrid Knowledge Distillation for
Robust and Accurate Federated Learning

Momin Ahmad Khan
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
makhan@umass.edu

Yasra Chandio
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
ychandio@umass.edu

Fatima Muhammad Anwar
University of Massachsuetts, Amherst
fanwar@umass.edu

Abstract
Data heterogeneity among Federated Learning (FL) users poses a significant challenge, resulting in reduced global model performance. The community has designed various techniques to tackle this issue, among which Knowledge Distillation (KD)-based techniques are common. While these techniques effectively
improve performance under high heterogeneity, they inadvertently cause higher
accuracy degradation under model poisoning attacks (known as attack amplification). This paper presents a case study to reveal this critical vulnerability
in KD-based FL systems. We show why KD causes this issue through empirical evidence and use it as motivation to design a hybrid distillation technique.
We introduce a novel algorithm, Hybrid Knowledge Distillation for Robust and
Accurate FL (HYDRA-FL), which reduces the impact of attacks in attack scenarios by offloading some of the KD loss to a shallow layer via an auxiliary
classifier. We model HYDRA-FL as a generic framework and adapt it to two
KD-based FL algorithms, FedNTD and MOON. Using these two as case studies,
we demonstrate that our technique outperforms baselines in attack settings while
maintaining comparable performance in benign settings. Our code is available at
https://github.com/momin-ahmad-khan/HYDRA-FL.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [33] is an emerging machine learning paradigm enabling multiple users’
collaborative model training without data sharing. Each user, termed a client, only shares their local
model with a server, which aggregates all local models into a single global model and redistributes
it to the clients. Due to its decentralized, privacy-preserving, and highly-scalable nature, FL has
been adopted by Google’s Gboard [2] for next-word prediction, Apple’s Siri [1] for automatic speech
recognition, and WeBank [44] for credit risk prediction.
Despite its benefits, FL faces challenges with data heterogeneity [29, 52, 14, 25]. FL performs well
when client data is independent and identically distributed (IID) and achieves similar convergence
as a single model trained on all the clients’ data but struggles when clients have diverse data (nonIID). In this case, the client’s local data is not a good representation of the overall data distribution
(unlike an ideal IID case), causing local models to drift away from each other. This drift results
in a global model with significant accuracy degradation compared to the IID scenario. Numerous
solutions [26, 21, 23, 54, 24, 47, 16, 28] address data heterogeneity, including Knowledge Distillation
(KD) [12] to reduce the drift between local models.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

