Induced Model Matching:
Restricted Models Help Train Full-Featured Models

Usama Muneeb
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Chicago
umunee2@uic.edu

Mesrob I. Ohannessian
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Chicago
mesrob@uic.edu

Abstract
We consider scenarios where a very accurate (often small) predictive model using
restricted features is available when training a full-featured (often larger) model.
This restricted model may be thought of as “side-information”, and can come
either from an auxiliary dataset or from the same dataset by forcing the restriction.
How can the restricted model be useful to the full model? To answer this, we
introduce a methodology called Induced Model Matching (IMM). IMM aligns the
context-restricted, or induced, version of the large model with the restricted model.
We relate IMM to approaches such as noising, which is implicit in addressing
the problem, and reverse knowledge distillation from weak teachers, which is
explicit but does not exploit restriction being the nature of the weakness. We show
that these prior methods can be thought of as approximations to IMM and can be
problematic in terms of consistency. Experimentally, we first motivate IMM using
logistic regression as a toy example. We then explore it in language modeling,
the application that initially inspired it, and demonstrate it on both LSTM and
transformer full models, using bigrams as restricted models. We lastly give a
simple RL example, which shows that POMDP policies can help learn better MDP
policies. The IMM principle is thus generally applicable in common scenarios
where restricted data is cheaper to collect or restricted models are easier to learn.

1

Introduction

In many applications, it is both statistically and computationally easier to construct (often small)
feature-restricted models. In this paper, we address the question of whether this could be beneficial in
the construction of an (often larger) full-featured model.
To motivate, consider the following toy logistic regression problem, with further details in Section
7. Say we have three features (x1 , x2 , x3 ) ∈ R3 and a binary label y ∈ {0, 1}. Let features be
generated from a distribution π and let labels be conditionally generated according to a logistic
(full-featured) true model P (y|x1 , x2 , x3 ). Assume we have ample feature-restricted data with only
one feature (x1 , y),P
which, by marginalization, are samples from the (feature-restricted) true induced
model P (y|x1 ) = x2 ,x3 π(x2 , x3 |x1 )P (y|x1 , x2 , x3 ). By virtue of this data, we get a very good
approximation P̂ of P , which we can use as a target induced model. How do we use P̂ , along with
full-featured data (x1 , x2 , x3 , y) to obtain a (full-featured) learned model Q(y|x1 , x2 , x3 )?
A few possible approaches are as follows. We could ignore P̂ , and learn Q simply by minimizing
cross-entropy on the data. This is wasteful, because P̂ contains valuable information. Alternatively,
we could learn Q by minimizing cross-entropy in addition to a secondary loss that keeps Q close to
P̂ . This is reasonable — in Section 2 we relate this to reverse knowledge distillation and in Section
6 to noising. However, P̂ addresses a markedly different task than Q, i.e., that of predicting with a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

