Bias and Volatility: A Statistical Framework for
Evaluating Large Language Model’s Stereotypes and
the Associated Generation Inconsistency

Yiran Liu∗ 1 , Ke Yang∗2 , Zehan Qi1 , Xiao Liu1 , Yang Yu† 3 , ChengXiang Zhai2
1
Tsinghua University
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
3
China University of Petroleum (Beijing)
liu-yr21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {key4, czhai}@illinois.edu
yangyu@cup.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a novel statistical framework for analyzing stereotypes in large language models (LLMs) by systematically estimating the bias and variation in their
generation. Current evaluation metrics in the alignment literature often overlook
the randomness of stereotypes caused by the inconsistent generative behavior of
LLMs. For example, this inconsistency can result in LLMs displaying contradictory
stereotypes, including those related to gender or race, for identical professions
across varied contexts. Neglecting such inconsistency could lead to misleading
conclusions in alignment evaluations and hinder the accurate assessment of the risk
of LLM applications perpetuating or amplifying social stereotypes and unfairness.
This work proposes a Bias-Volatility Framework (BVF) that estimates the probability distribution function of LLM stereotypes. Specifically, since the stereotype
distribution fully captures an LLM’s generation variation, BVF enables the assessment of both the likelihood and extent to which its outputs are against vulnerable
groups, thereby allowing for the quantification of the LLM’s aggregated discrimination risk. Furthermore, we introduce a mathematical framework to decompose
an LLM’s aggregated discrimination risk into two components: bias risk and
volatility risk, originating from the mean and variation of LLM’s stereotype distribution, respectively. We apply BVF to assess 12 commonly adopted LLMs and
compare their risk levels. Our findings reveal that: i) Bias risk is the primary
cause of discrimination risk in LLMs; ii) Most LLMs exhibit significant pro-male
stereotypes for nearly all careers; iii) Alignment with reinforcement learning from
human feedback lowers discrimination by reducing bias, but increases volatility;
iv) Discrimination risk in LLMs correlates with key sociol-economic factors like
professional salaries. Finally, we emphasize that BVF can also be used to assess
other dimensions of generation inconsistency’s impact on LLM behavior beyond
stereotypes, such as knowledge mastery.

1

Introduction

The penetration of large language models (LLMs) into society heightens public apprehension regarding the potential for its algorithmic bias to induce or exacerbate social inequality [Barocas et al.,
2017, Cowgill, 2018, Deshpande et al., 2020, Dressel and Farid, 2018, Dastin, 2018]. For instance,
∗
†

Yiran and Ke made equal contributions. Our data and code are available here.
Yang Yu is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

