Gradient-based Discrete Sampling with
Automatic Cyclical Scheduling

Patrick Pynadath
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
ppynadat@purdue.edu.edu
Arun Hariharan
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
harihar4@purdue.edu

Riddhiman Bhattacharya
Department of Management
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
bhatta76@purdue.edu
Ruqi Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
ruqiz@purdue.edu

Abstract
Discrete distributions, particularly in high-dimensional deep models, are often
highly multimodal due to inherent discontinuities. While gradient-based discrete
sampling has proven effective, it is susceptible to becoming trapped in local modes
due to the gradient information. To tackle this challenge, we propose an automatic
cyclical scheduling, designed for efficient and accurate sampling in multimodal
discrete distributions. Our method contains three key components: (1) a cyclical
step size schedule where large steps discover new modes and small steps exploit
each mode; (2) a cyclical balancing schedule, ensuring “balanced” proposals for
given step sizes and high efficiency of the Markov chain; and (3) an automatic
tuning scheme for adjusting the hyperparameters in the cyclical schedules, allowing adaptability across diverse datasets with minimal tuning. We prove the
non-asymptotic convergence and inference guarantee for our method in general
discrete distributions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
method in sampling complex multimodal discrete distributions.

1

Introduction

Discrete variables are common in many machine learning problems, highlighting the crucial need
for efficient discrete samplers. Recent advances [Grathwohl et al., 2021, Zhang et al., 2022b, Sun
et al., 2021, 2023b,a, Xiang et al., 2023] have leveraged gradient information in discrete distributions
to improve proposal distributions, significantly boosting their efficiency. These advancements have
set new benchmarks in discrete sampling tasks across graphical models, energy-based models, and
combinatorial optimization [Goshvadi et al., 2023].
However, one major limitation of gradient-based methods is their susceptibility to becoming trapped in
local modes [Ruder, 2016, Ziyin et al., 2021], which significantly reduces the accuracy and efficiency
of sampling results. In continuous spaces, several strategies such as cyclical step sizes [Zhang et al.,
2020], parallel tempering [Swendsen and Wang, 1986, Deng et al., 2020a], and flat histograms [Berg
and Neuhaus, 1991, Deng et al., 2020b], have been proposed to address this issue. When it comes to
discrete distributions, which are inherently more multimodal due to their discontinuous nature, the
problem becomes even more severe. Despite the pressing need, there is a lack of methodology for
gradient-based discrete samplers to effectively explore multimodal distributions. Current methods
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

