Flexible Context-Driven Sensory Processing in
Dynamical Vision Models
Lakshmi Narasimhan Govindarajan∗1, 3, 4 , Abhiram Iyer∗2, 3, 4 ,
Valmiki Kothare1 , and Ila Fiete1, 3, 4
1

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA
3
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA
4
K. Lisa Yang Integrative Computational Neuroscience (ICoN), MIT, Cambridge, MA ,
{lakshmin,abiyer,valmiki,fiete}@mit.edu
2

Abstract
Visual representations become progressively more abstract along the cortical hierarchy. These abstract representations define notions like objects and shapes, but
at the cost of spatial specificity. By contrast, low-level regions represent spatially
local but simple input features. How do spatially non-specific representations of
abstract concepts in high-level areas flexibly modulate the low-level sensory representations in appropriate ways to guide context-driven and goal-directed behaviors
across a range of tasks? We build a biologically motivated and trainable neural
network model of dynamics in the visual pathway, incorporating local, lateral, and
feedforward synaptic connections, excitatory and inhibitory neurons, and longrange top-down inputs conceptualized as low-rank modulations of the input-driven
sensory responses by high-level areas. We study this Dynamical Cortical network
(DCnet) in a visual cue-delay-search task and show that the model uses its own
cue representations to adaptively modulate its perceptual responses to solve the
task, outperforming state-of-the-art DNN vision and LLM models. The model’s
population states over time shed light on the nature of contextual modulatory dynamics, generating predictions for experiments. We fine-tune the same model on
classic psychophysics attention tasks, and find that the model closely replicates
known reaction time results. This work represents a promising new foundation for
understanding and making predictions about perturbations to visual processing in
the brain.

1

Introduction

We readily use abstract cues to modulate our sensory perception. These include cues to attend
to abstract high-level features (find Waldo; count the number of hoop shots, etc.) or low-level
features (find the red items, vertically oriented bars, etc.). Such cue-based modulations of the visual
pathway allow us to locate items of interest more rapidly and accurately, and to perform goal-directed
computations.
Understanding how top-down modulatory cues are represented and then interact with bottom-up
sensory-driven neural responses has been a longstanding goal in computational cognitive neuroscience [1–4]. Extensive psychophysical experiments [5] and studies showing that individual neurons
whose receptive fields are aligned with the attentional cue exhibit a gain modulation [6, 7] shed light
* Denotes equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

