UrbanDataLayer: A Unified Data Pipeline
for Urban Science
Yiheng Wang 1 , Tianyu Wang 1 , Yuying Zhang 1
Hongji Zhang 1 , Haoyu Zheng 1 , Guanjie Zheng ∗,1 , Linghe Kong ∗,1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{yhwang0828, wty500, shjtzyy01, zhanghongji,
langanzheng, gjzheng, linghe.kong}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The rapid progression of urbanization has generated a diverse array of urban
data, facilitating significant advancements in urban science and urban computing.
Current studies often work on separate problems case by case using diverse data,
e.g., air quality prediction, and built-up areas classification. This fragmented
approach hinders the urban research field from advancing at the pace observed in
Computer Vision and Natural Language Processing, due to two primary reasons.
On the one hand, the diverse data processing steps lead to the lack of large-scale
benchmarks and therefore decelerate iterative methodology improvement on a
single problem. On the other hand, the disparity in multi-modal data formats
hinders the combination of the related modal data to stimulate more research
findings. To address these challenges, we propose UrbanDataLayer (UDL), a suite
of standardized data structures and pipelines for city data engineering, providing a
unified data format for researchers. This allows researchers to easily build up largescale benchmarks and combine multi-modal data, thus expediting the development
of multi-modal urban foundation models. To verify the effectiveness of our work,
we present four distinct urban problem tasks utilizing the proposed data layer.
UrbanDataLayer aims to enhance standardization and operational efficiency within
the urban science research community. The examples and source code are available
at https://github.com/SJTU-CILAB/udl.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

20

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

1

Introduction

The accelerated pace of urbanization has enhanced life quality while concurrently inducing issues
such as air pollution and traffic congestion. Extensive urban data has been recorded due to the
widespread use of advanced sensing technologies [29]. Simultaneously, urban studies have sprung up
among various domains of human mobility [15], air quality [6, 20], traffic dynamics [18], climate
change [35], spatial planning [48] and poverty [42, 32], etc. However, several challenges are posed.
Firstly, numerous urban studies work on separate problems using different datasets case by case or
performing different processings on the same dataset. This lack of standard benchmarks hinders
the overall improvement of research. In urban issues, researchers often self-define the problem and
propose methods accordingly. Based on an analysis of 88 papers published in seven AI conferences
shown in Fig. 1, three phenomena are observed. (1) Many urban problems are defined within the same
domain, yet disparate datasets are used for identical problems. (2) Even if they use the same datasets,
∗

Corresponding Author.

Submitted to the 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

