Risk-Averse Fine-tuning of Large Language Models

Sapana Chaudhary∗
Amazon Web Services (AWS)
chausapa@amazon.com

Ujwal Dinesha Dileep Kalathil Srinivas Shakkottai
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Texas A&M University
{ujwald36,dileep.kalathil,sshakkot}@tamu.edu

Abstract
We consider the challenge of mitigating the generation of negative or toxic content
by the Large Language Models (LLMs) in response to certain prompts. We propose
integrating risk-averse principles into LLM fine-tuning to minimize the occurrence
of harmful outputs, particularly rare but significant events. By optimizing the
risk measure of Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR), our methodology trains LLMs
to exhibit superior performance in avoiding toxic outputs while maintaining effectiveness in generative tasks. Empirical evaluations on sentiment modification
and toxicity mitigation tasks demonstrate the efficacy of risk-averse reinforcement
learning with human feedback (RLHF) in promoting a safer and more constructive
online discourse environment. Trigger Warning: This paper contains prompts
and model outputs that can be offensive in nature.

1

Introduction

The deployment of large language models (LLMs) is witnessing remarkable growth across both
personal and professional domains [Nakano et al., 2021, Touvron et al., 2023]. While a majority
of users utilize LLMs via relatively innocuous prompts, a minority might do so with negative or
toxic prompts, leading to the generation of content that violates acceptable norms [Bai et al., 2022a,
Ganguli et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2022b], restricting LLM usage in innovative applications with broad
societal impacts. In this work, we aim to answer “Can LLMs be fine-tuned to avoid such outputs?”.
The key idea that we explore in this work is to bring the notion of risk-averseness into the realm of
LLMs. Unlike the traditional fine-tuning approach of Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF), which seeks to maximize the expected reward in a risk-neutral manner, we seek to optimize
a risk measure of the generated trajectories. The specific measure that we use follows Conditional
Value at Risk (CVaR), which minimizes the expected cost, conditioned on it being greater than a
certain quantile value α [Tamar et al., 2015, Greenberg et al., 2022]. In other words, we seek to
minimize the toxicity or negativity, specifically of rare but high-stakes events that might occur. This
is in contrast to the existing approach of safety-constrained RLHF [Dai et al., 2023], which constrains
the expected harmfulness score of the output within limits. Constraining expectation means that
the scores of positive trajectories can offset those of negative trajectories, rather than explicitly
constraining the probability of toxic outputs. Additionally, this approach necessitates learning two
separate reward/preference models.
Our objective is to develop a risk-averse RLHF (RA-RLHF) algorithm to utilize pre-collected prompts
and their associated responses, which have varying levels of negativity or toxicity, to fine-tune an
LLM to be risk-averse. Several ideas need to come together to realize such an approach. The two
elements that must be considered during each policy optimization step are the risk-level quantile that
we train against in that step, and the batch size of data to be used in that step. We use a soft-risk
∗

Work performed while at Texas A&M University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

