NYU CTF Bench:
A Scalable Open-Source Benchmark Dataset
for Evaluating LLMs in Offensive Security
Minghao Shao1,2∗, Sofija Jancheska1∗, Meet Udeshi1∗, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt1∗,
Haoran Xi1 , Kimberly Milner1 , Boyuan Chen1,2 , Max Yin1 , Siddharth Garg1
Prashanth Krishnamurthy1 , Farshad Khorrami1 , Ramesh Karri1 , Muhammad Shafique2
1

New York University, 2 New York University Abu Dhabi

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are being deployed across various domains
today. However, their capacity to solve Capture the Flag (CTF) challenges in
cybersecurity has not been thoroughly evaluated. To address this, we develop a
novel method to assess LLMs in solving CTF challenges by creating a scalable,
open-source benchmark database specifically designed for these applications. This
database includes metadata for LLM testing and adaptive learning, compiling
a diverse range of CTF challenges from popular competitions. Utilizing the
advanced function calling capabilities of LLMs, we build a fully automated
system with an enhanced workflow and support for external tool calls. Our
benchmark dataset and automated framework allow us to evaluate the performance
of five LLMs, encompassing both black-box and open-source models. This work
lays the foundation for future research into improving the efficiency of LLMs
in interactive cybersecurity tasks and automated task planning. By providing a
specialized benchmark, our project offers an ideal platform for developing, testing,
and refining LLM-based approaches to vulnerability detection and resolution.
Evaluating LLMs on these challenges and comparing with human performance
yields insights into their potential for AI-driven cybersecurity solutions to perform
real-world threat management. We make our benchmark dataset open source to
public https://github.com/NYU-LLM-CTF/NYU_CTF_Bench along with our
playground automated framework https://github.com/NYU-LLM-CTF/llm_
ctf_automation.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

Capture-the-Flag (CTF) competitions have evolved into a crucial tool for cybersecurity training
since their inception at DEFCON in 1993 [4,13] . These competitions simulate real-world security
scenarios, encompassing domains such as cryptography, forensics, binary exploitation, code reverse
engineering, and web exploitation. Competitors are tasked with identifying vulnerabilities using stateof-the-art cybersecurity techniques. CTF challenges come in two main types: Jeopardy and AttackDefense. Jeopardy-style challenges require competitors to uncover and print hidden flags, typically
character strings, demonstrating successful challenge completion. Attack-Defense challenges involve
participants defending their systems while simultaneously attacking others.
The use of machine learning (ML), particularly large language models (LLMs), in cybersecurity is
an emerging area of interest, presenting unique challenges and opportunities for innovation. There
is significant interest in understanding the offensive cybersecurity capabilities of LLM agents, as
∗

Authors contributed equally to this research.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

