Are Multiple Instance Learning Algorithms
Learnable for Instances?
∗

Jaeseok Jang and Hyuk-Yoon Kwon
Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University of Science and Technology
{jangjs1027, hyukyoon.kwon}@seoultech.ac.kr

Abstract
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) has been increasingly adopted to mitigate the
high costs and complexity associated with labeling individual instances, learning
instead from bags of instances labeled at the bag level and enabling instance-level
labeling. While existing research has primarily focused on the learnability of MIL
at the bag level, there is an absence of theoretical exploration to check if a given
MIL algorithm is learnable at the instance level. This paper proposes a theoretical
framework based on probably approximately correct (PAC) learning theory to
assess the instance-level learnability of deep multiple instance learning (Deep
MIL) algorithms. Our analysis exposes significant gaps between current Deep
MIL algorithms, highlighting the theoretical conditions that must be satisfied by
MIL algorithms to ensure instance-level learnability. With these conditions, we
interpret the learnability of the representative Deep MIL algorithms and validate
them through empirical studies.

1

Introduction

The performance of supervised learning models is greatly influenced by the amount of labeled data [1].
While various models utilizing large-scale datasets have achieved excellent performance, the cost
and time of labeling have emerged as issues, especially in domains requiring expert knowledge. For
example, in the case of pathology images, detailed labeling requires a significant amount of expert
time [2].
To address these issues, multiple instance learning (MIL) techniques have been introduced. MIL
encompasses all methodologies that learn to predict the labels of instances by learning from the labels
of bags composed of instances [3, 4, 5, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. This approach allows for detecting disease
areas in pathology images through whole-image labeling without requiring the labeling of regions
within the image. This can significantly reduce overall labeling costs and maximize the efficiency
of the method [2, 9]. As illustrated in Figure 1, if at least one instance in a bag is positive, the bag
is positive, and if all instances are negative, the bag is negative in MIL. To achieve instance-level
learning, it was necessary first to confirm that learning at the bag level could be performed at a high
level. Therefore, traditional MIL research focused primarily on the feasibility of learning at the bag
level rather than the instance level [11, 12, 13, 14], and some studies validated instance-level learning
only for specific algorithms [15].

Figure 1: The data structure consisting of multi-instances (Blue: Negative, Red: Positive) [16].
Recently, with the advancement of deep learning technologies, traditional MIL has evolved into
Deep MIL, enabling more effective extraction of features from individual instances and consideration
of interactions between instances, leading to significant improvements in prediction performance.
Despite these advancements, MIL research still predominantly focuses on learning at the bag level,
with a lack of exploration into the feasibility of instance-level learning [10, 17, 18].
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

