Aligning Vision Models with Human Aesthetics in
Retrieval: Benchmarks and Algorithms

Miaosen Zhang1† Yixuan Wei2 Zhen Xing3 Yifei Ma4 Zuxuan Wu3 Ji Li4
Zheng Zhang4 Qi Dai4‡ Chong Luo4 Xin Geng1‡ Baining Guo1‡
1

Southeast University 2 Tsinghua University 3 Fudan University 4 Microsoft
{miazhang,xgeng,307000167}@seu.edu.cn qid@microsoft.com

Abstract
Modern vision models are trained on very large noisy datasets. While these
models acquire strong capabilities, they may not follow the user’s intent to output
the desired results in certain aspects, e.g., visual aesthetic, preferred style, and
responsibility. In this paper, we target the realm of visual aesthetics and aim to
align vision models with human aesthetic standards in a retrieval system. Advanced
retrieval systems usually adopt a cascade of aesthetic models as re-rankers or filters,
which are limited to low-level features like saturation and perform poorly when
stylistic, cultural or knowledge contexts are involved. We find that utilizing the
reasoning ability of large language models (LLMs) to rephrase the search query and
extend the aesthetic expectations can make up for this shortcoming. Based on the
above findings, we propose a preference-based reinforcement learning method that
fine-tunes the vision models to distill the knowledge from both LLMs reasoning
and the aesthetic models to better align the vision models with human aesthetics.
Meanwhile, with rare benchmarks designed for evaluating retrieval systems, we
leverage large multi-modality model (LMM) to evaluate the aesthetic performance
with their strong abilities. As aesthetic assessment is one of the most subjective
tasks, to validate the robustness of LMM, we further propose a novel dataset
named HPIR to benchmark the alignment with human aesthetics. Experiments
demonstrate that our method significantly enhances the aesthetic behaviors of the
vision models, under several metrics. We believe the proposed algorithm can be a
general practice for aligning vision models with human values.

1

Introduction

Large-scale data pretrained models, e.g. CLIP [38], have been applied to a broad range of fields, e.g.
visual generation [40, 59, 58, 54, 56], understanding [33, 48], LMMs [26, 19]. They are trained on
very large image-text pair datasets, e.g. LAION [43] and DataComp [8], rather than the traditional
ImageNet [6]. These datasets contain noisy labels, and exhibit diverse data quality. As a result,
though models trained on such datasets demonstrate strong capabilities on semantic matching in the
wild, they may prefer samples that violate the intents from users, as shown in Fig. 1. For example,
using a vision-language model as an one stage retrieval system, with a huge amount of images in the
database, the model may pick the images that exactly match the search query but with unappealing
visual appearance. Moreover, it may provides harmful results that disrupt the principle of responsible
AI (RAI). Existing retrieval benchmarks [25, 63] also lack evaluation for aesthetics and RAI.
† The work is completed during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
‡ Corresponding authors.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

