Weak-to-Strong Search:
Align Large Language Models via
Searching over Small Language Models

Zhanhui Zhou∗† , Zhixuan Liu∗ , Jie Liu, Zhichen Dong, Chao Yang† , Yu Qiao
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
∗
Core Contribution, † Corresponding Author
asap.zzhou@gmail.com, yangchao@pjlab.org.cn
Code: https://github.com/ZHZisZZ/weak-to-strong-search

Abstract
Large language models are usually fine-tuned to align with human preferences.
However, fine-tuning a large language model can be challenging. In this work,
we introduce weak-to-strong search, framing the alignment of a large language
model as a test-time greedy search to maximize the log-probability difference
between small tuned and untuned models while sampling from the frozen large
model. This method serves both as (1) a compute-efficient model up-scaling
strategy that avoids directly tuning the large model and as (2) an instance of
weak-to-strong generalization that enhances a strong model with weak test-time
guidance. Empirically, we demonstrate the flexibility of weak-to-strong search
across different tasks. In controlled-sentiment generation and summarization, we
use tuned and untuned gpt2s to improve the alignment of large models without
additional training. Crucially, in a more difficult instruction-following benchmark, AlpacaEval 2.0, we show that reusing off-the-shelf small models (e.g.,
zephyr-7b-beta and its untuned version) can improve the length-controlled
win rates of both white-box and black-box large models against gpt-4-turbo
(e.g., 34.4% → 37.9% for Llama-3-70B-Instruct and 16.0% → 20.1% for
gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct), despite the small models’ low win rates ≈ 10.0%.

1

Introduction

Learning-based algorithms [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] have become the standard approach for aligning large
language models (LLMs) with human preferences [3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. However, fine-tuning large
language models is resource-intensive and difficult to implement [4]. These challenges have motivated
recent studies on search-based algorithms that keep the large language models frozen and steer their
decoding with test-time guidance [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. Typical examples of search-based
algorithms include rejection sampling [16, 17] and Monte Carlo Tree Search [18, 19]. These searchbased algorithms are promising as they can reuse the same guiding signal to steer the decoding
of any large language model without additional training. However, existing search-based methods
either simplify the search over tokens as a bandit problem [16, 17], which limits their steerability, or
require a value function learned from scratch to address preference reward sparsity and prune search
space [13, 18, 14], which can be as difficult as fine-tuning a large language model.
To make search-based algorithms better suited for aligning large language models, we introduce
weak-to-strong search, a simple algorithm that frames the alignment of a large model as a test-time
search over the log-probabilities of small language models. This algorithm makes two contributions:
(1) First, it builds on the theoretical foundation of the token-level MDP for alignment [20], using the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

