Statistical Estimation in the Spiked Tensor Model via
the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm

Leo Zhou
Walter Burke Institute for Theoretical Physics and the IQIM
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
leoxzhou@ucla.edu
Joao Basso
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
Quantum Artificial Intelligence Lab (QuAIL)
NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035
Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science (RIACS)
USRA, Mountain View, CA 94043
joao.basso@berkeley.edu
Song Mei
Department of Statistics and Department of EECS
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
songmei@berkeley.edu

Abstract
The quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) is a general-purpose
algorithm for combinatorial optimization that has been a promising avenue for
near-term quantum advantage. In this paper, we analyze the performance of the
QAOA on the spiked tensor model, a statistical estimation problem that exhibits a
large computational-statistical gap classically. We prove that the weak recovery
threshold of 1-step QAOA matches that of 1-step tensor power iteration. Additional
heuristic calculations suggest that the weak recovery threshold of p-step QAOA
matches that of p-step tensor power iteration when p is a fixed constant. This further
implies that multi-step QAOA with tensor unfolding could achieve, but not surpass,
the asymptotic classical computation threshold Θ(n(q−2)/4 ) for spiked q-tensors.
Meanwhile, we characterize the asymptotic overlap distribution for p-step QAOA,
discovering an intriguing sine-Gaussian law verified through simulations. For some
p and q, the QAOA has an effective recovery threshold that is a constant factor
better than tensor power iteration. Of independent interest, our proof techniques
employ the Fourier transform to handle difficult combinatorial sums, a novel
approach differing from prior QAOA analyses on spin-glass models without planted
structure.

1

Introduction
q

We study statistical estimation in the spiked tensor model, where we observe a q-tensor Y ∈ Rn in
nq dimensions given by
√
q
Y = (λn /nq/2 ) · u⊗q + (1/ n) · W ∈ Rn .
(1.1)
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

