Boosting Transferability and Discriminability for
Time Series Domain Adaptation

Mingyang Liu1 , Xinyang Chen1B , Yang Shu2B , Xiucheng Li1B , Weili Guan3 , Liqiang Nie1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University
3
School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
mingyangliu1024@gmail.com, yshu@dase.ecnu.edu.cn
{chenxinyang,lixiucheng,guanweili,nieliqiang}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation excels in transferring knowledge from a labeled
source domain to an unlabeled target domain, playing a critical role in time series
applications. Existing time series domain adaptation methods either ignore frequency features or treat temporal and frequency features equally, which makes it
challenging to fully exploit the advantages of both types of features. In this paper,
we delve into transferability and discriminability, two crucial properties in transferable representation learning. It’s insightful to note that frequency features are
more discriminative within a specific domain, while temporal features show better
transferability across domains. Based on the findings, we propose Adversarial
CO-learning Networks (ACON), to enhance transferable representation learning through a collaborative learning manner in three aspects: (1) Considering
the multi-periodicity in time series, multi-period frequency feature learning is
proposed to enhance the discriminability of frequency features; (2) Temporalfrequency domain mutual learning is proposed to enhance the discriminability
of temporal features in the source domain and improve the transferability of frequency features in the target domain; (3) Domain adversarial learning is conducted
in the correlation subspaces of temporal-frequency features instead of original
feature spaces to further enhance the transferability of both features. Extensive
experiments conducted on a wide range of time series datasets and five common applications demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of ACON. Code is available
at https://github.com/mingyangliu1024/ACON.

1

Introduction

Time series classification has achieved significant success in the deep learning era by leveraging
discriminative features learned from extensive labeled data [18]. However, the presence of distribution
shift may arise when deploying the model, potentially impeding the generalization ability of deep
models [31]. Unsupervised domain adaptation [13], offering the potential to transfer knowledge from
a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain, emerges as a promising solution.
Existing domain adaptation methods tailored for time series primarily focus on learning domaininvariant temporal features [30, 41, 29], yielding promising results. Recently, the significance of
frequency features for enhancing domain-invariant representation has also been recognized [16].
However, frequency features and temporal features are treated equally, and their distinct properties are
overlooked, leading to the inability to fully leverage both types of features to boost transfer learning.
In this paper, we analyze the two most important properties of features in transfer learning: transferability and discriminability, to investigate the characteristics of the frequency features and temporal
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

