Identifying Spatio-Temporal Drivers of Extreme
Events
Mohamad Hakam Shams Eddin

Juergen Gall

Institute of Computer Science, University of Bonn
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
{shams, gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
The spatio-temporal relations of impacts of extreme events and their drivers in
climate data are not fully understood and there is a need of machine learning
approaches to identify such spatio-temporal relations from data. The task, however,
is very challenging since there are time delays between extremes and their drivers,
and the spatial response of such drivers is inhomogeneous. In this work, we
propose a first approach and benchmarks to tackle this challenge. Our approach
is trained end-to-end to predict spatio-temporally extremes and spatio-temporally
drivers in the physical input variables jointly. By enforcing the network to predict
extremes from spatio-temporal binary masks of identified drivers, the network
successfully identifies drivers that are correlated with extremes. We evaluate
our approach on three newly created synthetic benchmarks, where two of them
are based on remote sensing or reanalysis climate data, and on two real-world
reanalysis datasets. The source code and datasets are publicly available at the
project page https://hakamshams.github.io/IDE.

1

Introduction

A frontier research challenge is to understand the affects of global change on the magnitude and
probability of extreme weather events [1]. Overall, the evolution of extreme events such as agricultural droughts results from stochastic processes [2], conditions at ecosystem scales [3, 4], and
the interaction between the Earth land and atmospheric variables as a part of a complex system of
feedbacks [5]. However, the relative impacts of these factors differ depending on the event [2]. The
time delays between extremes and their drivers vary seasonally [6–9], and the spatial response of these
drivers is inhomogeneous [4]. A major challenge is therefore to model the spatio-temporal relations
between extremes and their drivers during the development of these events [4]. The overarching goal
of this modelling is to improve our understanding of the patterns and impacts of such events. This
would improve our ability to project duration and intensity of extreme events and hence assisting in
adaptation planning [10, 11].
In this work, we propose an approach that identifies spatio-temporal drivers in multivariate climate
data that are correlated with the impact of extreme events. For the extreme events, we focus
on agricultural droughts as an example, which can be measured by extremely low values of the
vegetation health index (VHI). As drivers for such measurable extreme events, we consider anomalies
in atmospheric and hydrological state variables like temperature or soil moisture, as well as landatmosphere fluxes like evaporation. The task of identifying end-to-end spatio-temporal drivers for
measurable impacts of extremes has not been addressed before, and it is very challenging since
the drivers can occur earlier in time and at a different location than the measured extreme event as
illustrated in Fig. 1.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

