Improving Decision Sparsity

Yiyang Sun
Duke University

Tong Wang
Yale University

Cynthia Rudin
Duke University

Abstract
Sparsity is a central aspect of interpretability in machine learning. Typically,
sparsity is measured in terms of the size of a model globally, such as the number of
variables it uses. However, this notion of sparsity is not particularly relevant for
decision making; someone subjected to a decision does not care about variables that
do not contribute to the decision. In this work, we dramatically expand a notion of
decision sparsity called the Sparse Explanation Value (SEV) so that its explanations
are more meaningful. SEV considers movement along a hypercube towards a
reference point. By allowing flexibility in that reference and by considering how
distances along the hypercube translate to distances in feature space, we can derive
sparser and more meaningful explanations for various types of function classes.
We present cluster-based SEV and its variant tree-based SEV, introduce a method
that improves credibility of explanations, and propose algorithms that optimize
decision sparsity in machine learning models.

1

Introduction

The notion of sparsity is a major focus of interpretability in machine learning and statistical modeling
[Tibshirani, 1996, Rudin et al., 2022]. Typically, sparsity is measured globally, such as the number of
variables in a model, or as the number of leaves in a decision tree [Murdoch et al., 2019]. Global
sparsity is relevant in many situations, but it is less relevant for individuals subject to the model’s
decisions. Individuals care less about, and often do not even have access to, the global model. For
them, local sparsity, or decision sparsity, meaning the amount of information critical to their own
decision, is more consequential.
An important notion of decision sparsity has been established in the work of Sun et al. [2024], which
defined the Sparse Explanation Value (SEV), in the context of binary classification, as the number of
factors that need to be changed to a reference feature value in order to change the decision. In contrast
to SEV, counterfactual explanations tend not to be sparse since they require small changes to many
variables in order to reach the decision boundary [Sun et al., 2024]. Instead, SEV provides sparse
explanations: consider a loan application that is denied because the applicant has many delinquent
payments. In that case, the decision sparsity (that is, the SEV) would be 1 because only a single factor
was required to change the decision, overwhelming all possible mitigating factors. The framework of
SEV thus allows us to see sparsity of models in a new light.
Prior to this work, SEV had one basic definition: it is the minimal number of features we need to set
to their reference values to flip the sign of the prediction. The reference values are typically defined as
the mean of the instances in the opposite class. This calculation is easy to understand, but somewhat
limiting because the reference could be far in feature space from the point being explained and the
explanation could land in a low density area where explanations are not credible. As an example, for
the loan decision for a 21 year old applicant, SEV could create a counterfactual such as “Changing
the applicant’s 3-year credit history to 15 years would change the decision.” While this counterfactual
is valid, faithful, and sparse, it is not close because the distance between the query point and the
counterfactual is so large (3 years to 15 years). In addition, this explanation is not credible because
the proposed changes to the features lead to an unrealistic circumstance – 6-year-olds do not typically
have credit. That is, the counterfactual does not represent a typical member of the opposite class.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

