OPERA: Automatic Offline Policy Evaluation with
Re-weighted Aggregates of Multiple Estimators

Allen Nie1 Yash Chandak1 Christina J. Yuan2
Anirudhan Badrinath1 Yannis Flet-Berliac3 Emma Brunskill1∗
1
Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Computer Science, University of Texas, Austin
3
Cohere

Abstract
Offline policy evaluation (OPE) allows us to evaluate and estimate a new sequential
decision-making policy’s performance by leveraging historical interaction data
collected from other policies. Evaluating a new policy online without a confident
estimate of its performance can lead to costly, unsafe, or hazardous outcomes, especially in education and healthcare. Several OPE estimators have been proposed in
the last decade, many of which have hyperparameters and require training. Unfortunately, choosing the best OPE algorithm for each task and domain is still unclear.
In this paper, we propose a new algorithm that adaptively blends a set of OPE
estimators given a dataset without relying on an explicit selection using a statistical
procedure. We prove that our estimator is consistent and satisfies several desirable
properties for policy evaluation. Additionally, we demonstrate that when compared
to alternative approaches, our estimator can be used to select higher-performing
policies in healthcare and robotics. Our work contributes to improving ease of
use for a general-purpose, estimator-agnostic, off-policy evaluation framework for
offline RL.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) involves learning better sequential decision policies from logged
historical data, such as learning a personalized policy for math education software (Mandel et al.,
2014; Ruan et al., 2024), providing treatment recommendations in the ICU (Komorowski et al.,
2018; Luo et al., 2024) or learning new controllers for robotics(Kumar et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020).
Offline policy evaluation (OPE), in which the performance J(πe ) of a new evaluation policy πe is
estimated given historical data, is a common subroutine in offline RL for policy selection, and can be
particularly important when deciding whether to deploy a new decision policy that might be unsafe
or costly. Offline policy evaluation methods estimate the performance of an evaluation policy πe
given data collected by a behavior policy πb . There are many existing OPE algorithms, including
those that create importance sampling-based estimators (IS) (Precup, 2000), value-based estimators
(FQE) (Le et al., 2019), model-based estimators (Paduraru, 2013; Liu et al., 2018b; Dong et al., 2023),
doubly robust estimators Jiang and Li (2016); Thomas and Brunskill (2016), and minimax-style
estimators (Liu et al., 2018a; Nachum et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020).
This raises an important practical question: given a set of different OPE methods, each producing a
particular value estimate for an evaluation policy, what value estimate should be returned? A simple
approach is to avoid the problem and pick only one OPE algorithm or look at the direction of a set of
OPE algorithms’ scores as a coarse agreement measure. Voloshin et al. (2021) offered heuristics based
1

Emails: {anie,ychandak,ebrun}@cs.stanford.edu. 3 Work done while at Stanford.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

