Density-based User Representation using Gaussian
Process Regression for Multi-interest Personalized
Retrieval
Haolun Wu

1,2∗

3

3

3

1,2

Ofer Meshi
Masrour Zoghi
Fernando Diaz
Xue Liu
3
3
Craig Boutilier
Maryam Karimzadehgan
1
2
3
McGill University
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
Google Research
haolun.wu@mail.mcgill.ca, xueliu@cs.mcgill.ca, diazf@acm.org
{meshi,mzoghi,cboutilier,maryamk}@google.com

Abstract
Accurate modeling of the diverse and dynamic interests of users remains a significant challenge in the design of personalized recommender systems. Existing
user modeling methods, like single-point and multi-point representations, have
limitations w.r.t. accuracy, diversity, and adaptability. To overcome these deficiencies, we introduce density-based user representations (DURs), a novel method that
leverages Gaussian process regression (GPR) for effective multi-interest recommendation and retrieval. Our approach, GPR4DUR, exploits DURs to capture user
interest variability without manual tuning, incorporates uncertainty-awareness, and
scales well to large numbers of users. Experiments using real-world offline datasets
confirm the adaptability and efficiency of GPR4DUR, while online experiments
with simulated users demonstrate its ability to address the exploration-exploitation
trade-off by effectively utilizing model uncertainty.

1

Introduction

With the proliferation of online platforms, users have ready access to content, products and services
drawn from a vast corpus of candidates. Personalized recommender systems (RSs) play a vital role
in reducing information overload and helping users navigate this space. It is widely recognized
that users rarely have a single intent or interest when interacting with an RS [1, 2, 3]. To enhance
personalization, recent work focuses on discovering a user’s multiple interests and recommending
items that attempt to span their interests [3, 4, 5]. However, this is challenging for two reasons. First,
user interests are diverse and dynamic: diversity makes it hard to detect all interests, while their
dynamic nature renders determining which user interest is active at any given time quite difficult.
Second, it is hard to retrieve items related to niche interests due to the popularity bias [6].
User representation is a fundamental design choice in any RS. The most widely used strategy for
user modeling is the single-point user representation (SUR), which uses a single point in an item
embedding space to represent the user. The user’s affinity for an item is obtained using some distance
measure (e.g., inner product, cosine similarity) with the point representing the item. However,
SUR can limit the accuracy and diversity of item retrieval [7]; hence, most RSs generally use
high-dimensional embedding vectors (with high computation cost).
To address the limitations of SUR, MaxMF [1] adopts a multi-point user representation (MUR), where
each user is represented using K points in the embedding space, each reflecting a different “interest”.
MaxMF uses a constant, uniform K across all users (e.g., K = 4), which is somewhat ad hoc and
∗

Work done while doing an internship at Google.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

