Episodic Future Thinking Mechanism for Multi-agent
Reinforcement Learning

Dongsu Lee† and Minhae Kwon†∗
Department of Intelligent Semiconductors
∗
School of Electronic Engineering
Soongsil University, Seoul, South Korea
movementwater@soongsil.ac.kr, minhae@ssu.ac.kr
†

Abstract
Understanding cognitive processes in multi-agent interactions is a primary goal in
cognitive science. It can guide the direction of artificial intelligence (AI) research
toward social decision-making in multi-agent systems, which includes uncertainty
from character heterogeneity. In this paper, we introduce episodic future thinking
(EFT) mechanism for a reinforcement learning (RL) agent, inspired by cognitive
processes observed in animals. To enable future thinking functionality, we first
develop a multi-character policy that captures diverse characters with an ensemble
of heterogeneous policies. Here, the character of an agent is defined as a different
weight combination on reward components, representing distinct behavioral preferences. The future thinking agent collects observation-action trajectories of the
target agents and uses the pre-trained multi-character policy to infer their characters.
Once the character is inferred, the agent predicts the upcoming actions of target
agents and simulates the potential future scenario. This capability allows the agent
to adaptively select the optimal action, considering the predicted future scenario
in multi-agent interactions. To evaluate the proposed mechanism, we consider the
multi-agent autonomous driving scenario with diverse driving traits and multiple
particle environments. Simulation results demonstrate that the EFT mechanism
with accurate character inference leads to a higher reward than existing multi-agent
solutions. We also confirm that the effect of reward improvement remains valid
across societies with different levels of character diversity.2

1

Introduction

Understanding human decision-making in multi-agent interactions is a significant focus in cognitive
science. It provides valuable insights into designing interactions among diverse AI agents within multiagent systems. Research has shown that humans employ counterfactual or future scenario simulation
to enhance decision-making [45, 17, 49]. While counterfactual thinking, simulating alternative
consequences of past events, has been extensively explored in multi-agent RL (MARL) [34, 9, 52, 3],
episodic future thinking [1, 24], the ability to anticipate future events, remains underexplored in
literature despite its importance in handling multi-agent interactions.
Human beings strive to anticipate future situations to prevent costly mistakes. One naive approach
to incorporate this ability into AI is through future trajectory prediction using model-based RL
[40, 19, 31, 54, 28, 26]. However, this approach is feasible only if the state transition model is known
or easily learnable, which is often not the case in multi-agent systems. The complexity arises from
∗
2

Corresponding author: M. Kwon
Project Web: https://sites.google.com/view/eftm-neurips2024.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

