Causal Effect Identification in a Sub-Population with
Latent Variables
Amir Mohammad Abouei 1 , Ehsan Mokhtarian 1 , Negar Kiyavash 2 , Matthias Grossglauser 1

1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL
2
College of Management of Technology, EPFL
{amir.abouei, ehsan.mokhtarian, negar.kiyavash, matthias.grossglauser}@epfl.ch

Abstract
The S-ID problem seeks to compute a causal effect in a specific sub-population
from the observational data pertaining to the same sub-population [AMK24]. This
problem has been addressed when all the variables in the system are observable.
In this paper, we consider an extension of the S-ID problem that allows for the
presence of latent variables. To tackle the challenges induced by the presence of
latent variables in a sub-population, we first extend the classical relevant graphical
definitions, such as C-components and Hedges, initially defined for the so-called
ID problem [Pea95, TP02], to their new counterparts. Subsequently, we propose a
sound algorithm for the S-ID problem with latent variables.

1

Introduction

Causal inference, i.e., understanding the effect of an intervention in a stochastic system, is a key
focus of research in statistics and machine learning [Rub74, Pea00, Pea09, SGSH00]. Scientists,
policymakers, business leaders, and healthcare professionals must understand causal relationships to
move beyond correlations and make informed, evidence-based decisions. To perform causal inference
tasks, it is crucial to differentiate between two types of data: observational and interventional [PM18].
Observe 𝑽

Study 𝒀

𝑃(𝑽)

pler
Sam
iased
Unb

Sam
iased
Unb

Samples from the population

Biased

Sampler

Observe 𝑽

Population
Samples from a sub-population

(a) Observational data.

pler

𝑃𝑿 (𝒀)

Samples from the population

𝑃(𝑽 |𝑆 = 1)

Biased

Sampler

Study 𝒀

Population after an
intervention on 𝑿

𝑃𝑿 (𝒀|𝑆 = 1)

Samples from a sub-population

(b) Interventional data.

Figure 1: A population consists of a sample space for the study of the causal effect of an intervention.
While the unbiased sampler draws samples uniformly at random, the biased sampler selects samples
based on certain criteria, forming a sub-population.
Observational Data. Figure 1 illustrates a population that pertains to the entire sample space for a
study of the causal effect of some intervention. A sampler draws samples from the population. The
sampler is unbiased if it draws samples at random such that each individual in the population has
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

