A Compositional Atlas for Algebraic Circuits

Benjie Wang
University of California, Los Angeles
benjiewang@ucla.edu

Denis Deratani Mauá
University of São Paulo
ddm@ime.usp.br

Guy Van den Broeck
University of California, Los Angeles
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

YooJung Choi
Arizona State University
yj.choi@asu.edu

Abstract
Circuits based on sum-product structure have become a ubiquitous representation
to compactly encode knowledge, from Boolean functions to probability distributions. By imposing constraints on the structure of such circuits, certain inference
queries become tractable, such as model counting and most probable configuration.
Recent works have explored analyzing probabilistic and causal inference queries
as compositions of basic operators to derive tractability conditions. In this paper,
we take an algebraic perspective for compositional inference, and show that a large
class of queries—including marginal MAP, probabilistic answer set programming
inference, and causal backdoor adjustment—correspond to a combination of basic
operators over semirings: aggregation, product, and elementwise mapping. Using
this framework, we uncover simple and general sufficient conditions for tractable
composition of these operators, in terms of circuit properties (e.g., marginal determinism, compatibility) and conditions on the elementwise mappings. Applying
our analysis, we derive novel tractability conditions for many such compositional
queries. Our results unify tractability conditions for existing problems on circuits,
while providing a blueprint for analysing novel compositional inference queries.

1

Introduction

Circuit-based representations, such as Boolean circuits, decision diagrams, and arithmetic circuits,
are of central importance in many areas of AI and machine learning. For example, a primary means
of performing inference in many models, from Bayesian networks [16, 9] to probabilistic programs
[20, 24, 26, 43], is to convert them into equivalent circuits; this is commonly known as knowledge
compilation. Inference via knowledge compilation has also been used for many applications in
neuro-symbolic AI, such as constrained generation [2, 54] and neural logic programming [34, 28].
Circuits can also be learned as probabilistic generative models directly from data [25, 41, 40, 32], in
which context they are known as probabilistic circuits [11]. Compared with neural generative models,
probabilistic circuits enjoy tractable evaluation of inference queries such as marginal probabilities,
which has been used for tasks such as fair machine learning [12] and causal reasoning [53, 50, 49].
The key feature of circuits is that they enable one to precisely characterize tractability conditions
(structural properties of the circuit) under which a given inference query can be computed exactly
and efficiently. One can then enforce these circuit properties when compiling or learning a model
to enable tractable inference. For many basic inference queries, such as computing a marginal
probability, tractability conditions are well understood [48, 8]. However, for more complex queries,
the situation is less clear, and the exercise of deriving algorithms and tractability conditions for a
given query has usually been carried out in an instance-specific manner requiring significant effort.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

