Evaluating alignment between humans and neural
network representations in image-based learning tasks

Can Demircan1,2,∗ Tankred Saanum2 Leonardo Pettini3,4 Marcel Binz1,2
Blazej M Baczkowski4,5 Christian F Doeller4,6,7,8 Mona M Garvert4,9,10 Eric Schulz1,2
1

Institute for Human-Centered AI, Helmholtz Computational Health Center, Munich, Germany
2
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics - Tübingen, Germany
3
Max Planck School of Cognition - Leipzig, Germany
4
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive & Brain Sciences - Leipzig, Germany
5
University of Tübingen - Tübingen, Germany
6
Kavli Institute for Systems Neuroscience - Trondheim, Norway
7
Leipzig University - Leipzig, Germany
8
Technical University Dresden - Dresden, Germany
9
Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg - Würzburg, Germany
10
Max Planck Institute for Human Development - Berlin, Germany
∗
{can.demircan@helmholtz-munich.de}

Abstract
Humans represent scenes and objects in rich feature spaces, carrying information
that allows us to generalise about category memberships and abstract functions
with few examples. What determines whether a neural network model generalises
like a human? We tested how well the representations of 86 pretrained neural
network models mapped to human learning trajectories across two tasks where
humans had to learn continuous relationships and categories of natural images. In
these tasks, both human participants and neural networks successfully identified
the relevant stimulus features within a few trials, demonstrating effective generalisation. We found that while training dataset size was a core determinant of
alignment with human choices, contrastive training with multi-modal data (text
and imagery) was a common feature of currently publicly available models that
predicted human generalisation. Intrinsic dimensionality of representations had
different effects on alignment for different model types. Lastly, we tested three
sets of human-aligned representations and found no consistent improvements in
predictive accuracy compared to the baselines. In conclusion, pretrained neural
networks can serve to extract representations for cognitive models, as they appear
to capture some fundamental aspects of cognition that are transferable across tasks.
Both our paradigms and modelling approach offer a novel way to quantify alignment between neural networks and humans and extend cognitive science into more
naturalistic domains.

1

Introduction

Research on representational alignment between neural networks and humans has gained significant
attention in recent years [1, 2]. Comparisons across the systems have provided important insights
into neural network representations [3, 4], human cognition and the brain [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], and the
development of more robust machine learning systems [10, 11, 12]. In the sensory domain, the
comparisons have been predominantly made through two families of behavioural tasks. One common
approach is to compare object recognition performance across humans and neural networks [13]. This
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

