Learning Successor Features the Simple Way
Raymond Chua⇤ §
Christos Kaplanis ¶

Arna Ghosh §

Blake A. Richards † ‡ §

Doina Precup ‡ § ¶

Abstract
In Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL), it is a challenge to learn representations that
do not exhibit catastrophic forgetting or interference in non-stationary environments.
Successor Features (SFs) offer a potential solution to this challenge. However,
canonical techniques for learning SFs from pixel-level observations often lead
to representation collapse, wherein representations degenerate and fail to capture
meaningful variations in the data. More recent methods for learning SFs can
avoid representation collapse, but they often involve complex losses and multiple
learning phases, reducing their efficiency. We introduce a novel, simple method for
learning SFs directly from pixels. Our approach uses a combination of a Temporaldifference (TD) loss and a reward prediction loss, which together capture the basic
mathematical definition of SFs. We show that our approach matches or outperforms
existing SF learning techniques in both 2D (Minigrid), 3D (Miniworld) mazes and
Mujoco, for both single and continual learning scenarios. As well, our technique
is efficient, and can reach higher levels of performance in less time than other
approaches. Our work provides a new, streamlined technique for learning SFs
directly from pixel observations, with no pretraining required1 .

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) [Sutton and Barto, 2018] is important to modern artificial intelligence (AI), but standard approaches to deep RL can struggle when deployed for continual learning
[Parisi et al., 2019, Hadsell et al., 2020, Khetarpal et al., 2022]. When either the reward function
or the transition dynamics of the environment changes, standard deep RL techniques, such as deep
Q-learning, will either struggle to adapt to the changes or they will exhibit catastrophic forgetting
[Kirkpatrick et al., 2017, Kaplanis et al., 2018]. Given that the real-world is often non-stationary,
better techniques for deep RL in continual learning are a major goal in AI research [Rusu et al., 2016,
Rolnick et al., 2019, Powers et al., 2022, Abbas et al., 2023, Anand and Precup, 2024].
One potential solution that researchers have explored is the use of Successor Features (SFs). Successor
Features, the function approximation variant of Successor Representations (SRs) [Barreto et al., 2017],
decompose the value function into a separate reward function and transition dynamics representation
[Dayan, 1993]. In doing so, they make it easier to adapt to changes in the environment, because the
network can relearn either the reward function or the transition dynamics separately [Borsa et al.,
2018, Barreto et al., 2018, 2020, Hansen et al., 2019, Lehnert and Littman, 2019, Liu and Abbeel,
2021]. Furthermore, there are theoretical guarantees that SFs can improve generalization in multi-task
⇤

Correspondence to: ray.r.chua@gmail.com
Dept of Neurology & Neurosurgery, and Montreal Neurological Institute of McGill University.
‡
Co-senior Authorship. CIFAR Learning in Machines and Brains.
§
School of Computer Science, McGill University & Mila
¶
Google Deepmind
1
Code: https://github.com/raymondchua/simple_successor_features
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

