PCP-MAE: Learning to Predict Centers for Point
Masked Autoencoders
Xiangdong Zhang∗ , Shaofeng Zhang∗ , Junchi Yan‡
Dept. of CSE & School of AI & MoE Key Lab of Al, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zhangxiangdong, sherrylone, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Masked autoencoder has been widely explored in point cloud self-supervised learning, whereby the point cloud is generally divided into visible and masked parts.
These methods typically include an encoder accepting visible patches (normalized)
and corresponding patch centers (position) as input, with the decoder accepting the
output of the encoder and the centers (position) of the masked parts to reconstruct
each point in the masked patches. Then, the pre-trained encoders are used for downstream tasks. In this paper, we show a motivating empirical result that when directly
feeding the centers of masked patches to the decoder without information from the
encoder, it still reconstructs well. In other words, the centers of patches are important and the reconstruction objective does not necessarily rely on representations of
the encoder, thus preventing the encoder from learning semantic representations.
Based on this key observation, we propose a simple yet effective method, i.e.,
learning to Predict Centers for Point Masked AutoEncoders (PCP-MAE) which
guides the model to learn to predict the significant centers and use the predicted centers to replace the directly provided centers. Specifically, we propose a Predicting
Center Module (PCM) that shares parameters with the original encoder with extra
cross-attention to predict centers. Our method is of high pre-training efficiency
compared to other alternatives and achieves great improvement over Point-MAE,
particularly surpassing it by 5.50% on OBJ-BG, 6.03% on OBJ-ONLY, and
5.17% on PB-T50-RS for 3D object classification on the ScanObjectNN dataset.
The code is available at https://github.com/aHapBean/PCP-MAE .

1

Introduction

Point clouds are a widely used representation of 3-D objects, offering a rich expression of their
geometric information. This versatility has led to their broad adoption across various application
scenarios, including autonomous driving [28], robotics [10, 30], and the metaverse [32]. In the
early developing stage of point cloud understanding, there are lots of related work proposed to
enhance the ability of networks for understanding point cloud [13, 18, 25, 26, 39] where the networks
typically need fully-supervised training from scratch. However, point cloud data are difficult to
annotate compared to the data in 2-D vision and NLP owing to the complexity of the toughness
of discriminating them. It leads to a phenomenon called data desert [9] in 3-D which refrains the
development of these fully-supervised methods. Recently, numerous self-supervised learning (SSL)
methods [47, 24, 9, 27] were proposed for point cloud understanding to alleviate the negative effect
brought by data desert because self-supervised learning methods can utilize unlabeled data effectively
by performing designed pretext task (e.g., reconstruction-based or contrastive-based) for pre-training
and the learned semantic representation benefits the performance of downstream tasks.
∗

Equal contribution. ‡ Corresponding author. This work was supported by Shanghai Municipal Science and
Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

