Efficient Temporal Action Segmentation via
Boundary-aware Query Voting

Peiyao Wang1

Yuewei Lin2

Erik Blasch3

Jie Wei4

Haibin Ling1∗

1

Stony Brook University, 2 Brookhaven National Laboratory,
Air Force Research Laboratory, 4 The City College of New York
{peiyaowang, hling}@cs.stonybrook.edu, ywlin@bnl.gov,
erik.blasch@gmail.com, jwei@ccny.cuny.edu
3

Abstract
Although the performance of Temporal Action Segmentation (TAS) has been
improved in recent years, achieving promising results often comes with a high
computational cost due to dense inputs, complex model structures, and resourceintensive post-processing requirements. To improve the efficiency while keeping
the high performance, we present a novel perspective centered on per-segment
classification. By harnessing the capabilities of Transformers, we tokenize each
video segment as an instance token, endowed with intrinsic instance segmentation.
To realize efficient action segmentation, we introduce BaFormer, a boundaryaware Transformer network. It employs instance queries for instance segmentation
and a global query for class-agnostic boundary prediction, yielding continuous
segment proposals. During inference, BaFormer employs a simple yet effective
voting strategy to classify boundary-wise segments based on instance segmentation. Remarkably, as a single-stage approach, BaFormer significantly reduces the
computational costs, utilizing only ∼6% of the running time compared to the
state-of-the-art method DiffAct, while producing better or comparable accuracy
over several popular benchmarks. The code for this project is publicly available at
https://github.com/peiyao-w/BaFormer.

1

Introduction

Temporal Action Segmentation (TAS) [28, 43, 30, 29, 21, 32], a notable endeavor in the study of
untrimmed videos, aims to allocate an action label to each frame, enabling the detailed analysis
of complex activities by identifying specific actions within long-form videos. It has extensive
applications in surveillance [11, 12], sports analytics [20], and human-computer interaction [38].
Despite its critical importance, existing TAS models often grapple with high computational costs and
lengthy inference times, limiting their applicability in real-time and resource-constrained scenarios.
The inefficiency of TAS arises from two primary factors:1) Long-form Input: Untrimmed videos
in TAS often include tens of thousands of frames containing multiple action segments that ideally
should be sparse in terms of action semantics. However, most approaches [15, 32, 21, 43] maintain
frame-wise processing throughout the model to preserve dense information, aiming to enhance framewise prediction accuracy yet at the cost of efficiency. Conversely, the straightforward downsampling
method [28] fails to achieve the desired accuracy for dense predictions. 2) Heavy Model Structure:
The adoption of multi-stage refinement models and various time-consuming post-processing techniques further contribute to the slow runtime of TAS models. For instance, although a previous
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

