SA3DIP: Segment Any 3D Instance with
Potential 3D Priors
Xi Yang1 , Xu Gu1 , Xingyilang Yin1∗, Xinbo Gao2
Xidian University, 2 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
yangx@xidian.edu.cn, {ryangu,yxyl}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The proliferation of 2D foundation models has sparked research into adapting them
for open-world 3D instance segmentation. Recent methods introduce a paradigm
that leverages superpoints as geometric primitives and incorporates 2D multi-view
masks from Segment Anything model (SAM) as merging guidance, achieving
outstanding zero-shot instance segmentation results. However, the limited use
of 3D priors restricts the segmentation performance. Previous methods calculate
the 3D superpoints solely based on estimated normal from spatial coordinates,
resulting in under-segmentation for instances with similar geometry. Besides, the
heavy reliance on SAM and hand-crafted algorithms in 2D space suffers from
over-segmentation due to SAM’s inherent part-level segmentation tendency. To
address these issues, we propose SA3DIP, a novel method for Segmenting Any 3D
Instances via exploiting potential 3D Priors. Specifically, on one hand, we generate
complementary 3D primitives based on both geometric and textural priors, which
reduces the initial errors that accumulate in subsequent procedures. On the other
hand, we introduce supplemental constraints from the 3D space by using a 3D
detector to guide a further merging process. Furthermore, we notice a considerable
portion of low-quality ground truth annotations in ScanNetV2 benchmark, which
affect the fair evaluations. Thus, we present ScanNetV2-INS with complete ground
truth labels and supplement additional instances for 3D class-agnostic instance
segmentation. Experimental evaluations on various 2D-3D datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness and robustness of our approach. Our code and proposed ScanNetV2INS dataset are available HERE.

1

Introduction

3D instance segmentation is a fundamental task pivotal to 3D understanding across various domains
such as autonomous driving, robotics navigation, and virtual reality applications. State-of-theart methods [1, 2] are predominantly supervised and rely heavily on precise 3D annotations for
training, thus constraining their applications in open-world scenes. Compared to scarce 3D labeled
data, the acquisition and annotation of 2D images are more convenient. Recently, 2D foundation
models [3–6] trained on large-scale annotated 2D data show impressive performance and strong
generalization capabilities in zero-shot scenarios. Recent efforts have sought to leverage Segment
Anything Model (SAM) by lifting its class-agnostic 2D segmentation results to 3D tasks [7–10].
Specifically, some methods [7, 8] propose a pipeline that decomposes the 3D scene into geometric
primitives and leverages 2D multi-view masks from SAM to calculate pairwise similarity scores as
merging guidance. Further well-designed algorithms or Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are included
to ensure multi-view consistency.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

