Rethinking Decoders for Transformer-based Semantic
Segmentation: A Compression Perspective

Qishuai Wen and Chun-Guang Li∗
School of Artificial Intelligence
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, P.R. China
{wqs,lichunguang}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
State-of-the-art methods for Transformer-based semantic segmentation typically
adopt Transformer decoders that are used to extract additional embeddings from
image embeddings via cross-attention, refine either or both types of embeddings
via self-attention, and project image embeddings onto the additional embeddings
via dot-product. Despite their remarkable success, these empirical designs still lack
theoretical justifications or interpretations, thus hindering potentially principled
improvements. In this paper, we argue that there are fundamental connections between semantic segmentation and compression, especially between the Transformer
decoders and Principal Component Analysis (PCA). From such a perspective, we
derive a white-box, fully attentional DEcoder for PrIncipled semantiC segemenTation (DEPICT), with the interpretations as follows: 1) the self-attention operator
refines image embeddings to construct an ideal principal subspace that aligns with
the supervision and retains most information; 2) the cross-attention operator seeks
to find a low-rank approximation of the refined image embeddings, which is expected to be a set of orthonormal bases of the principal subspace and corresponds to
the predefined classes; 3) the dot-product operation yields compact representation
for image embeddings as segmentation masks. Experiments conducted on dataset
ADE20K find that DEPICT consistently outperforms its black-box counterpart,
Segmenter, and it is light weight and more robust. Our code and models are
available at https://github.com/QishuaiWen/DEPICT.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation has been a fundamental task in computer vision for decades. In the supervised
setting, the task aims to segment an image into regions corresponding to different predefined classes.
The dominant approaches for semantic segmentation have experienced significant shifts, in particular,
from hand-crafted features [16] to deep learning, from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [24, 5]
to Vision Transformers (ViT) [46, 35], and then from per-pixel classification to mask classification [8].
Recently, state-of-the-art methods [35, 8, 7, 45] for Transformer-based semantic segmentation [22]
typically adopted the Transformer decoders inspired by DETR [2].
Although they vary among different methods, the Transformer decoders typically consist of crossattention operators that extract additional embeddings (known as class embeddings [35, 45] or mask
embeddings [8, 7]) from image embeddings, self-attention operators that refine either or both the
additional embeddings and image embeddings, layer normalization (LN) [21] and feedforward neural
networks (FFN), which are the default compositions of a Transformer block [37], and one (or two
for mask classification) dot-product operation of the two types of embeddings. Here, we illustrate in
Figure 1 two representative methods, i.e., Segmenter [35] and MaskFormer [8].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

