Unified Covariate Adjustment for Causal Inference
Yonghan Jung1 , Jin Tian2 , and Elias Bareinboim3
1
Purdue University
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Columbia University
1
2
jung222@purdue.edu, jin.tian@mbzuai.ac.ae, 3 eb@cs.columbia.edu
2

Abstract
Causal effect identification and estimation are fundamental tasks found throughout
the data sciences. Although causal effect identification has been solved in theory,
many existing estimators only address a subset of scenarios, known as the sequential
back-door adjustment (SBD) (Pearl and Robins, 1995a) or g-formula (Robins,
1986). Recent efforts for developing general-purpose estimators with broader
coverage, incorporating the front-door adjustment (FD) (Pearl, 2000) and others,
are not scalable due to the high computational cost of summing over a highdimensional set of variables. In this paper, we introduce a novel approach that
achieves broad coverage of causal estimands beyond the SBD, incorporating various
sum-product functionals like the FD, while achieving scalability – estimated in
polynomial time relative to the number of variables and samples in the problem.
Specifically, we present the class of unified covariate adjustment (UCA) for which
we develop a scalable and doubly robust estimator. In particular, we illustrate
the expressiveness of UCA for a wide spectrum of causal estimands (e.g., SBD,
FD, and others) in causal inference. We then develop an estimator that exhibits
computational efficiency and double robustness. Experiments corroborate the
scalability and robustness of the proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Causal inference is a crucial aspect of scientific research, with broad applications ranging from social
sciences to economics, and from biology to medicine. Two significant tasks in causal inference
are causal effect identification and estimation. Causal effect identification concerns determining
the conditions under which the causal effect can be inferred from a combination of available data
distributions and a causal graph depicting the data-generating process. Causal effect estimation, on
the other hand, develops an estimator for the identified causal effect expression using finite samples.
Causal effect identification theories have been well-established across various scenarios. These
include cases where the input distribution is purely observational (Tian and Pearl, 2003; Shpitser and
Pearl, 2006; Huang and Valtorta, 2006) (known as observational identification or obsID) or a combination of observational and interventional (Bareinboim and Pearl, 2012a; Lee et al., 2019) (referred to
as generalized identification or gID); scenarios where the target query and input distributions originate
from different populations (Bareinboim and Pearl, 2012b; Bareinboim et al., 2014; Bareinboim and
Pearl, 2016; Correa et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2020) (known as recoverability or transportability); or
cases where the target query is counterfactual (Rung 3) (Correa et al., 2021) (referred to as Ctf-ID)
beyond interventional (Rung 2) of the Ladder of Causation (Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018; Bareinboim
et al., 2020). In these situations, algorithmic solutions have been devised that take input distributions
along with specified target queries and formulate identification functionals as arithmetic operations
(sums/integration, products, ratios) on conditional distributions induced from input distributions.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

