Artificial Generational Intelligence: Cultural
Accumulation in Reinforcement Learning

Jonathan Cook ∗
FLAIR, University of Oxford
jonathan.cook2@hertford.ox.ac.uk
Edward Hughes
Google DeepMind
edwardhughes@google.com

Chris Lu ∗
FLAIR, University of Oxford
christopher.lu@eng.ox.ac.uk

Joel Z. Leibo
Google DeepMind
jzl@google.com

Jakob Foerster
FLAIR, University of Oxford
jakob@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Cultural accumulation drives the open-ended and diverse progress in capabilities
spanning human history. It builds an expanding body of knowledge and skills by
combining individual exploration with inter-generational information transmission.
Despite its widespread success among humans, the capacity for artificial learning
agents to accumulate culture remains under-explored. In particular, approaches
to reinforcement learning typically strive for improvements over only a single
lifetime. Generational algorithms that do exist fail to capture the open-ended,
emergent nature of cultural accumulation, which allows individuals to trade-off
innovation and imitation. Building on the previously demonstrated ability for reinforcement learning agents to perform social learning, we find that training setups
which balance this with independent learning give rise to cultural accumulation.
These accumulating agents outperform those trained for a single lifetime with the
same cumulative experience. We explore this accumulation by constructing two
models under two distinct notions of a generation: episodic generations, in which
accumulation occurs via in-context learning and train-time generations, in which
accumulation occurs via in-weights learning. In-context and in-weights cultural
accumulation can be interpreted as analogous to knowledge and skill accumulation,
respectively. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to present general
models that achieve emergent cultural accumulation in reinforcement learning,
opening up new avenues towards more open-ended learning systems, as well as
presenting new opportunities for modelling human culture.

1

Introduction

The capacity to learn skills and accumulate knowledge over timescales that far outstrip a single
lifetime (i.e., across generations) is commonly referred to as cultural accumulation [Hofstede et al.,
1994, Tennie et al., 2009]. Cultural accumulation has been considered the key to human success
[Henrich, 2019], continuously aggregating new skills, knowledge and technology. It also sustains
generational improvements in the behaviour of other species, such as in the homing efficiency of
birds [Sasaki and Biro, 2017]. The two core mechanisms underpinning cultural accumulation are
social learning [Bandura and Walters, 1977, Hoppitt and Laland, 2013] and independent discovery
[Mesoudi, 2011]. Its effectiveness can be attributed to the flexibility with which participants engage
in these two mechanisms [Enquist et al., 2008, Rendell et al., 2010, Mesoudi and Thornton, 2018].
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

