Unified Mechanism-Specific Amplification by
Subsampling and Group Privacy Amplification

Jan Schuchardt1 , Mihail Stoian2∗, Arthur Kosmala1∗, Stephan Günnemann1
{j.schuchardt, a.kosmala, s.guennemann}@tum.de, mihail.stoian@utn.de
1
Dept. of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich
2
Dept. of Engineering, University of Technology Nuremberg

Abstract
Amplification by subsampling is one of the main primitives in machine learning
with differential privacy (DP): Training a model on random batches instead of
complete datasets results in stronger privacy. This is traditionally formalized via
mechanism-agnostic subsampling guarantees that express the privacy parameters
of a subsampled mechanism as a function of the original mechanism’s privacy
parameters. We propose the first general framework for deriving mechanismspecific guarantees, which leverage additional information beyond these parameters
to more tightly characterize the subsampled mechanism’s privacy. Such guarantees
are of particular importance for privacy accounting, i.e., tracking privacy over
multiple iterations. Overall, our framework based on conditional optimal transport
lets us derive existing and novel guarantees for approximate DP, accounting with
Rényi DP, and accounting with dominating pairs in a unified, principled manner.
As an application, we analyze how subsampling affects the privacy of groups of
multiple users. Our tight mechanism-specific bounds outperform tight mechanismagnostic bounds and classic group privacy results.

1

Introduction

Composability and amplification by subsampling are two key properties of Differential Privacy
(DP) [1–3] that make it possible to provide provable privacy guarantees for machine learning
algorithms that iteratively learn from batches of data.
Composability means that privacy gracefully deteriorates when iteratively applying a differentially
private mechanism to a dataset [2]. Kairouz et al. [4], Murtagh and Vadhan [5] ultimately derived
tight composition theorems that optimally characterize the privacy parameters (ε′ , δ ′ ) of a composed
mechanism as a function of the component mechanisms’ parameters (ε, δ). However, later work
demonstrated that these guarantees are only tight in a mechanism-agnostic sense [6]. Stronger
mechanism-specific composition guarantees can often be obtained by using additional information
beyond the fact that the mechanisms satisfies some notion of DP. Methods for tracking privacy over
multiple iterations (e.g. [6–12]) are refererred to as privacy accountants.
Amplification by subsampling means that privacy can be strenghtened by applying a differentially
private mechanism to randomly sampled batches of a dataset [13, 14]. Similar to Kairouz et al.
[4], Balle et al. [15] ultimately proposed a framework for deriving tight subsampling theorems that
optimally characterize the privacy parameters (ε′ , δ ′ ) of a subsampled mechanism as a function of
the underlying base mechanism’s parameters (ε, δ).
However, their framework for deriving subsampling theorems has two key limitations. Firstly, as
we shall demonstrate, the resultant guarantees are generally only tight in a mechanism-agnostic
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

