A provable control of sensitivity of neural networks
through a direct parameterization of the overall
bi-Lipschitzness

Yuri Kinoshita, Taro Toyoizumi
Department of Mathematical Informatics,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Laboratory for Neural Computation and Adaptation,
RIKEN Center for Brain Science, Wako, Japan.
yuri-kinoshita111@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
While neural networks can enjoy an outstanding flexibility and exhibit unprecedented performance, the mechanism behind their behavior is still not wellunderstood. To tackle this fundamental challenge, researchers have tried to restrict
and manipulate some of their properties in order to gain new insights and better control on them. Especially, throughout the past few years, the concept of
bi-Lipschitzness has been proved as a beneficial inductive bias in many areas. However, due to its complexity, the design and control of bi-Lipschitz architectures
are falling behind, and a model that is precisely designed for bi-Lipschitzness
realizing a direct and simple control of the constants along with solid theoretical
analysis is lacking. In this work, we investigate and propose a novel framework for
bi-Lipschitzness that can achieve such a clear and tight control based on convex
neural networks and the Legendre-Fenchel duality. Its desirable properties are
illustrated with concrete experiments to illustrate its broad range of applications.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

Nowadays, neural networks have become an indispensable tool in the field of machine learning and
artificial intelligence. While they can enjoy an outstanding flexibility and exhibit unprecedented
performance, the mechanism behind their behavior is still not well-understood. To tackle this
fundamental challenge, researchers have tried to restrict and manipulate some of their properties in
order to gain new insights and better control on them. Especially, throughout the past few years, the
concept of sensitivity has been proved as a beneficial inductive bias in many areas.
Sensitivity can be translated into the concept of bi-Lipschitzness, which combines two different
properties, namely, Lipschitzness and inverse Lipschitzness. The former describes the maximal, and
the latter the minimal sensitivity of a function. Bi-Lipschitzness is attracting interests in various fields
not only as it proposes a promising solution to avoid unexpected and irregular results caused by a too
sensitive or too insensitive behavior of the trained function, but also as it achieves an approximate
isometry that preserves geometries of the input dimension (Li et al., 2020). It plays an essential role
in generative models such as normalizing flows to guarantee invertibility (Behrmann et al., 2019),
in uncertainty estimation to prevent the recurrent problem of feature collapse (Liu et al., 2020a;
Van Amersfoort et al., 2020) and in inverse problems (Kruse et al., 2021) to assure the stability of
both the forward and inverse function (Behrmann et al., 2021).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

