Advancing Training Efficiency of Deep Spiking Neural
Networks through Rate-based Backpropagation

1

Chengting Yu1,2 , Lei Liu2 , Gaoang Wang2 , Erping Li1,2 , Aili Wang1,2∗
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-UIUC Institute, Zhejiang University
chengting.21@intl.zju.edu.cn, ailiwang@intl.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent insights have revealed that rate-coding is a primary form of information
representation captured by surrogate-gradient-based Backpropagation Through
Time (BPTT) in training deep Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs). Motivated by
these findings, we propose rate-based backpropagation, a training strategy specifically designed to exploit rate-based representations to reduce the complexity of
BPTT. Our method minimizes reliance on detailed temporal derivatives by focusing on averaged dynamics, streamlining the computational graph to reduce
memory and computational demands of SNNs training. We substantiate the rationality of the gradient approximation between BPTT and the proposed method
through both theoretical analysis and empirical observations. Comprehensive
experiments on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet, and CIFAR10-DVS validate
that our method achieves comparable performance to BPTT counterparts, and
surpasses state-of-the-art efficient training techniques. By leveraging the inherent
benefits of rate-coding, this work sets the stage for more scalable and efficient
SNNs training within resource-constrained environments. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Tab-ct/rate-based-backpropagation.

1

Introduction

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are conceptualized as biologically inspired neural systems, incorporating spiking neurons that closely mimic biological neural dynamics [46, 56]. Unlike Artificial
Neural Networks (ANNs) based on continuous data representations, SNNs adopt spike-coding strategies to facilitate data transmission through discrete binary spike trains [52]. The intrinsic binary
mechanism eliminates the need for the extensive multiply-accumulate operations typically required for
synaptic connectivity [56], thereby enhancing energy efficiency and inference speed when deployed
on neuromorphic hardware systems [1, 10, 54].
The mainstream training methods for SNNs primarily utilize Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT)
with surrogate gradients to overcome non-differentiable spike events, allowing SNNs to achieve
comparable results with ANNs counterparts [51, 62, 74]. However, the direct training method
necessitates the storage of all temporal activations for backward propagation across the network’s
depth and duration, leading to high training costs in terms of both computational time and memory
demands [43, 86, 35, 77, 76, 47, 13]. To alleviate memory burdens, online training techniques have
been developed that partially decouple the time dependencies of backward computations in BPTT
[2, 4, 76, 48, 89]. However, online methods still require iterative computations based on the time
dimension, increasing training time complexity as the number of timesteps grows.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

