Are High-Degree Representations Really Unnecessary
in Equivariant Graph Neural Networks?

Jiacheng Cen1 2 , Anyi Li1 2 , Ning Lin1 2 , Yuxiang Ren3 , Zihe Wang1 2 , Wenbing Huang1 2∗
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
2012 Laboratories, Huawei Technologies, Shanghai
{jiacc.cn, li_anyi, ninglin00}@outlook.com; renyuxiang1@huawei.com;
wang.zihe@ruc.edu.cn; hwenbing@126.com

Abstract
Equivariant Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) that incorporate the E(3) symmetry
have achieved significant success in various scientific applications. As one of the
most successful models, EGNN [1] leverages a simple scalarization technique
to perform equivariant message passing over only Cartesian vectors (i.e., 1stdegree steerable vectors), enjoying greater efficiency and efficacy compared to
equivariant GNNs using higher-degree steerable vectors. This success suggests
that higher-degree representations might be unnecessary. In this paper, we disprove
this hypothesis by exploring the expressivity of equivariant GNNs on symmetric
structures, including k-fold rotations and regular polyhedra. We theoretically
demonstrate that equivariant GNNs will always degenerate to a zero function if the
degree of the output representations is fixed to 1 or other specific values. Based
on this theoretical insight, we propose HEGNN, a high-degree version of EGNN
to increase the expressivity by incorporating high-degree steerable vectors while
still maintaining EGNN’s advantage through the scalarization trick. Our extensive
experiments demonstrate that HEGNN not only aligns with our theoretical analyses
on a toy dataset consisting of symmetric structures, but also shows substantial
improvements on other complicated datasets without obvious symmetry, including
N -body and MD17. Our study potentially showcase an effective way of modeling
high-degree representations in equivariant GNNs.

1

Introduction

Molecules, proteins, crystals, and many other scientific data can be effectively modeled and represented through geometric graphs [2–8]. This type of data structure encapsulates not only node
characteristics and edge information but also a 3D vector (such as position, velocity, etc.) for each
node. To process geometric graphs, equivariant Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been developed,
which undergo equivariant message passing over nodes, conforming to the E(3) or SE(3) symmetry
of physical laws. These models have achieved remarkable successes in a lot of scientific tasks, such
as physical dynamics simulation [9–11], molecular generation [12–15] and protein design [16–18].
Pioneer equivariant GNNs [19–22] derive high-degree steerable representations beyond scalars and
3D coordinates with the help of spherical harmonics and conduct equivariant message passing
between representations of different degrees through the Clebsch-Gordan (CG) tensor product. While
these high-degree models are able to approximate any function of fully connected geometric graphs
in theory [23], they usually suffer from expensive computational costs in practice. In contrast,
∗

Wenbing Huang is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

