Probabilistic Weather Forecasting with Hierarchical
Graph Neural Networks

Joel Oskarsson
Linköping University
joel.oskarsson@liu.se

Tomas Landelius
Swedish Meteorological and
Hydrological Institute
tomas.landelius@smhi.se

Marc Peter Deisenroth
University College London
m.deisenroth@ucl.ac.uk

Fredrik Lindsten
Linköping University
fredrik.lindsten@liu.se

Abstract
In recent years, machine learning has established itself as a powerful tool for
high-resolution weather forecasting. While most current machine learning models focus on deterministic forecasts, accurately capturing the uncertainty in the
chaotic weather system calls for probabilistic modeling. We propose a probabilistic
weather forecasting model called Graph-EFM, combining a flexible latent-variable
formulation with the successful graph-based forecasting framework. The use of a
hierarchical graph construction allows for efficient sampling of spatially coherent
forecasts. Requiring only a single forward pass per time step, Graph-EFM allows
for fast generation of arbitrarily large ensembles. We experiment with the model
on both global and limited area forecasting. Ensemble forecasts from Graph-EFM
achieve equivalent or lower errors than comparable deterministic models, with the
added benefit of accurately capturing forecast uncertainty.

1

Introduction

Forecasting the dynamics of Earth’s atmosphere is a scientific problem of utmost importance. Society
is dependent on fast and informative weather forecasts for planning in areas such as transportation
and agriculture and for balancing the energy system [3]. Especially important is the use of forecasts to
issue warnings for extreme weather events [1]. Recent advances in Machine-Learning-based Weather
Prediction (MLWP) have enabled models that produce accurate forecasts in a fraction of the time of
traditional physics-based systems [37, 4, 23]. So far these developments have largely been focused
on deterministic modeling. However, forecasting only one likely weather scenario ignores the many
uncertainties in predicting future weather.
Weather is a chaotic system, resulting in high forecast uncertainty [52]. This uncertainty comes from
both imperfect representations of initial states and inaccurate descriptions of the function mapping
from one time step to the next [26]. Accurately modeling this uncertainty significantly increases the
value of weather forecasts. Such uncertainty can be communicated to end-users to improve decision
making or be used in downstream products, for example to compute a distribution over solar power
generation. Capturing the full forecast uncertainty requires us to predict not just a single likely state
trajectory, but a collection of possible future weather states. Due to the complexity and dimensionality
of the weather system the feasible way to achieve this is by generating samples from a modeled
distribution. Such ensemble forecasting is today performed using physics-based methods, where a
number of ensemble members are simulated as samples from this distribution. The computational
cost of this is however massive, often limiting the spatial resolution or size of the ensemble [3].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

