Federated Transformer: Multi-Party Vertical
Federated Learning on Practical Fuzzily Linked Data

Zhaomin Wu, Junyi Hou, Yiqun Diao, Bingsheng He
National University of Singapore, Singapore
zhaomin@nus.edu.sg, {junyi.h,yiqun,hebs}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is an evolving paradigm that enables multiple parties
to collaboratively train models without sharing raw data. Among its variants,
Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) is particularly relevant in real-world, crossorganizational collaborations, where distinct features of a shared instance group are
contributed by different parties. In these scenarios, parties are often linked using
fuzzy identifiers, leading to a common practice termed as multi-party fuzzy VFL.
Existing models generally address either multi-party VFL or fuzzy VFL between
two parties. Extending these models to practical multi-party fuzzy VFL typically
results in significant performance degradation and increased costs for maintaining
privacy. To overcome these limitations, we introduce the Federated Transformer
(FeT), a novel framework that supports multi-party VFL with fuzzy identifiers.
FeT innovatively encodes these identifiers into data representations and employs
a transformer architecture distributed across different parties, incorporating three
new techniques to enhance performance. Furthermore, we have developed a
multi-party privacy framework for VFL that integrates differential privacy with
secure multi-party computation, effectively protecting local representations while
minimizing associated utility costs. Our experiments demonstrate that the FeT
surpasses the baseline models by up to 46% in terms of accuracy when scaled to 50
parties. Additionally, in two-party fuzzy VFL settings, FeT also shows improved
performance and privacy over cutting-edge VFL models.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a learning paradigm that enables multiple parties to collaboratively train
a model while preserving the privacy of their local data [27]. Among its various forms, Vertical
Federated Learning (VFL) [53] is particularly prevalent form in real-world applications as highlighted
in a recent technical report [48]. In VFL, participants possess different features of the same set of
instances, where common features, such as names or addresses, serve as identifiers (a.k.a. keys) to
link datasets across these parties.
Real-world applications often necessitate multi-party fuzzy VFL, characterized by two key attributes.
First, it supports collaboration among multiple parties, commonly observed in collaborations across
hospitals [33], sensors [52], and financial institutions [38]. Second, it accommodates scenarios where
these parties are linked using fuzzy identifiers, such as addresses. Such scenarios are prevalent
in applications, as illustrated in an analysis [50] of the German Record Linkage Center [11]. For
instance, multiple vehicle rental companies that are fuzzily linked by source and destination addresses
in the same city can collaborate to predict travel times.
To illustrate the significance of multi-party fuzzy VFL, consider the application of travel cost
prediction in a city through collaboration among taxi, car, bike, and bus companies, as shown
in Figure 1. Since personal travel information is private and cannot be shared, VFL is essential.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

