ConStat: Performance-Based Contamination
Detection in Large Language Models

Jasper Dekoninck1 , Mark Niklas Müller1,2 , Martin Vechev1
Department of Computer Science1
LogicStar.ai2
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{jasper.dekoninck,martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

mark@logicstar.ai

Abstract
Public benchmarks play an essential role in the evaluation of large language models.
However, data contamination can lead to inflated performance, rendering them
unreliable for model comparison. It is therefore crucial to detect contamination and
estimate its impact on measured performance. Unfortunately, existing detection
methods can be easily evaded and fail to quantify contamination. To overcome
these limitations, we propose a novel definition of contamination as artificially
inflated and non-generalizing benchmark performance instead of the inclusion
of benchmark samples in the training data. This perspective enables us to detect
any model with inflated performance, i.e., performance that does not generalize
to rephrased samples, synthetic samples from the same distribution, or different
benchmarks for the same task. Based on this insight, we develop C ON S TAT, a
statistical method that reliably detects and quantifies contamination by comparing performance between a primary and reference benchmark relative to a set of
reference models. We demonstrate the effectiveness of C ON S TAT in an extensive
evaluation of diverse model architectures, benchmarks, and contamination scenarios and find high levels of contamination in multiple popular models including
M ISTRAL, L LAMA, Y I, and the top-3 Open LLM Leaderboard models.1

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) become increasingly effective at a wide range of tasks, many
companies and research institutions compete to develop better models [2, 5, 28, 36]. To facilitate
this development, a variety of benchmarks have been proposed that allow a standardized in-depth
comparison of model performance across diverse tasks [15, 16, 26, 33].
Data Contamination Modern LLMs are trained on vast amounts of internet-sourced data, raising
the risk of unintentionally including benchmark samples in the training set. Such data contamination
can lead to artificially inflated benchmark performance that does not accurately reflect a model’s
true ability to generalize to unseen tasks. However, model providers argue that the impact of this
contamination on model performance is negligible [2, 14, 36] and the enormous size of current
training sets almost guarantees contamination to some extent. This casts doubt on the relevance of
this traditional definition of contamination in the context of LLMs.
This Work: A New Perspective on Data Contamination We propose a new perspective on
contamination, defining it based on its effect on model performance rather than its cause. Specifically,
we define contamination as artificially inflated, non-generalizing performance, i.e., we say a model
is contaminated if and only if its performance relative to other models is significantly higher on the
original benchmark than on a similar reference benchmark. This definition captures the essence of the
contamination problem, i.e., performance measurements becoming unreliable for model comparisons.
1

Code available at https://github.com/eth-sri/ConStat.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

