Beyond Prompts: Dynamic Conversational
Benchmarking of Large Language Models

David Castillo-Bolado∗ , Joseph Davidson∗ , Finlay Gray, Marek Rosa
GoodAI
{david.castillo,joseph.davidson}@goodai.com

Abstract
We introduce a dynamic benchmarking system for conversational agents that evaluates their performance through a single, simulated, and lengthy user↔agent interaction. The interaction is a conversation between the user and agent, where
multiple tasks are introduced and then undertaken concurrently. We context
switch regularly to interleave the tasks, which constructs a realistic testing scenario in which we assess the Long-Term Memory, Continual Learning, and Information Integration capabilities of the agents. Results from both proprietary and
open-source Large-Language Models show that LLMs in general perform well on
single-task interactions, but they struggle on the same tasks when they are interleaved. Notably, short-context LLMs supplemented with an LTM system perform
as well as or better than those with larger contexts. Our benchmark suggests that
there are other challenges for LLMs responding to more natural interactions that
contemporary benchmarks have heretofore not been able to capture.

1

Introduction

The capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) have been primarily evaluated through isolated
tests (see §6), focusing on increasing data volumes and context size (c.f. [Su et al., 2024, Chen
et al., 2023, Peng et al., 2024, Zhang et al., 2024a]). However, these tests are single shot and single
topic (Figure 1), and therefore often overlook the most common user interaction mode: chat-based
conversation.
In response, we introduce the LTM Benchmark1 , an automated system designed to evaluate the
Long-Term Memory (LTM) and Continual Learning (CL) capabilities of conversational agents. The
LTM Benchmark engages agents in a single, prolonged conversation, incorporating multiple tasks
and distractions to simulate realistic and meaningful interactions. This approach provides a more
comprehensive assessment of an agent’s ability to effectively use and integrate information across
extended dialogues. Furthermore, we show that this “conversational multitasking” structure significantly degrades the test performance of LLMs, indicating that their real-world capabilities are not
fully revealed through most contemporary benchmarks. The LTM benchmark is primarily synthetic,
and can be generated to result in conversations of arbitrary length, which may potentially surpass
the context size of the LLMs under test.
Our contributions can be described thus:
• An automatic benchmarking system that evaluates an agent by conversing with it, interleaving all tests in a single conversation.
1
All data, experiments, and code for implementing, and running the LTM benchmark mentioned in this
paper are under an open source license and available, in full, at: https://github.com/GoodAI/goodai-ltmbenchmark.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

