Binary Search with Distributional Predictions

Michael Dinitz∗
Johns Hopkins University
mdinitz@cs.jhu.edu

Sungjin Im†
UC Merced
sim3@ucmerced.edu

Benjamin Moseley‡
Carnegie Mellon University
moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu

Thomas Lavastida
University of Texas at Dallas
thomas.lavastida@utdallas.edu

Aidin Niaparast‡
Carnegie Mellon University
aniapara@andrew.cmu.edu

Sergei Vassilvitskii
Google Research
sergeiv@google.com

Abstract
Algorithms with (machine-learned) predictions is a powerful framework for combining traditional worst-case algorithms with modern machine learning. However,
the vast majority of work in this space assumes that the prediction itself is nonprobabilistic, even if it is generated by some stochastic process (such as a machine
learning system). This is a poor fit for modern ML, particularly modern neural networks, which naturally generate a distribution. We initiate the study of algorithms
with distributional predictions, where the prediction itself is a distribution. We
focus on one of the simplest yet fundamental settings: binary search (or searching a
sorted array). This setting has one of the simplest algorithms with a point prediction,
but what happens if the prediction is a distribution? We show that this is a richer
setting: there are simple distributions where using the classical prediction-based
algorithm with any single prediction does poorly. Motivated by this, as our main
result, we give an algorithm with query complexity O(H(p) + log η), where H(p)
is the entropy of the true distribution p and η is the earth mover’s distance between
p and the predicted distribution p̂. This also yields the first distributionally-robust
algorithm for the classical problem of computing an optimal binary search tree
given a distribution over target keys. We complement this with a lower bound
showing that this query complexity is essentially optimal (up to constants), and
experiments validating the practical usefulness of our algorithm.

1

Introduction

Algorithms with predictions, or algorithms with machine-learned advice, has proved to be a useful
framework for combining machine learning (which is extremely useful in the usual case but can
be quite bad when in the worst case) with traditional worst-case algorithms (which are quite good
in the worst-case but do not do as well as we might hope in the usual case). While similar ideas
have appeared in many places in the past, the formal study of this setting was pioneered by Lykouris
and Vassilvitskii [2021], and was particularly motivated by the practical success of learned index
structures [Kraska et al., 2018]. The goal is usually to design an algorithm for some classical and
important problem in the setting when we are also provided with some type of “advice” or “prediction”
(presumably given by some machine learning algorithm) as to what the instance is like. If the advice
is “good” then we want our algorithm to do extremely well, while if the advice is “bad” then we
∗

Supported in part by NSF awards 1909111 and 2228995.
Supported in part by NSF awards 1844939, 2121745, and 2423106, and by ONR grant N00014-22-1-2701.
‡
Supported in part by a Google Research Award, an Infor Research Award, a Carnegie Bosch Junior Faculty
Chair, NSF grants CCF-2121744 and CCF-1845146 and ONR Grant N000142212702.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

