Delving into the Reversal Curse:
How Far Can Large Language Models Generalize?

arXiv:2410.18808v2 [cs.CL] 22 Nov 2024

Zhengkai Lin1,2∗, Zhihang Fu2 , Kai Liu2,3 , Liang Xie4 , Binbin Lin5,6 ,
Wenxiao Wang5†, Deng Cai1 , Yue Wu2 , Jieping Ye2†
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Cloud,
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
5
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, 6 Fullong Inc.
3

Abstract
While large language models (LLMs) showcase unprecedented capabilities, they
also exhibit certain inherent limitations when facing seemingly trivial tasks. A
prime example is the recently debated “reversal curse”, which surfaces when
models, having been trained on the fact “A is B”, struggle to generalize this
knowledge to infer that “B is A”. In this paper, we examine the manifestation
of the reversal curse across various tasks and delve into both the generalization
abilities and the problem-solving mechanisms of LLMs. This investigation leads
to a series of significant insights: (1) LLMs are able to generalize to “B is A”
when both A and B are presented in the context as in the case of a multiple-choice
question. (2) This generalization ability is highly correlated to the structure of
the fact “A is B” in the training documents. For example, this generalization
only applies to biographies structured in “[Name] is [Description]” but not to
“[Description] is [Name]”. (3) We propose and verify the hypothesis that LLMs
possess an inherent bias in fact recalling during knowledge application, which
explains and underscores the importance of the document structure to successful
learning. (4) The negative impact of this bias on the downstream performance
of LLMs can hardly be mitigated through training alone. These findings offer
a novel perspective on interpreting LLMs’ generalization through their intrinsic
mechanisms and provide insights for developing more effective learning methods.1

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown incredible achievements across various tasks [5, 36].
Central to the discourse on LLMs is the debate over whether their capabilities stem from merely
memorizing massive pretraining corpus [33, 9], or extend from a deeper understanding of human
language and the ability to generalize their knowledge to new tasks and settings [24, 4]. Recently, a
phenomenon identified within LLMs, termed the “reversal curse”, suggests that LLMs struggle to
generalize beyond their training text [2, 12]. The curse manifests as models after being trained on
the fact that “A is B” failing to infer that “B is A”. For example, after learning that “Paul J. Flory is
the 74th Nobel laureate in Chemistry”, LLMs may not be able to complete the sentence “The 74th
Nobel laureate in Chemistry is [Paul J. Flory]”. These failures raise concerns about the generalization
ability of today’s LLMs: do LLMs understand their training documents, such as the equivalence
between A and B? If they do, to what extent can they apply this knowledge to downstream tasks?
* Work done during Zhengkai Lin’s research internship at Alibaba Cloud. Email: zhengkai.lin@zju.edu.cn.
†
1

Corresponding authors. Email: wenxiaowang@zju.edu.cn, yejieping.ye@alibaba-inc.com.
https://github.com/alibaba/thinking_bias.git

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

