Can Language Models Learn to Skip Steps?

Tengxiao Liu♠▲∗ Qipeng Guo♡ Xiangkun Hu♢ Cheng Jiayang♢
Yue Zhang♣† Xipeng Qiu♠† Zheng Zhang♢
♠
Fudan University ▲ UC Santa Barbara ♡ Shanghai AI Laboratory
♣
Westlake University ♢ Amazon AWS AI
tengxiao@ucsb.edu zhangyue@westlake.edu.cn
xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn zhaz@amazon.com

Abstract
Trained on vast corpora of human language, language models demonstrate emergent human-like reasoning abilities. Yet they are still far from true intelligence,
which opens up intriguing opportunities to explore the parallels of humans and
model behaviors. In this work, we study the ability to skip steps in reasoning—a
hallmark of human expertise developed through practice. Unlike humans, who
may skip steps to enhance efficiency or to reduce cognitive load, models do not
inherently possess such motivations to minimize reasoning steps. To address this,
we introduce a controlled framework that stimulates step-skipping behavior by
iteratively refining models to generate shorter and accurate reasoning paths. Empirical results indicate that models can develop the step skipping ability under our
guidance. Moreover, after fine-tuning on expanded datasets that include both complete and skipped reasoning sequences, the models can not only resolve tasks with
increased efficiency without sacrificing accuracy, but also exhibit comparable and
even enhanced generalization capabilities in out-of-domain scenarios. Our work
presents the first exploration into human-like step-skipping ability and provides
fresh perspectives on how such cognitive abilities can benefit AI models.

1

Introduction

The pursuit of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) is profoundly influenced and inspired by human
intelligence [35, 6]. Trained extensively on human language, language models not only excel in
various tasks, but also begin to exhibit emergent human-like abilities that are not explicitly engineered
into them [24]. Among these, reasoning stands out as a core human-like cognitive ability, and has
demonstrated great potential in a wide range of problem solving scenarios [47, 11, 30, 37, 28, 34].
Despite their advances in displaying human-like cognitive activities, huge gaps remain in how models
and humans actually behave [22, 46, 20]. These differences bring up interesting questions regarding
the exploration and development of similar capabilities between models and humans.
We aim to investigate whether the models exhibit any reasoning abilities unique to human experts,
and whether they can evolve from beginners to reasoning experts. When humans learn to reason,
beginners typically start with detailed, step-by-step solutions to imitate the gradual process of problem
solving. As practice makes perfect, human experts not only solve problems more swiftly but also
utilize shorter mental pathways, often skipping steps in their reasoning process [36]. This particular
ability helps them speed up the reasoning and saves cognitive load for more challenging steps [44].
As demonstrated in Figure 1, the step-skipping behavior illustrated on the right side is commonly
adopted by human experts during equation simplification.
∗
†

Work done during internship at AWS Shanghai AI Lab.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

