DigiRL: Training In-The-Wild Device-Control
Agents with Autonomous Reinforcement Learning

Hao Bai1,2∗ Yifei Zhou1∗ Mert Cemri1 Jiayi Pan1
Alane Suhr1 Sergey Levine1 Aviral Kumar3,4
1

UC Berkeley

2

UIUC

3

CMU

4

Google DeepMind

Abstract
Training corpuses for vision language models (VLMs) typically lack sufficient
amounts of decision-centric data. This renders off-the-shelf VLMs sub-optimal
for decision-making tasks such as in-the-wild device control through graphical
user interfaces (GUIs). While training with static demonstrations has shown
some promise, we show that such methods fall short for controlling real GUIs
due to their failure to deal with real world stochasticity and non-stationarity not
captured in static observational data. This paper introduces a novel autonomous
RL approach, called DigiRL, for training in-the-wild device control agents through
fine-tuning a pre-trained VLM in two stages: offline RL to initialize the model,
followed by offline-to-online RL. To do this, we build a scalable and parallelizable
Android learning environment equipped with a VLM-based evaluator and develop
a simple yet effective RL approach for learning in this domain. Our approach
runs advantage-weighted RL with advantage estimators enhanced to account for
stochasticity along with an automatic curriculum for deriving maximal learning
signal. We demonstrate the effectiveness of DigiRL using the Android-in-the-Wild
(AitW) dataset, where our 1.3B VLM trained with RL achieves a 49.5% absolute
improvement – from 17.7 to 67.2% success rate – over supervised fine-tuning with
static human demonstration data. These results significantly surpass not only the
prior best agents, including AppAgent with GPT-4V (8.3% success rate) and the
17B CogAgent trained with AitW data (38.5%), but also the prior best autonomous
RL approach based on filtered behavior cloning (57.8%), thereby establishing a
new state-of-the-art for digital agents for in-the-wild device control.

1

Introduction

Advances in vision-language models (VLMs), especially in regards to their remarkable commonsense, reasoning, and generalization abilities imply that realizing a fully autonomous digital AI
assistant, that can simplify human life by automating day-to-day activities on computer devices via
natural language interfaces, is no longer a distant aspiration [16, 45, 56]. An effective device-control
AI assistant should be able to complete tasks in-the-wild through Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs)
on digital devices: make travel plans; experiment with presentation designs; and operate a mobile
device autonomously, all while running amidst stochasticity and distractors on the device, the Internet,
and the tools it interacts with. However, enhanced reasoning or common-sense abilities do not
directly transfer to intelligent assistant behavior: ultimately we want AI assistants to accomplish
∗

Equal contribution, listed in alphabetical order; work done at UC Berkeley. E-mails: haob2@illinois.edu,
yifei_zhou@berkeley.edu, aviralku@andrew.cmu.edu. Project page: https://digirl-agent.github.io/.
Code available at https://github.com/DigiRL-agent/digirl.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

