Large Language Models as Urban Residents: An LLM
Agent Framework for Personal Mobility Generation

Jiawei Wang1

Renhe Jiang1∗

Makoto Onizuka2

Ryosuke Shibasaki1

Chuang Yang1
Noboru Koshizuka1

Zengqing Wu2
Chuan Xiao2

1

The University of Tokyo, 2 Osaka University
{jiawei@g.ecc, koshizuka@iii}.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{jiangrh,chuang.yang,shiba}@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
wuzengqing@outlook.com, {onizuka,chuanx}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel approach using Large Language Models (LLMs)
integrated into an agent framework for flexible and effective personal mobility
generation. LLMs overcome the limitations of previous models by effectively
processing semantic data and offering versatility in modeling various tasks. Our
approach addresses three research questions: aligning LLMs with real-world urban
mobility data, developing reliable activity generation strategies, and exploring LLM
applications in urban mobility. The key technical contribution is a novel LLM agent
framework that accounts for individual activity patterns and motivations, including
a self-consistency approach to align LLMs with real-world activity data and a
retrieval-augmented strategy for interpretable activity generation. We evaluate
our LLM agent framework and compare it with state-of-the-art personal mobility
generation approaches, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach and its
potential applications in urban mobility. Overall, this study marks the pioneering
work of designing an LLM agent framework for activity generation based on realworld human activity data, offering a promising tool for urban mobility analysis.
Source codes are available at https://github.com/Wangjw6/LLMob/ .

1

Introduction

The prevalence of large language models (LLMs) has facilitated a variety of applications extending beyond the domain of NLP. Notably, LLMs have gained widespread usage in furthering our
understanding of humans and society in a multitude of disciplines, such as economy [1] and political
science [2], and have been employed as agents in various social science studies [36, 35, 10]. In this
paper, we target the utilization of LLM agents for the study of personal mobility data. Modeling
personal mobility opens up numerous opportunities for building a sustainable community, including
proactive traffic management and the design of comprehensive urban development strategies [4, 3, 45].
In particular, generating reliable activity trajectories has become a promising and effective way to
exploit individual activity data [13, 6]. On one hand, learning to generate activity trajectory leads to a
thorough understanding of activity patterns, enabling the flexible simulation of urban mobility. On
the other hand, while individual activity trajectory data is abundant thanks to advances in telecommunications, its practical use is often limited due to privacy concerns. In this sense, generated data can
provide a viable alternative that offers a balance between utility and privacy.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

