IF-Font: Ideographic Description Sequence-Following
Font Generation
Xinping Chen, Xiao Ke∗, Wenzhong Guo
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Networking Computing
and Intelligent Information Processing,
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, China
Engineering Research Center of Big Data Intelligence,
Ministry of Education, Fuzhou 350116, China
{221027017, kex, guowenzhong}@fzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot font generation (FFG) aims to learn the target style from a limited number
of reference glyphs and generate the remaining glyphs in the target font. Previous
works focus on disentangling the content and style features of glyphs, combining
the content features of the source glyph with the style features of the reference
glyph to generate new glyphs. However, the disentanglement is challenging due to
the complexity of glyphs, often resulting in glyphs that are influenced by the style
of the source glyph and prone to artifacts. We propose IF-Font, a novel paradigm
which incorporates Ideographic Description Sequence (IDS) instead of the source
glyph to control the semantics of generated glyphs. To achieve this, we quantize
the reference glyphs into tokens, and model the token distribution of target glyphs
using corresponding IDS and reference tokens. The proposed method excels in
synthesizing glyphs with neat and correct strokes, and enables the creation of new
glyphs based on provided IDS. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
greatly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both one-shot and few-shot settings,
particularly when the target styles differ significantly from the training font styles.
The code is available at https://github.com/Stareven233/IF-Font.

福
猫

content style
Img Encode

Reference

Source

CNN
Decoder
Img Encode

content style

猫 福
Output

Img Encode
Transformer Decoder

Reference

⿰犭⿱艹⿴口十
IDS

VQ
Decoder

猫
Output

Text Encode

Autoregressive

Figure 1: Comparison of two font generation paradigms. Left: The style-content disentangling
paradigm. It assumes that a glyph can be decomposed into two distinct attributes: content and style.
Right: The proposed paradigm. We first autoregressively predict the target tokens and decode them
with a VQ decoder. Orange boxes show the main difference between the two paradigms.

∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

