Optimization Algorithm Design via Electric Circuits

Stephen P. Boyd
Stanford University

Tetiana Parshakova∗
Stanford University

Ernest K. Ryu
UCLA

Jaewook J. Suh∗
Rice University

Abstract
We present a novel methodology for convex optimization algorithm design using
ideas from electric RLC circuits. Given an optimization problem, the first stage
of the methodology is to design an appropriate electric circuit whose continuoustime dynamics converge to the solution of the optimization problem at hand.
Then, the second stage is an automated, computer-assisted discretization of the
continuous-time dynamics, yielding a provably convergent discrete-time algorithm.
Our methodology recovers many classical (distributed) optimization algorithms
and enables users to quickly design and explore a wide range of new algorithms
with convergence guarantees.

1

Introduction

In the classical literature of optimization theory, optimization algorithms are designed with the goal
of establishing fast worst-case convergence guarantees. However, these methods, designed with
the pessimistic framework of worst-case analysis, often exhibit slow practical performance. In the
modern machine learning literature, optimizers are designed with the goal of obtaining fast empirical
performance on a set of practical problems of interest. However, these methods, designed without
consideration of the feasibility of a convergence analysis, tend to be much more difficult to analyze
theoretically, and such methods sometimes even fail to converge under nice idealized assumptions
such as convexity [92, 131].
In this work, we present a novel methodology for convex optimization algorithm design using ideas
from electric RLC (resistor-inductor-capacitor) circuits and the performance estimation problem
[54, 150]. (To clarify, our proposal does not involve building a physical circuit.) Specifically,
our methodology provides a quick and systematic recipe for designing new, provably convergent
optimization algorithms, including distributed optimization algorithms. The ease of the methodology
enables users to quickly explore a wide range of algorithms with convergence guarantees.
Optimization problem formulation. We consider the standard-form optimization problem
minimize f (x)
subject to x ∈ R(E ⊺ ),

(1)

where x ∈ Rm is the optimization variable, f : Rm → R ∪ {∞} is closed, convex, and proper,
and E ∈ Rn×m . Assume we have n nets N1 , . . . , Nn forming a partition of {1, . . . , m}. More
specifically, we let E ∈ Rn×m be a selection matrix defined as

+1 if j ∈ Ni
Eij =
(2)
0
otherwise.
Our goal is to find a primal-dual solution satisfying the KKT conditions [126, Theorem 28.3]
y ∈ ∂f (x), x ∈ R(E ⊺ ), y ∈ N (E).
(3)
As we show through examples, this standard-form problem (1) conveniently models many optimization problem setups of practical interest.
∗

Lead authors (author list ordered alphabetically)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

