Embedding Trajectory for Out-of-Distribution
Detection in Mathematical Reasoning

Yiming Wangα Pei Zhangβ,γ Baosong Yangβ,
Derek F. Wongγ
α
α,
Zhuosheng Zhang Rui Wang
α
Shanghai Jiao Tong University β Tongyi Lab γ NLP2 CT Lab, University of Macau
Email:

: Corresponding Author
{yiming.wang, wangrui12}@sjtu.edu.cn
β
yangbaosong.ybs@alibaba-inc.com

α

Abstract
Real-world data deviating from the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
assumption of in-distribution training data poses security threats to deep networks,
thus advancing out-of-distribution (OOD) detection algorithms. Detection methods
in generative language models (GLMs) mainly focus on uncertainty estimation and
embedding distance measurement, with the latter proven to be most effective in
traditional linguistic tasks like summarization and translation. However, another
complex generative scenario mathematical reasoning poses significant challenges
to embedding-based methods due to its high-density feature of output spaces, but
this feature causes larger discrepancies in the embedding shift trajectory between
different samples in latent spaces. Hence, we propose a trajectory-based method TV
Score, which uses trajectory volatility for OOD detection in mathematical reasoning.
Experiments show that our method outperforms all traditional algorithms on GLMs
under mathematical reasoning scenarios and can be extended to more applications
with high-density features in output spaces, such as multiple-choice questions.
§ https://github.com/Alsace08/OOD-Math-Reasoning

1

Introduction

The rapid development of generative language models (GLMs) [40, 41, 5, 2, 50] has empowered
them to fit diverse and challenging datasets, showing strong generalization over in-distribution
(ID) test data satisfying the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) assumption. However,
unconstrained inputs in real-world settings frequently trigger distributional drifts, called out-ofdistribution (OOD) data. In such scenarios, model performance often deteriorates unexpectedly,
yielding harmful outcomes. Thus, OOD detection [38, 4] is critical in safeguarding model security.
A highly scalable detection method must not rely on specific OOD data distributions, so simulating
scenarios where OOD data is unavailable is more promising. Most existing research mainly focuses
on vision and text classification tasks [12, 30, 55, 26, 48]. In contrast, studies addressing OOD
detection on GLMs remain relatively niche, despite the more severe risks associated with OOD
perils in GLMs due to the potential for error propagation in autoregressive generated sequences [43].
Existing methods on GLMs only focus on traditional text generation scenarios like summarization and
translation, and these methods did not step outside the research framework of uncertainty estimation
[33, 31] and embedding distance measure [43]. Among these, [43] has demonstrated that embeddingbased methods are currently the only optimal solution for text generation scenarios, they determine
whether a new sample is ID or OOD by calculating the Mahalanobis Distance [22] between the new
sample embedding and ID embedding distribution in the static input or output space.
Recently, mathematical reasoning has emerged as a challenging generative task and a crucial
benchmark for evaluating model abilities. However, it presents unique phenomena in both input and
output spaces that render embedding-based methods inapplicable, as shown in Figure 1:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

