Learning to Reason via
Program Generation, Emulation, and Search

Nathaniel Weir∗†
Johns Hopkins University
nweir@jhu.edu

Muhammad Khalifa∗†
University of Michigan
khalifam@umich.edu

Orion Weller∗
Johns Hopkins University
oweller@cs.jhu.edu

Linlu Qiu∗
MIT
linluqiu@mit.edu

Peter Clark
Allen Institute for AI
peterc@allenai.org

Abstract
Program synthesis with language models (LMs) has unlocked a large set of reasoning abilities; code-tuned LMs have proven adept at generating programs that solve
a wide variety of algorithmic symbolic manipulation tasks (e.g. word concatenation). However, not all reasoning tasks are easily expressible as code, e.g. tasks
involving commonsense reasoning, moral decision-making, and sarcasm understanding. Our goal is to extend an LM’s program synthesis skills to such tasks and
evaluate the results via pseudo-programs, namely Python programs where some
leaf function calls are left undefined. To that end, we propose, Code Generation
and Emulated EXecution (C O GEX). C O GEX works by (1) training LMs to generate pseudo-programs, (2) teaching them to emulate their generated program’s
execution, including those leaf functions, allowing the LM’s knowledge to fill in
the execution gaps; and (3) using them to search over many programs to find an
optimal one. To adapt the C O GEX model to a new task, we introduce a method
for performing program search to find a single program whose pseudo-execution
yields optimal performance when applied to all the instances of a given dataset. We
show that our approach yields large improvements compared to standard in-context
learning approaches on a battery of tasks, both algorithmic and soft reasoning. This
result thus demonstrates that code synthesis can be applied to a much broader class
of problems than previously considered.1

1

Introduction

Recently there have been rapid advances in training language models (LMs) to generate code rather
than natural language (NL), following the intuition that code may be more effective than NL for certain
tasks, such as those requiring complex calculations, iteration, or data structure manipulation(Chen
et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023). Although successful, these works have mostly studied tasks conducive
to a programmatic paradigm, such as symbolic manipulation or algorithmic reasoning, i.e., tasks for
which a clear compilable program can be devised. However, it is unclear how to apply this approach
to “softer” reasoning tasks such as commonsense and social reasoning, where algorithmic solutions
are less obvious (Zhang et al., 2023a).
∗

Work done in part during internships at Allen Institute for AI.
Our released dataset, fine-tuned models, and implementation can be found at https://github.com/
nweir127/CoGEX.
†
Co-first authors.
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

