Near-Optimal Distributionally Robust Reinforcement
Learning with General Lp Norms

Pierre Clavier∗†
Ecole Polytechnique, Inria

Laixi Shi‡
Caltech

Erwan Le Pennec ∗
Ecole polytechnique

Adam Wierman ‡
Caltech

Matthieu Geist§
Cohere

Eric Mazumdar ‡
Caltech

Abstract
To address the challenges of sim-to-real gap and sample efficiency in reinforcement
learning (RL), this work studies distributionally robust Markov decision processes
(RMDPs) — optimize the worst-case performance when the deployed environment
is within an uncertainty set around some nominal MDP. Despite recent efforts,
the sample complexity of RMDPs has remained largely undetermined. While the
statistical implications of distributional robustness in RL have been explored in
some specific cases, the generalizability of the existing findings remains unclear,
especially in comparison to standard RL. Assuming access to a generative model
that samples from the nominal MDP, we examine the sample complexity of
RMDPs using a class of generalized Lp norms as the ’distance’ function for the
uncertainty set, under two commonly adopted sa-rectangular and s-rectangular
conditions. Our results imply that RMDPs can be more sample-efficient to solve
than standard MDPs using generalized Lp norms in both sa- and s-rectangular
cases, potentially inspiring more empirical research. We provide a near-optimal
upper bound and a matching minimax lower bound for the sa-rectangular scenarios.
For s-rectangular cases, we improve the state-of-the-art upper bound and also
derive a lower bound using L∞ norm that verifies the tightness.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [Sutton, 1988] is a popular paradigm in machine learning, particularly
noted for its success in practical applications. The RL framework, usually modeled within the context
of a Markov decision process (MDP), focuses on learning effective decision-making strategies based
on interactions with a fixed environment. However, the work of Mannor et al. [2004], among others,
has highlighted a vulnerability in RL strategies, revealing the sensitivity to inherent shift or estimation
errors in the reward and transition probabilities. A specific example of this is when, because of a
sim-to-real gap, policies learned in idealized environments fail when deployed in environments with
slight changes or adversarial perturbations [Klopp et al., 2017, Mahmood et al., 2018].
To address this issue, distributionally robust RL, usually formulated as robust MDPs (RMDPs),
proposed by Iyengar [2005] and Nilim and El Ghaoui [2005], have attracted considerable attention.
RMDPs are formulated as max-min problems, seeking policies that are resilient to model environment
∗

CMAP, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, 91120 Palaiseau
Inria Paris, HeKA, 75015 Paris, France
‡
Department of Computing Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, CA 91125, USA.
§
Cohere, Paris.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

