Unleashing the Potential of the Diffusion Model in
Few-shot Semantic Segmentation

Muzhi Zhu1∗ Yang Liu1∗ Zekai Luo1∗ Chenchen Jing1
Hao Chen1∗ Guangkai Xu1 Xinlong Wang2 Chunhua Shen1
1

Zhejiang University

2

Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
The Diffusion Model has not only garnered noteworthy achievements in the realm
of image generation but has also demonstrated its potential as an effective pretraining method utilizing unlabeled data. Drawing from the extensive potential
unveiled by the Diffusion Model in both semantic correspondence and open vocabulary segmentation, our work initiates an investigation into employing the
Latent Diffusion Model for Few-shot Semantic Segmentation. Recently, inspired
by the in-context learning ability of large language models, Few-shot Semantic
Segmentation has evolved into In-context Segmentation tasks, morphing into a
crucial element in assessing generalist segmentation models. In this context, we
concentrate on Few-shot Semantic Segmentation, establishing a solid foundation
for the future development of a Diffusion-based generalist model for segmentation. Our initial focus lies in understanding how to facilitate interaction between
the query image and the support image, resulting in the proposal of a KV fusion
method within the self-attention framework. Subsequently, we delve deeper into
optimizing the infusion of information from the support mask and simultaneously
re-evaluating how to provide reasonable supervision from the query mask. Based
on our analysis, we establish a simple and effective framework named DiffewS,
maximally retaining the original Latent Diffusion Model’s generative framework
and effectively utilizing the pre-training prior. Experimental results demonstrate
that our method significantly outperforms the previous SOTA models in multiple
settings. Our code is released at: https://github.com/aim-uofa/DiffewS

1

Introduction

The Diffusion Model (DM) has demonstrated powerful capabilities in multiple visual generation tasks,
including image generation [1, 2], image editing [3, 4], video generation [5–7], etc. At the same time,
DM has also been proven to be a powerful method for self-supervised pre-training [8, 9] employing
unlabelled data. To exploit the representation ability of DM, there are currently two emerging topics
in vision research: improving the learning paradigm [10, 11] and downstream task adaptation[12–14].
The latter often focuses on the Latent Diffusion Model [2] (LDM). By compressing images into latent
space, it significantly decreases computational expenses and emerges as the first open-source Text-toImage Diffusion Model scaled up to the LAION-5B [15] level. For example, ODISE [16],DVP [12],
DatasetDM [17] adapt LDM to multiple tasks such as depth estimation, semantic segmentation, but
they all require training additional decoder heads, which increases training costs and may undermine
the generalization ability and generation quality. Therefore, some works [13, 14] have emerged that
attempt to repurpose the Diffusion Model’s generative framework and apply it to visual perception
tasks without adding extra decoder heads. Nonetheless, these paradigms still cannot uniformly adapt
to all tasks.
∗

MZ, YL and ZL contributed equally. YL is the project lead. HC is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

