The Many Faces of Optimal Weak-to-Strong Learning

Kasper Green Larsen
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University
larsen@cs.au.dk

Mikael Møller Høgsgaard
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University
hogsgaards@cs.au.dk

Markus Engelund Mathiasen
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University
markusm@cs.au.dk

Abstract
Boosting is an extremely successful idea, allowing one to combine multiple low
accuracy classifiers into a much more accurate voting classifier. In this work, we
present a new and surprisingly simple Boosting algorithm that obtains a provably
optimal sample complexity. Sample optimal Boosting algorithms have only recently
been developed, and our new algorithm has the fastest runtime among all such
algorithms and is the simplest to describe: Partition your training data into 5 disjoint
pieces of equal size, run AdaBoost on each, and combine the resulting classifiers via
a majority vote. In addition to this theoretical contribution, we also perform the first
empirical comparison of the proposed sample optimal Boosting algorithms. Our
pilot empirical study suggests that our new algorithm might outperform previous
algorithms on large data sets.

1

Introduction

Boosting is one of the most powerful machine learning ideas, allowing one to improve the accuracy
of a simple base learning algorithm A. The main idea in Boosting, is to iteratively invoke the base
learning algorithm A on modified versions of a training data set. Each invocation of A returns a
classifier, and these classifiers are finally combined via a majority vote or averaging. Variations of
Boosting, including Gradient Boosting [10, 16, 7], are often among the best performing classifiers
in practice, especially when data is tabular. Furthermore, when combined with decision trees or
regressors as the base learning algorithm, these algorithms are independent of scaling of data features
and provides impressive out-of-the-box performance. See the excellent survey [22] for further details.
The textbook Boosting algorithm for binary classification, AdaBoost [9], works by maintaining a
weighing Dt = (Dt (1), . . . , Dt (m)) of a training set S = (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xm , ym ) with (xi , yi ) ∈
X × {−1, 1} for an input domain X and labels {−1, 1}. In each Boosting iteration t, a classifier
ht : X → {−1, 1} is trained to minimize the 0/1-loss on S, but with samples weighed according
to Dt . The weights are then updated such that samples (xi , yi ) misclassified by ht have a larger
weight under Dt+1 and correctly classified samples have a smaller weight. Finally, after a sufficient
number
P of iterations T , AdaBoost combines the classifiers h1 , . . . , hT into a voting classifier f (x) =
sign( t αt ht (x)) taking a weighted majority vote among the predictions made by the ht ’s. Here the
αt ’s are real-valued weights depending on the accuracy of ht on Dt .

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

