R EL B ENCH: A Benchmark for Deep Learning
on Relational Databases
Joshua Robinson1⇤, Rishabh Ranjan1⇤, Weihua Hu2⇤, Kexin Huang1⇤,
Jiaqi Han1 , Alejandro Dobles1 , Matthias Fey2 , Jan E. Lenssen2,3 ,
Yiwen Yuan2 , Zecheng Zhang2 , Xinwei He2 , Jure Leskovec1,2
1
Stanford University 2 Kumo.AI 3 Max Planck Institute for Informatics
https://relbench.stanford.edu

Abstract

We present R EL B ENCH, a public benchmark for solving predictive tasks over
relational databases with graph neural networks. R EL B ENCH provides databases
and tasks spanning diverse domains and scales, and is intended to be a foundational infrastructure for future research. We use R EL B ENCH to conduct the first
comprehensive study of Relational Deep Learning (RDL) (Fey et al., 2024), which
combines graph neural network predictive models with (deep) tabular models that
extract initial entity-level representations from raw tables. End-to-end learned RDL
models fully exploit the predictive signal encoded in primary-foreign key links,
marking a significant shift away from the dominant paradigm of manual feature
engineering combined with tabular models. To thoroughly evaluate RDL against
this prior gold-standard, we conduct an in-depth user study where an experienced
data scientist manually engineers features for each task. In this study, RDL learns
better models whilst reducing human work needed by more than an order of magnitude. This demonstrates the power of deep learning for solving predictive tasks
over relational databases, opening up many new research opportunities enabled by
R EL B ENCH.

1

Introduction

Relational databases are the most widely used database management system, underpinning much of
the digital economy. Their popularity stems from their table storage structure, making maintenance
relatively easy, and data simple to access using powerful query languages such as SQL. Because of
their popularity, AI systems across a wide variety of domains are built using data stored in relational
databases, including e-commerce, social media, banking systems, healthcare, manufacturing, and
open-source scientific repositories (Johnson et al., 2016; PubMed, 1996).
Despite the importance of relational databases, the rich relational information is typically foregone,
as no model architecture is capable of handling varied database structures. Instead, data is “flattened”
into a simpler format such as a single table, often by manual feature engineering, on which standard
tabular models can be used (Kaggle, 2022). This results in a significant loss in predictive signal, and
creates a need for data extraction pipelines that frequently cause bugs and add to software complexity.
To fully exploit the predictive signal encoded in the relations between entities, a new proposal is to
re-cast relational data as an exact graph representation, with a node for each entity in the database,
edges indicating primary-foreign key links, and node features extracted using deep tabular models,
an approach termed Relational Deep Learning (RDL) (Fey et al., 2024). The graph representation
allows Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017) to be used as
predictive models. RDL is the first approach for an end-to-end learnable neural network model with
access to all possible predictive signal in a relational databases, and has the potential to unlock new
⇤

Equal contribution, order chosen randomly. First authors may swap the ordering for professional purposes.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

