A Primal-Dual-Assisted Penalty Approach to Bilevel
Optimization with Coupled Constraints

Liuyuan Jiang† , Quan Xiao† , Victor M. Tenorio⋆ , Fernando Real-Rojas⋆
Antonio G. Marques⋆ , Tianyi Chen†
†

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, United States
⋆
King Juan Carlos University, Madrid, Spain
{jiangl7, xiaoq5, chent18}@rpi.edu
{victor.tenorio, antonio.garcia.marques}@urjc.es; f.real.2018@alumnos.urjc.es

Abstract
Interest in bilevel optimization has grown in recent years, partially due to its applications to tackle challenging machine-learning problems. Several exciting recent
works have been centered around developing efficient gradient-based algorithms
that can solve bilevel optimization problems with provable guarantees. However,
the existing literature mainly focuses on bilevel problems either without constraints,
or featuring only simple constraints that do not couple variables across the upper
and lower-levels, excluding a range of complex applications. Our paper studies this
challenging but less explored scenario and develops a (fully) first-order algorithm,
which we term BLOCC, to tackle BiLevel Optimization problems with Coupled
Constraints. We establish rigorous convergence theory for the proposed algorithm
and demonstrate its effectiveness on two well-known real-world applications hyperparameter selection in support vector machine (SVM) and infrastructure
planning in transportation networks using the real data from the city of Seville.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization (BLO) approaches are pertinent in various machine learning problems, including
hyperparameter optimization [49, 24], meta-learning [22], and reinforcement learning [67, 63].
Moreover, the ability to handle BLO with constraints is particularly important, as these constraints
appear in applications such as pricing [15], transportation [50, 1], and kernelized SVM [30]. Although
there is extensive research on BLO problems without constraints or with uncoupled constraints
[31, 12, 39, 42, 62], solutions for BLO problems with coupled constraints (CCs) remain limited;
see details in Table 1. However, it is of particular interest to investigate BLO with lower-level CCs.
Taking infrastructure planning in a transportation network as an example, the lower-level seeks to
optimize a utility constrained by the upper-level parameter, network configuration.
Motivated by this, we consider the coupled-constrained BLO problem in the following form
min f (x, yg∗ (x))

(1a)

x∈X

s.t.

yg∗ (x) := arg min g(x, y) with

Y(x) := {y ∈ Y : g c (x, y) ≤ 0}

y∈Y(x)

(1b)

where f : Rdx × Rdy → R is the upper-level objective, g : Rdx × Rdy → R is the lower-level
The work was supported by NSF project 2412486, NSF SCALE-MoDL project 2401297, NSF CAREER
project 2047177, Cisco Research Award, Amazon Research Award, the IBM-Rensselaer Future of Computing
Research Collaboration, and the Comunidad de Madrid (via URJC grants F840 and F978).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

