TARP-VP: Towards Evaluation of Transferred
Adversarial Robustness and Privacy on Label
Mapping Visual Prompting Models

Zhen Chen1 Yi Zhang2 Fu Wang3 Xingyu Zhao2 Xiaowei Huang1 Wenjie Ruan4∗
1
University of Liverpool 2 University of Warwick 3 University of Exeter 4 USTC
{cz97, xiaowei.huang}@liverpool.ac.uk
{yi.zhang.16, xingyu.zhao}@warwick.ac.uk
fw377@exeter.ac.uk rwjie@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial robustness and privacy of deep learning (DL) models are two widely
studied topics in AI security. Adversarial training (AT) is an effective approach to
improve the robustness of DL models against adversarial attacks. However, while
models with AT demonstrate enhanced robustness, they become more susceptible to membership inference attacks (MIAs), thus increasing the risk of privacy
leakage. This indicates a negative trade-off between adversarial robustness and
privacy in general deep learning models. Visual prompting is a novel model reprogramming (MR) technique used for fine-tuning pre-trained models, achieving good
performance in vision tasks, especially when combined with the label mapping
technique. However, the performance of label-mapping-based visual prompting
(LM-VP) under adversarial attacks and MIAs lacks evaluation. In this work, we
regard the MR of LM-VP as a unified entity, referred to as the LM-VP model,
and take a step toward jointly evaluating the adversarial robustness and privacy of
LM-VP models. Experimental results show that the choice of pre-trained models
significantly affects the white-box adversarial robustness of LM-VP, and standard
AT even substantially degrades its performance. In contrast, transfer AT-trained
LM-VP achieves a good trade-off between transferred adversarial robustness and
privacy, a finding that has been consistently validated across various pre-trained
models.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have gained great success, yet concerns regarding their security continue
to grow, as they are susceptible to various attacks [30, 13, 23, 29, 35]. In addition to the deep
learning models, training samples are also the key to this success. Consequently, attacks targeting
the relationship between training samples and models have emerged, such as adversarial attacks
[23, 14, 43, 37] and membership inference attacks (MIAs) [25, 28, 30, 32]. Adversarial attacks are
gradient-based methods that introduce imperceptible perturbations on inputs, generating adversarial
examples (AEs) that cause the target models to give incorrect predictions. Adversarial training (AT)
[23], proposed by Szegedy et al. has been recognized as one of the most effective defenses against
such attacks. The basic idea of AT is to incorporate AEs into the training process, resulting in
significantly improved performance under adversarial attacks compared to standard training (ST).
MIAs, on the other hand, aim to determine whether a specific sample was part of the model’s training
data. Various ideas exist for performing MIAs, e.g., shadow model-based attacks [30] and prediction
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

