G RAPH T RAIL: Translating G NN Predictions into
Human-Interpretable Logical Rules

Burouj Armgaan, Manthan Dalmia
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
IIT Delhi, India
csz228001@iitd.ac.in,
manthandalmia2@gmail.com

Sourav Medya
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois, Chicago, USA
medya@uic.edu

Sayan Ranu
Department of Computer Science & Engineering and Yardi School of AI
IIT Delhi, India
sayanranu@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
Instance-level explanation of graph neural networks (G NNs) is a well-studied area.
These explainers, however, only explain an instance (e.g., a graph) and fail to
uncover the combinatorial reasoning learned by a G NN from the training data
towards making its predictions. In this work, we introduce G RAPH T RAIL, the first
end-to-end, post-hoc, global G NN explainer that translates the functioning of a
black-box G NN model to a boolean formula over the (sub)graph-level concepts
without relying on local explainers. G RAPH T RAIL is unique in automatically mining the discriminative subgraph-level concepts using Shapley values. Subsequently,
the G NN predictions are mapped to a human-interpretable boolean formula over
these concepts through symbolic regression. Extensive experiments across diverse
datasets and G NN architectures demonstrate significant improvement over existing
global explainers in mapping G NN predictions to faithful logical formulae. The robust and accurate performance of G RAPH T RAIL makes it invaluable for improving
GNNs and facilitates adoption in domains with strict transparency requirements.

1

Introduction and Related Works

G NNs have witnessed widespread adoption for graph-level prediction tasks due to their impressive
performance [35, 14, 46, 11, 41, 18, 38, 32, 5, 12, 53, 22]. Unfortunately, like other deep-learning
models, G NNs are considered black boxes due to their lack of transparency and interpretability. This
lack of interpretability presents a significant barrier to their adoption in critical domains such as
healthcare, finance, and law enforcement. Additionally, the ability to explain predictions is crucial
for understanding potential flaws in the model and generating insights for further refinement.
Existing Works: To introduce interpretability of G NNs, several algorithms have been proposed in
the literature [23]. Fig. G in the Appendix, which was originally presented in [23], and now updated
by us with more recent works, presents the taxonomy of G NN explainability research. As observed, a
vast majority of explainers focus on instance-level explanations.
Instance-level (or local) explainers [55, 29, 42, 58, 15, 57, 27, 45, 25, 3, 1, 51, 47, 26, 6, 19] take
a graph as input and identify components within this graph—-such as a subgraph—that maximally
influence the prediction made by a model. This instance-level focus limits its ability to extract
patterns utilized by G NNs at a global level across a multitude of graphs and how these patterns are
combined into a single decision-making rule. The objective of our work is to develop an end-to-end
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

