Dealing with Synthetic Data Contamination in Online
Continual Learning

Maorong Wang1 Nicolas Michel1,2 Jiafeng Mao1 Toshihiko Yamasaki1
1
The University of Tokyo 2 Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, LIGM
{ma_wang, yamasaki}@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
nicolas.michel@univ-eiffel.fr
mao@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Image generation has shown remarkable results in generating high-fidelity realistic
images, in particular with the advancement of diffusion-based models. However,
the prevalence of AI-generated images may have side effects for the machine
learning community that are not clearly identified. Meanwhile, the success of
deep learning in computer vision is driven by the massive dataset collected on
the Internet. The extensive quantity of synthetic data being added to the Internet would become an obstacle for future researchers to collect “clean” datasets
without AI-generated content. Prior research has shown that using datasets contaminated by synthetic images may result in performance degradation when used
for training. In this paper, we investigate the potential impact of contaminated
datasets on Online Continual Learning (CL) research. We experimentally show
that contaminated datasets might hinder the training of existing online CL methods.
Also, we propose Entropy Selection with Real-synthetic similarity Maximization
(ESRM), a method to alleviate the performance deterioration caused by synthetic
images when training online CL models. Experiments show that our method can
significantly alleviate performance deterioration, especially when the contamination is severe. For reproducibility, the source code of our work is available at
https://github.com/maorong-wang/ESRM.

1

Introduction

Continual Learning (CL) [10, 31, 41, 12] solves the problem of learning from a sequence of everemerging machine-learning tasks without forgetting previously learned knowledge. Defined by
learning manners, CL can be classified into two categories [4]: offline CL and online CL. In offline
CL (i.e. conventional CL), the learners can access the training dataset on current task multiple times
before proceeding to the next task. In online CL, the training data also comes in a continual data
stream, and the continual learner only sees the training data once. Besides learning manners, there are
also three typical CL settings [38]: Task-Incremental Learning (TIL), Domain-Incremental Learning
(DIL), and Class-Incremental Learning (CIL). In this paper, we investigate the more challenging CIL
setting in the online CL manner.
Image generation with deep generative models has shown remarkable success. Thanks to denoising
diffusion models [19, 34], Internet users are capable of generating high-fidelity and realistic images
within several seconds. Despite the astonishing quality of those images to human eyes, research
has shown that AI-generated content may be harmful when used to train machine learning models,
leading to potential performance deterioration [18, 28], bias amplification [8], loss of diversity [28],
etc.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

