Sample Efficient Bayesian Learning of
Causal Graphs from Interventions

Zihan Zhou*
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
zhou1248@purdue.edu

Muhammad Qasim Elahi*
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
elahi0@purdue.edu

Murat Kocaoglu
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
mkocaoglu@purdue.edu

Abstract
Causal discovery is a fundamental problem with applications spanning various areas
in science and engineering. It is well understood that solely using observational
data, one can only orient the causal graph up to its Markov equivalence class,
necessitating interventional data to learn the complete causal graph. Most works in
the literature design causal discovery policies with perfect interventions, i.e., they
have access to infinite interventional samples. This study considers a Bayesian
approach for learning causal graphs with limited interventional samples, mirroring
real-world scenarios where such samples are usually costly to obtain. By leveraging
the recent result of Wienöbst et al. [2023] on uniform DAG sampling in polynomial
time, we can efficiently enumerate all the cut configurations and their corresponding
interventional distributions of a target set, and further track their posteriors. Given
any number of interventional samples, our proposed algorithm randomly intervenes
on a set of target vertices that cut all the edges in the graph and returns a causal graph
according to the posterior of each target set. When the number of interventional
samples is large enough, we show theoretically that our proposed algorithm will
return the true causal graph with high probability. We compare our algorithm
against various baseline methods on simulated datasets, demonstrating its superior
accuracy measured by the structural Hamming distance between the learned DAG
and the ground truth. Additionally, we present a case study showing how this
algorithm could be modified to answer more general causal questions without
learning the whole graph. As an example, we illustrate that our method can be used
to estimate the causal effect of a variable that cannot be intervened.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery refers to learning the underlying causal graph of a data generating process using a
combination of observational and interventional data. This is a fundamental problem with applications
across various areas including economics, genomics, meteorology, could computing, and etc. [Pearl,
2009, Hoover, 1990, King et al., 2004, Ikram et al., 2022, Runge et al., 2019]. In recent decades, the
technological progress has facilitated the accumulation of vast quantities of observational data, i.e.,
data collected without perturbing the underling causal mechanisms. However, with only observational
data, one can only recover the causal graph up to its Markov equivalence class (MEC) [Verma, 1991,
Andersson et al., 1997]. In general, interventional data, i.e., data collected after a perturbation in
*Equal Contribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

