Regression under demographic parity constraints via
unlabeled post-processing

Gayane Taturyan
IRT SystemX, Université Gustave Eiffel,
Université Paul-Sabatier
gayane.taturyan@univ-eiffel.fr

Evgenii Chzhen
CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay
evgenii.chzhen@cnrs.fr

Mohamed Hebiri
Université Gustave Eiffel
mohamed.hebiri@univ-eiffel.fr

Abstract
We address the problem of performing regression while ensuring demographic
parity, even without access to sensitive attributes during inference. We present a
general-purpose post-processing algorithm that, using accurate estimates of the
regression function and a sensitive attribute predictor, generates predictions that
meet the demographic parity constraint. Our method involves discretization and
stochastic minimization of a smooth convex function. It is suitable for online
post-processing and multi-class classification tasks only involving unlabeled data
for the post-processing. Unlike prior methods, our approach is fully theory-driven.
We require precise control over the gradient norm of the convex function, and thus,
we rely on more advanced techniques than standard stochastic gradient descent.
Our algorithm is backed by finite-sample analysis and post-processing bounds,
with experimental results validating our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic fairness is an umbrella term for a subset of machine learning research that aims to better
understand, quantify, mitigate, evaluate, and conceptualize negative and/or positive effects of datadriven algorithms on the society. At least one direction in this field falls within theoretical machine
learning, where a form of fairness constraint, mainly inspired by common sense and formalized
within mathematical framework, is proposed as an arguably reasonable proxy for a definition of
ethical and non-discriminatory prediction. Even more particular sub-field of this research direction is
formalized within a paradigm of group fairness, that aims at mitigating negative impact (or provide
equal treatment to) towards sub-populations that share a common sensitive characteristic. Many
works fall within this category (Barocas et al., 2018, Calders et al., 2009, Chiappa et al., 2020, Dwork
et al., 2011, Feldman et al., 2015, Gordaliza et al., 2019, Hardt et al., 2016, Jiang et al., 2020, Lum
and Johndrow, 2016, Zafar et al., 2017, Zemel et al., 2013, just to name a few).
Even without going into debates on the relevance of a given definition of fairness, many, purely
mathematical and algorithmic questions remain unanswered in this field. The best theoretical
understanding of the problem is available for the demographic parity constraint in case of awareness—
the situation when the sensitive attribute is available at inference time (Agarwal et al., 2019, Chiappa
et al., 2020, Chzhen and Schreuder, 2020b, Chzhen et al., 2019, Denis et al., 2024, Gaucher et al.,
2023, Le Gouic et al., 2020). The latter case is well studies both in classification and regression
setups. This is no longer the case for other fairness constraints or the unawareness setup—the
situation when the sensitive attribute is not available at inference time. In particular, while the case of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

