NeuralFluid : Nueral Fluidic System Design and
Control with Differentiable Simulation
Yifei Li
MIT CSAIL

Yuchen Sun
Georgia Institute of Technology

Eftychios Sifakis
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Pingchuan Ma
MIT CSAIL

Tao Du
Tsinghua University, Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Bo Zhu
Georgia Institute of Technology

Wojciech Matusik
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
We present NeuralFluid , a novel framework to explore neural control and design
of complex fluidic systems with dynamic solid boundaries. Our system features a
fast differentiable Navier-Stokes solver with solid-fluid interface handling, a lowdimensional differentiable parametric geometry representation, a control-shape
co-design algorithm, and gym-like simulation environments to facilitate various
fluidic control design applications. Additionally, we present a benchmark of
design, control, and learning tasks on high-fidelity, high-resolution dynamic fluid
environments that pose challenges for existing differentiable fluid simulators. These
tasks include designing the control of artificial hearts, identifying robotic endeffector shapes, and controlling a fluid gate. By seamlessly incorporating our
differentiable fluid simulator into a learning framework, we demonstrate successful
design, control, and learning results that surpass gradient-free solutions in these
benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Complex fluidic systems play an important role in many engineering and scientific disciplines, encompassing applications at different length scales ranging from biomedical implants [1], microfluidic
devices [2], hydraulic devices to and flying robots [3]. Understanding these fluid-solid coupling
mechanisms in nature and mimicking their control strategies in artificial designs is essential for
advancing our control and design capabilities to synthesize novel solid-fluid systems.
Devising neural control algorithms to accurately manipulate the behavior of a complex fluidic system
and optimize its performance remains challenging due to the intricate interplay between device
geometry, control policies, flow dynamics, and the inherent physical and optimization constraints
unique to each fluidic system. On one hand, differentiable simulation fluid-system interactions are
inherently difficult because simulation is dynamic, involving a sequence of forward and backward
steps interleaved with control signals that are computationally expensive. On the other hand, naively
employing traditional control algorithms, mainly derived from their solid counterparts, to control
fluidic systems remains difficult due to characterizing the infinite degrees of freedom of fluid flows
and their interactions with solid boundaries. The co-design of fluid-solid systems, involving both
shape and control, is critical to exploring the optimal performance of these systems.
Currently, the machine learning community lacks a computational Gym-like [4] environment to
facilitate the exploration of fluidic systems manifesting strong solid-fluid interactions and controllable
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

