FlexPlanner: Flexible 3D Floorplanning via Deep
Reinforcement Learning in Hybrid Action Space with
Multi-Modality Representation

Ruizhe Zhong1 , Xingbo Du1 , Shixiong Kai2 , Zhentao Tang2 , Siyuan Xu2 ,
Jianye Hao2,3 , Mingxuan Yuan2 , Junchi Yan1∗
1
Dept. of CSE & School of AI & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{zerzerzerz271828, duxingbo, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
{kaishixiong, tangzhentao1, xusiyuan520, yuan.mingxuan}@huawei.com
jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
In the Integrated Circuit (IC) design flow, floorplanning (FP) determines the position and shape of each block. Serving as a prototype for downstream tasks, it
is critical and establishes the upper bound of the final PPA (Power, Performance,
Area). However, with the emergence of 3D IC with stacked layers, existing methods
are not flexible enough to handle the versatile constraints. Besides, they typically
face difficulties in aligning the cross-die modules in 3D ICs due to their heuristic
representations, which could potentially result in severe data transfer failures. To
address these issues, we propose FlexPlanner, a flexible learning-based method in
hybrid action space with multi-modality representation to simultaneously handle
position, aspect ratio, and alignment of blocks. To our best knowledge, FlexPlanner
is the first learning-based approach to discard heuristic-based search in the 3D FP
task. Thus, the solution space is not limited by the heuristic floorplanning representation, allowing for significant improvements in both wirelength and alignment
scores. Specifically, FlexPlanner models 3D FP based on multi-modalities, including vision, graph, and sequence. To address the non-trivial heuristic-dependent
issue, we design a sophisticated policy network with hybrid action space and
asynchronous layer decision mechanism that allow for determining the versatile
properties of each block. Experiments on public benchmarks MCNC and GSRC
show the effectiveness. We significantly improve the alignment score from 0.474
to 0.940 and achieve an average reduction of 16% in wirelength. Moreover, our
method also demonstrates zero-shot transferability on unseen circuits. Code is
publicly available at: https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/EDA-AI.

1

Introduction

In the very beginning stage of physical design in Electronic Design Automation (EDA), floorplanning
(FP) plays a critical role. As a subsequent stage of hardware design [1] and logic synthesis [2],
floorplanning provides a prototype for downstream tasks [3], ranging from power delivery network
(PDN) design [4] to placement [5, 6] & routing [7, 8] (P&R), hence determining the upper bound
of final PPA (Power, Performance, Area). Recognized as an NP-hard problem [9], FP establishes
∗
Corresponding Author. This work was partly supported by NSFC (62222607, 92370201) and Shanghai
Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

