Artemis: Towards Referential Understanding in
Complex Videos

Jihao Qiu1∗ Yuan Zhang1∗
Pengyu Yan2
1

Xi Tang1∗

David Doermann2

Lingxi Xie

Qixiang Ye1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

2

Tianren Ma1
Yunjie Tian1,2†

University at Buffalo

{qiujiahao19, zhangyuan192, tangxi19, matianren18, tianyunjie19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
pyan4@buffalo.edu doermann@buffalo.edu 198808xc@gmail.com qxye@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Videos carry rich visual information including object description, action, interaction, etc., but the existing multimodal large language models (MLLMs) fell short
in referential understanding scenarios such as video-based referring. In this paper,
we present Artemis, an MLLM that pushes video-based referential understanding to a finer level. Given a video, Artemis receives a natural-language question
with a bounding box in any video frame and describes the referred target in the
entire video. The key to achieving this goal lies in extracting compact, targetspecific video features, where we set a solid baseline by tracking and selecting
spatiotemporal features from the video. We train Artemis on the newly established
VideoRef45K dataset with 45K video-QA pairs and design a computationally efficient, three-stage training procedure. Results are promising both quantitatively
and qualitatively. Additionally, we show that Artemis can be integrated with video
grounding and text summarization tools to understand more complex scenarios.
Code and data are available at https://github.com/qiujihao19/Artemis.

1

Introduction

The past year has witnessed rapid progress of multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [33, 68,
40], offering abundant abilities of open-world image understanding with language-based dialogues.
In comparison, there are fewer studies on training MLLMs for video understanding, albeit videos are
much more informative than still images. Existing video-based MLLMs [29, 61, 37, 31, 38] mostly
focus on superficial dialogues in which the video is encoded holistically, inevitably lacking the ability
to understand fine-level video contents, e.g., describing a user-specific target in the video.
We are considering a new task called video-based referential understanding to compensate for the
limitation. Specifically, we are interested in complex videos that span 20–30 seconds and the target
performs multiple actions during this period. Given a video, the MLLM tries to answer a question
like ‘What is the target <region> doing in this video?’ where <region> refers to a
bounding box in any video frame. We argue that the task is not only challenging as it requires
feature extraction, tracking, summarization, etc., but also important because it lays the foundation of
finer-level video understanding. However, as shown in Figure 1, existing MLLMs often fell short in
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

