Distributed Lion for Communication Efficient
Distributed Training

Bo Liu∗
The University of Texas at Austin
bliu@cs.utexas.edu

Lemeng Wu∗
Meta AI
lmwu@google.com

Kaizhao Liang
The University of Texas at Austin
kaizhaol@utexas.edu

Jiaxu Zhu
Meta AI
jiaxuzhu@meta.com

Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi
Meta AI
raghuraman@meta.com

Lizhang Chen∗
The University of Texas at Austin
lzchen@utexas.edu
Chen Liang
Google
crazydonkey@google.com

Qiang Liu
The University of Texas at Austin
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
The Lion optimizer has been a promising competitor with the AdamW for training
large AI models, with advantages in memory, computation, and sample efficiency.
In this paper, we introduce Distributed Lion, an innovative adaptation of Lion
for distributed training environments. Leveraging the sign operator in Lion, our
Distributed Lion only requires to communicate binary or lower-precision vectors
between workers to the center server, significantly reducing the communication
cost. Our theoretical analysis confirms Distributed Lion’s convergence properties.
Empirical results demonstrate its robustness across a range of tasks, worker counts,
and batch sizes, on both vision and language problems. Notably, Distributed Lion
attains comparable performance to standard Lion or AdamW optimizers applied
on aggregated gradients, but with significantly reduced communication bandwidth.
This feature is particularly advantageous for training large models. In addition,
we also demonstrate that Distributed Lion presents a more favorable performancebandwidth balance compared to existing efficient distributed methods such as deep
gradient compression and ternary gradients.

1

Introduction

The pursuit of modern artificial intelligence hinges on the training of large-scale models like large
language models[28] and large vision models (LVM)[20]. As the stakes – in terms of time, cost, and
environmental impact – grow ever higher for training expansive AI systems, the hunt for efficient
optimizers becomes critical.
Recently, a new optimization named Lion (evolved sign momentum) [11] has been discovered with
an evolutionary program. It was shown that it exhibits performance on par with the current state-ofthe-art AdamW [26] across a wide range of tasks, while reducing the memory cost and training time.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

