Unified Guidance for Geometry-Conditioned
Molecular Generation
Sirine Ayadi∗1,2

Leon Hetzel∗1,2,3

Fabian Theis1,2,3

1

Johanna Sommer∗1,2
Stephan Günnemann1,2

School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich
2
Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich
3
Center for Computation Health, Helmholtz Munich
{si.ayadi, l.hetzel, jm.sommer, f.theis, s.guennemann}@tum.de

Abstract
Effectively designing molecular geometries is essential to advancing pharmaceutical innovations, a domain, which has experienced great attention through the
success of generative models and, in particular, diffusion models. However, current
molecular diffusion models are tailored towards a specific downstream task and
lack adaptability. We introduce UniGuide, a framework for controlled geometric
guidance of unconditional diffusion models that allows flexible conditioning during
inference without the requirement of extra training or networks. We show how
applications such as structure-based, fragment-based, and ligand-based drug design
are formulated in the UniGuide framework and demonstrate on-par or superior
performance compared to specialised models. Offering a more versatile approach,
UniGuide has the potential to streamline the development of molecular generative
models, allowing them to be readily used in diverse application scenarios.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have emerged as an important class of generative models in various domains,
including computer vision [1], signal processing [2], computational chemistry, and drug discovery
[3–8]. By gradually adding noise to data samples and learning the reverse process of removing noise,
diffusion models effectively transform noisy samples into structured data [9, 10]. In the context of
drug discovery, it is essential to effectively address downstream tasks, which often pose specific
geometric conditions. Examples of this include (i) Structure-based drug design (SBDD) that aims
to create small ligands that fit given receptor binding sites [11], (ii) Fragment-based drug design
(FBDD) that designs molecules by elaborating known scaffolds [12, 13], or (iii) Ligand-based drug
design (LBDD) which generates molecules that fit a certain shape [14]. Recent works address these
tasks by either incorporating specialised models or focusing on conditions that directly resemble
molecular structures. In both cases, this narrow focus restricts their adaptability to new or slightly
altered settings.
We address the challenge of adaptability by introducing UniGuide, a method that unifies guidance for
geometry-conditioned molecular generation, see Fig. 1. The key element for achieving this unification
is the condition map, which transforms complex geometric conditions to match the diffusion model’s
∗

Equal contribution
Project Page: www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/uniguide

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

