Functionally Constrained Algorithm Solves
Convex Simple Bilevel Problems

Huaqing Zhang* 1,2
1

Lesi Chen* 1,2

Jing Xu1

Jingzhao Zhang1,2,3

IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qizhi Institute
3
Shanghai AI Lab

{zhanghq22, chenlc23, xujing21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
jingzhaoz@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper studies simple bilevel problems, where a convex upper-level function is
minimized over the optimal solutions of a convex lower-level problem. We first
show the fundamental difficulty of simple bilevel problems, that the approximate
optimal value of such problems is not obtainable by first-order zero-respecting
algorithms. Then we follow recent works to pursue the weak approximate solutions.
For this goal, we propose a novel method by reformulating them into functionally
constrained problems. Our method achieves near-optimal rates for both smooth and
nonsmooth problems. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first near-optimal
algorithm that works under standard assumptions of smoothness or Lipschitz
continuity for the objective functions.

1

Introduction

This work focuses on the following optimization problem:
min f (x) s.t.
x∈Z

x ∈ Xg∗ ≜ arg min g(z),
z∈Z

(1)

where f, g are convex and continuous functions and Z ⊆ Rn is a compact convex set. Such a problem
is often referred to as “simple bilevel optimization” in the literature, as the upper-level objective
function f is minimized over the solution set of a lower-level problem. It captures a hierarchical
structure and thus has many applications in machine learning, including lexicographic optimization
[13, 15] and lifelong learning [13, 18]. Understanding the structure of simple bilevel optimization
and designing efficient algorithms for it is vital and has gained massive attention in recent years
[1, 5, 6, 10, 12–14, 19, 23–27].
To solve the problem, one may observe that Problem (1) is equivalent to the convex optimization
problem minx∈Xg∗ f (x) with implicitly defined convex domain Xg∗ . Hence, it is natural to try to
design first-order methods to find x̂ ∈ Rn such that
|f (x̂) − f ∗ | ≤ ϵf ,
∗

g(x̂) − g ∗ ≤ ϵg ,
∗

(2)

where f is the optimal value of Problem (1) and g is the optimal value of the lower-level problem
(minz∈Z g(z)). We highlight the asymmetry in f and g here. f ∗ is the minimal in the constrained
set Xg∗ , and hence it is possible that f (x) < f ∗ for some x ∈ Z. On the other hand, g ∗ is globally
minimal and hence g ∗ ≤ g(x) for any x ∈ Z. Such asymmetry is natural as the role of f, g are
inherently asymmetrical for bilevel problems. We call such x̂ a (ϵf , ϵg )-absolute optimal solution.
*

Equal contributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

