Randomized algorithms and PAC bounds for inverse
reinforcement learning in continuous spaces

Angeliki Kamoutsi
EPFL, Switzerland
angeliki.kamoutsi@epfl.ch
Tobias Sutter
University of Konstanz, Germany
tob.sutter@uni-konstanz.de

Peter Schmitt-Förster
University of Konstanz, Germany
peter.schmitt-foerster@uni-konstanz.de
Volkan Cevher
EPFL, Switzerland
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

John Lygeros
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
jlygeros@ethz.ch

Abstract
This work studies discrete-time discounted Markov decision processes with continuous state and action spaces and addresses the inverse problem of inferring a cost
function from observed optimal behavior. We first consider the case in which we
have access to the entire expert policy and characterize the set of solutions to the
inverse problem by using occupation measures, linear duality, and complementary
slackness conditions. To avoid trivial solutions and ill-posedness, we introduce a
natural linear normalization constraint. This results in an infinite-dimensional linear
feasibility problem, prompting a thorough analysis of its properties. Next, we use
linear function approximators and adopt a randomized approach, namely the scenario approach and related probabilistic feasibility guarantees, to derive ε-optimal
solutions for the inverse problem. We further discuss the sample complexity for
a desired approximation accuracy. Finally, we deal with the more realistic case
where we only have access to a finite set of expert demonstrations and a generative
model and provide bounds on the error made when working with samples.

1

Introduction

In the standard reinforcement learning (RL) setting [1, 2, 3, 4], a cost signal is given to instruct agents
on completing a desired task. However, oftentimes, it is either too challenging to optimize a given
cost (e.g., due to sparsity), or it is prohibitively hard to manually engineer a cost function that induces
complex and multi-faceted optimal behaviors. At the same time, in many real-world scenarios,
encoding preferences using expert demonstrations is easy and provides an intuitive and human-centric
interface for behavioral specification [5, 6, 7]. Considering the inverse reinforcement (IRL) problem
involves deducing a cost function from observed optimal behavior. IRL is actively researched
with applications in engineering, operations research, and biology [8, 9, 10]. There are two main
motivations behind inverse decision-making. The first one concerns situations where the cost function
is of interest by itself, e.g., for scientific inquiry, modeling of human and animal behavior [11, 12]
or modeling of other cooperative or adversarial agents [13]. The second one concerns the task of
imitation or apprenticeship learning [14] by first recovering the expert’s cost function and then using
it to reproduce and synthesize the optimal behavior. For instance, in engineering, IRL can be used to
explain and imitate the observed expert behavior, e.g., in the highway driving task [14, 15], parking
lot navigation [16], and urban navigation [17]. Other examples can be found in humanoid robotics
and understanding of human locomotion [18]. Despite extensive research efforts, our understanding
of IRL still has significant limitations. One major gap lies in the absence of algorithms designed
for continuous state and action spaces, which are crucial for numerous promising applications like
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

