2D-OOB: Attributing Data Contribution Through
Joint Valuation Framework
Yifan Sun∗
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
yifan50@illinois.edu

Jingyan Shen∗
Columbia University
js5544@columbia.edu

Yongchan Kwon†
Columbia University
yk3012@columbia.edu

Abstract
Data valuation has emerged as a powerful framework for quantifying each datum’s
contribution to the training of a machine learning model. However, it is crucial
to recognize that the quality of cells within a single data point can vary greatly
in practice. For example, even in the case of an abnormal data point, not all cells
are necessarily noisy. The single scalar score assigned by existing data valuation
methods blurs the distinction between noisy and clean cells of a data point, making
it challenging to interpret the data values. In this paper, we propose 2D-OOB, an
out-of-bag estimation framework for jointly determining helpful (or detrimental)
samples as well as the particular cells that drive them. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate that 2D-OOB achieves state-of-the-art performance across
multiple use cases while being exponentially faster. Specifically, 2D-OOB shows
promising results in detecting and rectifying fine-grained outliers at the cell level,
and localizing backdoor triggers in data poisoning attacks.

1

Introduction

From customer behavior prediction and medical image analysis to autonomous driving and policy
making, machine learning (ML) systems process ever increasing amounts of data. In such data-rich
regimes, a fraction of the samples is often noisy, incorrect annotations are likely to occur, and uniform
data quality standards become difficult to enforce. To address these challenges, data valuation emerges
as a research field receiving increasing attention, focusing on properly assessing the contribution of
each datum to ML training [13, 26]. These methods have proven useful in identifying low-quality
samples that can be detrimental to model performance, as well as selecting subsets of data that are
representative of enhanced model performance [52, 30, 49]. Furthermore, they are widely applicable
in data marketplace for fair revenue allocation and incentive design [55, 48, 43, 5].
Nevertheless, existing data valuation methods assign a scalar score to each datum, thereby failing to
account for the varied roles of individual cells. This leaves the valuation rationale unclear and can be
unsatisfactory and sub-optimal in various practical scenarios. Firstly, whenever a score is assigned
to a data point by a particular data valuation method, it is crucial to understand the underlying
justifications to ensure transparency and reliability, especially in high-stakes decision making [42].
Secondly, it is important to recognize the fact that even if a data point is of low quality, it is rarely the
case that all the cells within this data point are noisy [40, 29, 46]. The absence of detailed insights
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

