A Versatile Diffusion Transformer with Mixture of
Noise Levels for Audiovisual Generation
Gwanghyun Kim1,:,˚
Brendan Jou2
Lu Jiang4,˚
1

Alonso Martinez2

José Lezama2
Aren Jansen2

Seoul National University

2

Yu-Chuan Su2

Agrim Gupta3,˚
Jacob Walker2

Google DeepMind

3

Lijun Yu4,˚

Krishna Somandepalli2,:

Stanford University 4 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Training diffusion models for audiovisual sequences allows for a range of generation tasks by learning conditional distributions of various input-output combinations
of the two modalities. Nevertheless, this strategy often requires training a separate
model for each task which is expensive. Here, we propose a novel training approach
to effectively learn arbitrary conditional distributions in the audiovisual space. Our
key contribution lies in how we parameterize the diffusion timestep in the forward
diffusion process. Instead of the standard fixed diffusion timestep, we propose
applying variable diffusion timesteps across the temporal dimension and across
modalities of the inputs. This formulation offers flexibility to introduce variable
noise levels for various portions of the input, hence the term mixture of noise levels.
We propose a transformer-based audiovisual latent diffusion model and show that
it can be trained in a task-agnostic fashion using our approach to enable a variety
of audiovisual generation tasks at inference time. Experiments demonstrate the
versatility of our method in tackling cross-modal and multimodal interpolation
tasks in the audiovisual space. Notably, our proposed approach surpasses baselines
in generating temporally and perceptually consistent samples conditioned on the
input. Project page: avdit2024.github.io

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a remarkable surge in the development and exploration of multimodal
diffusion models. Prominent examples include text-to-image (T2I) [37, 41, 54, 39], text-to-video
(T2V) [17, 6, 12]. Despite notable advancements, generating sequences across multiple modalities,
like video and audio, remains challenging and is an open research area.
Introducing a time axis to static data paves the way for diverse multimodal sequential tasks including
cross-modal generation (e.g., audio-to-video), multimodal interpolation, and audiovisual continuation
as shown in Fig 1. Each task can be further divided based on various input-output combinations of
the modalities, leading to a number of conditional distributions. For example, with video data x1:N
0
and audio data y01:N of length N , The complexity of configurations grows with tasks like audiovisual
pn `1:N q
pn `1:N q p1:nc q
p1:n q
continuation, ppx0 c
, y0 c
|x0
, y0 c q, where nc is the input frame length used for
pnPNxc q

conditioning, and multimodal interpolation, ppx0
˚
:

pnPNyc q

, y0

pnPNx q

|x0

pnPNy q

, y0

q, where Nx and

Work done while at Google.
Equal contribution. Corresponding author: Krishna Somandepalli xksoman@google.comy

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

