Learning Optimal Lattice Vector Quantizers for
End-to-end Neural Image Compression

Xi Zhang1 Xiaolin Wu2∗
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University
xzhang9308@gmail.com, xlw@swjtu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
It is customary to deploy uniform scalar quantization in the end-to-end optimized
Neural image compression methods, instead of more powerful vector quantization,
due to the high complexity of the latter. Lattice vector quantization (LVQ), on the
other hand, presents a compelling alternative, which can exploit inter-feature dependencies more effectively while keeping computational efficiency almost the same
as scalar quantization. However, traditional LVQ structures are designed/optimized
for uniform source distributions, hence nonadaptive and suboptimal for real source
distributions of latent code space for Neural image compression tasks. In this paper,
we propose a novel learning method to overcome this weakness by designing the
rate-distortion optimal lattice vector quantization (OLVQ) codebooks with respect
to the sample statistics of the latent features to be compressed. By being able to
better fit the LVQ structures to any given latent sample distribution, the proposed
OLVQ method improves the rate-distortion performances of the existing quantization schemes in neural image compression significantly, while retaining the
amenability of uniform scalar quantization.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network (DNN) based image compression methods have quickly merged as the winner of
rate-distortion performance over all their competitors, which is a remarkable achievement considering
decades of slow progress in this heavily researched field. Their successes are mostly due to the
capability of DNNs to learn compact and yet versatile latent representations of images. Nevertheless,
all neural image compression systems will not be complete without the quantization and entropy
coding modules for the learnt latent features.
Contrary to the sophistication of highly expressive non-linear latent image representations, quantizing
the latent representations (the bottleneck of the autoencoder compression architecture) is done, in
current prevailing practice, by uniform scalar quantizer. This design decision is apparently made
in favor of the simplicity and computational efficiency. However, uniform scalar quantization is
inevitably limited in capturing complex inter-feature dependencies present in the latent space, leading
to lower coding efficiency, particularly for highly correlated or skewed source distributions.
In data compression, a common approach of overcoming the limitations of scalar quantization is vector
quantization (VQ), in which a vector of tokens is quantized as a whole into a VQ codeword, allowing
for effective exploitation of inter-feature dependencies. But designing optimal vector quantizers is an
NP-hard problem. Moreover, the VQ encoding requires the expensive nearest neighbor search in high
dimensional space. One way of balancing between the complexity and compression performance is to
introduce some structures into the quantizers. Lattice vector quantization (LVQ) is such an approach.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

