EigenVI: score-based variational inference with
orthogonal function expansions

Diana Cai
Flatiron Institute
dcai@flatironinstitute.org

Chirag Modi
Flatiron Institute
cmodi@flatironinstitute.org

Charles C. Margossian
Flatiron Institute
cmargossian@flatironinstitute.org
David M. Blei
Columbia University
david.blei@columbia.edu

Robert M. Gower
Flatiron Institute
rgower@flatironinstitute.org
Lawrence K. Saul
Flatiron Institute
lsaul@flatironinstitute.org

Abstract
We develop EigenVI, an eigenvalue-based approach for black-box variational inference (BBVI). EigenVI constructs its variational approximations from orthogonal
function expansions. For distributions over RD , the lowest order term in these
expansions provides a Gaussian variational approximation, while higher-order
terms provide a systematic way to model non-Gaussianity. These approximations
are flexible enough to model complex distributions (multimodal, asymmetric), but
they are simple enough that one can calculate their low-order moments and draw
samples from them. EigenVI can also model other types of random variables (e.g.,
nonnegative, bounded) by constructing variational approximations from different
families of orthogonal functions. Within these families, EigenVI computes the
variational approximation that best matches the score function of the target distribution by minimizing a stochastic estimate of the Fisher divergence. Notably, this
optimization reduces to solving a minimum eigenvalue problem, so that EigenVI
effectively sidesteps the iterative gradient-based optimizations that are required
for many other BBVI algorithms. (Gradient-based methods can be sensitive to
learning rates, termination criteria, and other tunable hyperparameters.) We use
EigenVI to approximate a variety of target distributions, including a benchmark
suite of Bayesian models from posteriordb. On these distributions, we find that
EigenVI is more accurate than existing methods for Gaussian BBVI.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic modeling is a cornerstone of modern data analysis, uncertainty quantification, and
decision making. A key challenge of probabilistic inference is computing a target distribution of
interest; for instance, in Bayesian modeling, the goal is to compute a posterior distribution, which is
often intractable. Variational inference (VI) [5, 21, 45] is a popular method for scalable probabilistic
inference that has worked across a range of applications. The idea behind VI is to approximate the
target distribution by the closest member of some tractable family.
One major focus of research is to develop black-box algorithms for variational inference [6, 15,
23, 27, 32, 37, 40, 44, 46]. Algorithms for black-box variational inference (BBVI) can be used to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

