The State of Data Curation at NeurIPS: An
Assessment of Dataset Development Practices in the
Datasets and Benchmarks Track
Eshta Bhardwaj1,3 , Harshit Gujral2 , Siyi Wu2 , Ciara Zogheib1 , Tegan Maharaj1 , and Christoph Becker1,3
1

2

Faculty of Information, University of Toronto
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
3
Digital Curation Institute, University of Toronto

Abstract
Data curation is a field with origins in librarianship and archives, whose scholarship and thinking on data issues go back centuries, if not millennia. The field
of machine learning is increasingly observing the importance of data curation to
the advancement of both applications and fundamental understanding of machine
learning models – evidenced not least by the creation of the Datasets and Benchmarks track itself. This work provides an analysis of recent dataset development
practices at NeurIPS through the lens of data curation. We present an evaluation
framework for dataset documentation, consisting of a rubric and toolkit developed through a thorough literature review of data curation principles. We use
the framework to systematically assess the strengths and weaknesses in current
dataset development practices of 60 datasets published in the NeurIPS Datasets
and Benchmarks track from 2021-2023. We summarize key findings and trends.
Results indicate greater need for documentation about environmental footprint,
ethical considerations, and data management. We suggest targeted strategies and
resources to improve documentation in these areas and provide recommendations
for the NeurIPS peer-review process that prioritize rigorous data curation in ML.
We also provide guidelines for dataset developers on the use of our rubric as a
standalone tool. Finally, we provide results in the format of a dataset that showcases aspects of recommended data curation practices. Our rubric and results are of
interest for improving data curation practices broadly in the field of ML as well as
to data curation and science and technology studies scholars studying practices in
ML. Our aim is to support continued improvement in interdisciplinary research on
dataset practices, ultimately improving the reusability and reproducibility of new
datasets and benchmarks, enabling standardized and informed human oversight,
and strengthening the foundation of rigorous and responsible ML research.

1

Introduction

The NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks (D&B) track was created in 2021 to enhance the development
of datasets in line with the exponential growth of applications of machine learning (ML). A key
challenge this track aimed to address is that of datasets being used outside their original scope as
benchmarks [43, 81, 87, 102] – among other potential issues, this creates the possibility of field-level
overfitting, as well as unanticipated ethical and privacy problems. NeurIPS sought to address this
by encouraging the development of new datasets for ML, improving the quality of datasets being
produced, and emphasizing the importance of the role of data within ML. The introduction of new,
tailored peer-review guidelines also enabled and incentivized publication of datasets and benchmarks.
The D&B track is thus uniquely positioned to influence and guide the quality and ethicality of datasets
being released and bolster responsible dataset development practices.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

