Federated Model Heterogeneous
Matryoshka Representation Learning

Liping Yi1,2 , Han Yu2 , Chao Ren2 , Gang Wang1,∗ , Xiaoguang Liu1,∗, Xiaoxiao Li3,4
College of Computer Science, TMCC, SysNet, DISSec, GTIISC, Nankai University, China
2
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Canada
4
Vector Institute, Canada
{yiliping, wgzwp, liuxg}@nbjl.nankai.edu.cn
{han.yu, chao.ren}@ntu.edu.sg, xiaoxiao.li@ece.ubc.ca
1

Abstract
Model heterogeneous federated learning (MHeteroFL) enables FL clients to collaboratively train models with heterogeneous structures in a distributed fashion.
However, existing MHeteroFL methods rely on training loss to transfer knowledge
between the client model and the server model, resulting in limited knowledge
exchange. To address this limitation, we propose the Federated model heterogeneous Matryoshka Representation Learning (FedMRL) approach for supervised
learning tasks. It adds an auxiliary small homogeneous model shared by clients
with heterogeneous local models. (1) The generalized and personalized representations extracted by the two models’ feature extractors are fused by a personalized
lightweight representation projector. This step enables representation fusion to
adapt to local data distribution. (2) The fused representation is then used to
construct Matryoshka representations with multi-dimensional and multi-granular
embedded representations learned by the global homogeneous model header and
the local heterogeneous model header. This step facilitates multi-perspective representation learning and improves model learning capability. Theoretical analysis
shows that FedMRL achieves a O(1/T ) non-convex convergence rate. Extensive
experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate its superior model accuracy with
low communication and computational costs compared to seven state-of-the-art
baselines. It achieves up to 8.48% and 24.94% accuracy improvement compared
with the state-of-the-art and the best same-category baseline, respectively.

1

Introduction

Traditional federated learning (FL) [32, 47, 46, 12] often relies on a central FL server to coordinate
multiple data owners (a.k.a., FL clients) to train a global shared model without exposing local data.
In each communication round, the server broadcasts the global model to the clients. A client trains
it on its local data and sends the updated local model to the FL server. The server aggregates local
models to produce a new global model. These steps are repeated until the global model converges.
During the runtime of FL, only model parameters are transmitted between the server and clients,
preserving data privacy[14, 56, 51].
However, the above design cannot handle the following heterogeneity challenges [53] commonly
found in practical FL applications: (1) Data heterogeneity [42]: FL clients’ local data often follow nonindependent and identically distributions (non-IID). A single global model produced by aggregating
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

