Implicit Regularization of Sharpness-Aware
Minimization for Scale-Invariant Problems
Bingcong Li

Liang Zhang

Niao He

Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{bingcong.li, liang.zhang, niao.he}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) improves generalization of various deep
learning tasks. Motivated by popular architectures such as LoRA, we explore the
implicit regularization of SAM for scale-invariant problems involving two groups of
variables. Instead of focusing on commonly used sharpness, this work introduces
a concept termed balancedness, defined as the difference between the squared
norm of two variables. This allows us to depict richer global behaviors of SAM. In
particular, our theoretical and empirical findings reveal that i) SAM promotes balancedness; and ii) the regularization on balancedness is data-responsive – outliers
have stronger impact. The latter coincides with empirical observations that SAM
outperforms SGD in the presence of outliers. Leveraging the implicit regularization,
we develop a resource-efficient SAM variant, balancedness-aware regularization
(BAR), tailored for scale-invariant problems such as finetuning language models
with LoRA. BAR saves 95% computational overhead of SAM, with enhanced test
performance across various tasks on RoBERTa, GPT2, and OPT-1.3B.

1

Introduction

Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) is emerging as an appealing optimizer, because it enhances
generalization performance on various downstream tasks across vision and language applications
(Foret et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Bahri et al., 2022). The success of SAM is typically explained
using its implicit regularization (IR) toward a flat solution (Wen et al., 2023a).
However, existing results only characterize sharpness/flatness near local minima (Wen et al., 2023a).
Little is known about early convergence, despite its crucial role in SAM’s implicit regularization
(Agarwala and Dauphin, 2023). In addition, theoretical understanding of SAM highly hinges upon
the existence of positive eigenvalues of Hessians (Wen et al., 2023a), leaving gaps in nonconvex
scenarios where the Hessian can be negative definite. The limitations above lead to our first question
(Q1): can we broaden the scope of implicit regularization to depict global behaviors in SAM?
Moreover, scenarios where SAM popularizes often involve certain form of data anomalies, such as
outliers and large data variance. SAM has provable generalization benefits on sparse coding problems
in the small signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regime (Chen et al., 2023). Remarkable performance of SAM
is also observed under distributional shifts, e.g., domain adaptation (Wang et al., 2023), meta-learning
(Abbas et al., 2022), and transfer learning in language models (Bahri et al., 2022; Sherborne et al.,
2023). Evidences above motivate our second question (Q2): can implicit regularization of SAM
reflect its enhanced performance under data anomalies?
This work answers both Q1 and Q2 within a class of scale-invariant problems. The focus on scaleinvariance is motivated by its prominence in deep learning architectures. Consider variables x ∈ Rd1
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

