Distributional Preference Alignment of LLMs
via Optimal Transport
Igor Melnyk⋆∗, Youssef Mroueh⋆ , Brian Belgodere⋆ , Mattia Rigotti, Apoorva Nitsure,
Mikhail Yurochkin, Kristjan Greenewald, Jiri Navratil, and Jarret Ross
IBM Research
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Current LLM alignment techniques use pairwise human preferences at a sample
level, and as such, they do not imply an alignment on the distributional level. We
propose in this paper Alignment via Optimal Transport (AOT), a novel method for
distributional preference alignment of LLMs. AOT aligns LLMs on unpaired preference data by making the reward distribution of the positive samples stochastically
dominant in the first order on the distribution of negative samples. We introduce a
convex relaxation of this first-order stochastic dominance and cast it as an optimal
transport problem with a smooth and convex cost. Thanks to the one-dimensional
nature of the resulting optimal transport problem and the convexity of the cost, it
has a closed-form solution via sorting on empirical measures. We fine-tune LLMs
with this AOT objective, which enables alignment by penalizing the violation of
the stochastic dominance of the reward distribution of the positive samples on the
reward distribution of the negative samples. We analyze the sample complexity
of AOT by considering the dual of the OT problem and show that it converges at
the parametric rate. Empirically, we show on a diverse set of alignment datasets
and LLMs that AOT leads to state-of-the-art models in the 7B family of models
when evaluated with Open LLM Benchmarks and AlpacaEval. Code for AOT is
available in the Hugging Face TRL library https://ibm.biz/AOT_TRL.

1

Introduction

Aligning Large Language Models (LLMs) with human preferences is a crucial step in making these
models safe and having them follow instructions faithfully. By ensuring that LLMs adhere to human
preferences, values, ethics, and desired behaviors we can reduce the risk of generating harmful,
biased, or inappropriate content.
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback, RLHF [Christiano et al., 2017, Stiennon et al., 2020,
Ouyang et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2022], achieves this by learning a reward model on human preference
data, followed by fine-tuning the LLM to maximize the reward score while staying close to the initial
reference policy to retain utility from the pre-trained model. Recently, new paradigms departed from
RLHF towards direct preference optimization methods such as DPO [Rafailov et al., 2024], SLIC
[Zhao et al., 2023], and Identity Policy optimization [Azar et al., 2024]. In these approaches, the
reward is expressed in terms of the log-likelihood ratio between the LLM policy and the reference
model. The training is done on paired preference data, i.e. as triplets of prompts, chosen and rejected
sentences, where for each prompt a chosen and a rejected sample are available. The training objective
is to maximize the margin between the log-likelihood ratio evaluated on the chosen sentence versus
∗

Now with Capital One; Work done while at IBM Research

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

