Improving the Worst-Case Bidirectional
Communication Complexity for Nonconvex
Distributed Optimization under Function Similarity

Kaja Gruntkowska
KAUST∗

Alexander Tyurin
KAUST∗, AIRI†, Skoltech‡

Peter Richtárik
KAUST∗

Abstract
Effective communication between the server and workers plays a key role in
distributed optimization. In this paper, we focus on optimizing communication,
uncovering inefficiencies in prevalent downlink compression approaches. Considering first the pure setup where the uplink communication costs are negligible,
we introduce MARINA-P, a novel method for downlink compression, employing
a collection of correlated compressors. Theoretical analysis demonstrates that
MARINA-P with permutation compressors can achieve a server-to-worker communication complexity improving with the number of workers, thus being provably
superior to existing algorithms. We further show that MARINA-P can serve as a
starting point for extensions such as methods supporting bidirectional compression:
we introduce M3, a method combining MARINA-P with uplink compression and a
momentum step, achieving bidirectional compression with provable improvements
in total communication complexity as the number of workers increases. Theoretical
findings align closely with empirical experiments, underscoring the efficiency of
the proposed algorithms.

1

Introduction

In federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017; Konečný et al., 2016) and large-scale machine learning
(Ramesh et al., 2021; OpenAI, 2023), a typical environment consists of multiple devices working together to train a model. Facilitating this collaborative process requires the transmission of
substantial information (e.g., gradients, current model) between these devices. In the centralized
framework, communication takes place via a server. As a result, practical challenges arise due to
the large size of machine learning models and network speed limitations, potentially creating a
communication bottleneck (Kairouz et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023a). One possible strategy to reduce
this communication burden is to use lossy compression (Seide et al., 2014; Alistarh et al., 2017). Our
paper focuses on this research direction.
We consider the following nonconvex distributed optimization task:


n
P
min f (x) := n1
fi (x) ,
x∈Rd

(1)

i=1

where x ∈ Rd is the vector of parameters of the model, n is the number of workers and fi : Rd →
R, i ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n} are smooth nonconvex functions. We investigate the scenario where
the functions fi are stored on n distinct workers, each directly connected to the server via some
∗

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
AIRI, Moscow, Russia
‡
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

