Universal Online Convex Optimization
with 1 Projection per Round

1

Wenhao Yang1,2 , Yibo Wang1,2 , Peng Zhao1,2 , Lijun Zhang1,2,∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{yangwh, wangyb, zhaop, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
To address the uncertainty in function types, recent progress in online convex
optimization (OCO) has spurred the development of universal algorithms that
simultaneously attain minimax rates for multiple types of convex functions. However, for a T -round online problem, state-of-the-art methods typically conduct
O(log T ) projections onto the domain in each round, a process potentially timeconsuming with complicated feasible sets. In this paper, inspired by the black-box
reduction of Cutkosky and Orabona [2018], we employ a surrogate loss defined
over simpler domains to develop universal OCO algorithms that only require 1
projection. Embracing the framework of prediction with expert advice, we maintain
a set of experts for each type of functions and aggregate their predictions via a
meta-algorithm. The crux of our approach lies in a uniquely designed expert-loss
for strongly convex functions, stemming from an innovative decomposition of the
regret into the meta-regret and the expert-regret. Our analysis sheds new light on
the surrogate loss, facilitating a rigorous examination of the discrepancy between
the regret of the original loss and that of the surrogate loss, and carefully controlling
meta-regret under the strong convexity condition. With only 1 projection per round,
we establish optimal regret bounds for general convex, exponentially concave, and
strongly convex functions simultaneously. Furthermore, we enhance the expert-loss
to exploit the smoothness property, and demonstrate that our algorithm can attain
small-loss regret for multiple types of convex and smooth functions.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) stands as a pivotal online learning framework for modeling many
real-world problems [Hazan, 2016]. OCO is commonly formulated as a repeated game between the
learner and the environment with the following protocol. In each round t ∈ [T ], the learner chooses a
decision xt from a convex domain X ⊆ Rd ; after submitting this decision, the learner suffers a loss
ft (xt ), where ft : X 7→ R is a convex function selected by the environment. The goal of the learner
PT
is to minimize the cumulative loss over T rounds, i.e., t=1 ft (xt ), and the standard performance
measure is the regret [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006]:
R EGT =

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈X

T
X

ft (x),

(1)

t=1

which quantifies the difference between the cumulative loss of the online learner and that of the best
decision chosen in hindsight.
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

