Linear Transformers are Versatile In-Context
Learners
Max Vladymyrov
Google Research
mxv@google.com

Johannes von Oswald
Google, Paradigms of Intelligence Team
jvoswald@google.com

Mark Sandler
Google Research
sandler@google.com

Rong Ge
Duke University
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Recent research has demonstrated that transformers, particularly linear attention
models, implicitly execute gradient-descent-like algorithms on data provided incontext during their forward inference step. However, their capability in handling
more complex problems remains unexplored. In this paper, we prove that each layer
of a linear transformer maintains a weight vector for an implicit linear regression
problem and can be interpreted as performing a variant of preconditioned gradient
descent. We also investigate the use of linear transformers in a challenging scenario
where the training data is corrupted with different levels of noise. Remarkably,
we demonstrate that for this problem linear transformers discover an intricate and
highly effective optimization algorithm, surpassing or matching in performance
many reasonable baselines. We analyze this algorithm and show that it is a novel
approach incorporating momentum and adaptive rescaling based on noise levels.
Our findings show that even linear transformers possess the surprising ability to
discover sophisticated optimization strategies.

1

Introduction

The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has revolutionized the field of machine learning,
driving breakthroughs across various domains and serving as a foundation for powerful models (Anil
et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023). However, despite their
widespread success, the mechanisms that drive their performance remain an active area of research.
A key component of their success is attributed to in-context learning (ICL, Brown et al., 2020) – an
emergent ability of transformers to make predictions based on information provided within the input
sequence itself, without explicit parameter updates.
Recently, several papers (Garg et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2022; von Oswald et al., 2023a) have
suggested that ICL might be partially explained by an implicit meta-optimization of the transformers
that happens on input context (aka mesa-optimization Hubinger et al., 2019). They have shown that
transformers with linear self-attention layers (aka linear transformers) trained on linear regression
tasks can internally implement gradient-based optimization.
Specifically, von Oswald et al. (2023a) demonstrated that linear transformers can execute iterations of
an algorithm similar to the gradient descent algorithm (which they call GD++ ), with each attention
layer representing one step of the algorithm. Later, Ahn et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023) further
characterized this behavior, showing that the learned solution is a form of preconditioned GD, and
this solution is optimal for one-layer linear transformers.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

