GMAI-MMBench: A Comprehensive Multimodal
Evaluation Benchmark Towards General Medical AI
Pengcheng Chen1,2∗ Jin Ye1,3∗† Guoan Wang1,4∗ Yanjun Li1,4
Zhongying Deng5 Wei Li1,6 Tianbin Li1 Haodong Duan1
Ziyan Huang1,6 Yanzhou Su1 Benyou Wang7,8 Shaoting Zhang1
9
Bin Fu Jianfei Cai3 Bohan Zhuang3 Eric J Seibel2 Yu Qiao1,9 Junjun He1‡
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 University of Washington 3 Monash University
4
East China Normal University 5 University of Cambridge 6 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
7
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 8 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
9
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences

Figure 1: Overview of the GMAI-MMBench. The benchmark is meticulously designed for testing
LVLMs’ abilities in real-world clinical scenarios with three key features: (1) Comprehensive medical
knowledge: It consists of 284 diverse clinical-related datasets from worldwide sources, covering 38
modalities. (2) Well-categorized data structure: It features 18 clinical VQA tasks and 18 clinical
departments, meticulously organized into a lexical tree. (3) Multi-perceptual granularity: Interactive
methods span from image to region level, offering varying degrees of perceptual details.

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) are capable of handling diverse data
types such as imaging, text, and physiological signals, and can be applied in various fields. In the medical field, LVLMs have a high potential to offer substantial
assistance for diagnosis and treatment. Before that, it is crucial to develop benchmarks to evaluate LVLMs’ effectiveness in various medical applications. Current
benchmarks are often built upon specific academic literature, mainly focusing on
a single domain, and lacking varying perceptual granularities. Thus, they face
specific challenges, including limited clinical relevance, incomplete evaluations,
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Project lead.
‡
Corresponding author: hejunjun@pjlab.org.cn
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

