The Space Complexity of Approximating Logistic Loss

Gregory Dexter
LinkedIn Corporation
gdexter@linkedin.com

Petros Drineas
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
pdrineas@purdue.edu

Rajiv Khanna
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
rajivak@purdue.edu

Abstract
We provide space complexity lower bounds for data structures that approximate
logistic loss up to ϵ-relative error on a logistic regression problem with data
X ∈ Rn×d and labels y ∈ {−1, 1}d . The space complexity of existing coreset
constructions depend on a natural complexity measure µy (X), first defined in [10].
We give an Ω̃( ϵd2 ) space complexity lower bound in the regime µy (X) = O(1) that
shows existing coresets are optimal in this regime up to lower order factors. We
also prove a general Ω̃(d · µy (X)) space lower bound when ϵ is constant, showing
that the dependency on µy (X) is not an artifact of mergeable coresets. Finally, we
refute a prior conjecture that µy (X) is hard to compute by providing an efficient
linear programming formulation, and we empirically compare our algorithm to
prior approximate methods.

1

Introduction

Logistic regression is an indispensable tool in data analysis, dating back to at least the early 19th
century. It was originally used to make predictions in social science and chemistry applications [14, 15,
3], but over the past 200 years it has been applied to all data-driven scientific domains, from economics
and the social sciences to physics, medicine, and biology. At a high level, the (binary) logistic
regression model is a statistical abstraction that models the probability of one of two alternatives or
classes by expressing the log-odds (the logarithm of the odds) for the class as a linear combination of
one or more predictor variables.
Formally, logistic regression aims to find a parameter vector β ∈ Rd that minimizes the logistic loss,
L(β), which is defined as follows:
L(β) =

n
X

T

log(1 + e−yi xi β ),

(1)

i=1

where X ∈ Rn×d is the data matrix (n points in Rd , with xTi being the rows of X) and y ∈ {−1, 1}n
is the vector of labels whose entries are the yi . Due to the central importance of logistic regression,
algorithms and methods to improve the efficiency of minimizing the logistic loss are always of interest
[7, 10, 9].
The prior study of linear regression, a much simpler problem that admits a closed-form solution, has
provided ample guidance on how we may expect to improve the efficiency of logistic regression. Let
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

