Mars: Situated Inductive Reasoning
in an Open-World Environment

Xiaojuan Tang 1, 3
xiaojuan@stu.pku.edu.cn
Song-chun Zhu 1, 2, 3
sczhu@bigai.ai

Jiaqi Li 3
lijiaqi@bigai.ai

Muhan Zhang1, 3, ∗
muhan@pku.edu.cn

Yitao Liang 1, 3
yitaol@pku.edu.cn
Zilong Zheng 3, ∗
zlzheng@bigai.ai

1

Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peking University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
State Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial Intelligence, BIGAI
https://marscrafter.github.io

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) trained on massive corpora have shown remarkable success in knowledge-intensive tasks. Yet, most of them rely on pre-stored
knowledge. Inducing new general knowledge from a speciﬁc environment and
performing reasoning with the acquired knowledge—situated inductive reasoning, is crucial and challenging for machine intelligence. In this paper, we design
Mars, an interactive environment devised for situated inductive reasoning. It introduces counter-commonsense game mechanisms by modifying terrain, survival
setting and task dependency while adhering to certain principles. In Mars, agents
need to actively interact with their surroundings, derive useful rules and perform
decision-making tasks in speciﬁc contexts. We conduct experiments on various
RL-based and LLM-based methods, ﬁnding that they all struggle on this challenging situated inductive reasoning benchmark. Furthermore, we explore Induction
from Reﬂection, where we instruct agents to perform inductive reasoning from history trajectory. The superior performance underscores the importance of inductive
reasoning in Mars. Through Mars, we aim to galvanize advancements in situated
inductive reasoning and set the stage for developing the next generation of AI
systems that can reason in an adaptive and context-sensitive way.

1

Introduction

Imagine a scenario: in the United States, you drive on the right side of the road. When you travel to
the UK, you might initially ﬁnd it strange how people drive. However, you soon realize that driving
on the left is the norm here and adapt yourself to the new rule. Inductive reasoning, a capacity that
identiﬁes underlying rules, mechanisms, or general claims of unobserved experience based on past
observations, undoubtedly plays a pivot role in scientiﬁc discoveries as well as in the conduct of our
everyday affairs. Research on the origin and justiﬁcations of such inductive aptitude can date back
to the 1900s. David Hume, one of the most inﬂuential philosophers in human nature, presented a
critical dilemma as follows:
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

