Query-Based Adversarial Prompt Generation

Jonathan Hayase1 Ema Borevkovic2 Nicholas Carlini3 Florian Tramèr2
1
University of Washington 2 ETH Zürich 3 Google Deepmind

Milad Nasr3

Abstract
Recent work has shown it is possible to construct adversarial examples that cause
aligned language models to emit harmful strings or perform harmful behavior.
Existing attacks work either in the white-box setting (with full access to the model
weights), or through transferability: the phenomenon that adversarial examples
crafted on one model often remain effective on other models. We improve on prior
work with a query-based attack that leverages API access to a remote language
model to construct adversarial examples that cause the model to emit harmful
strings with (much) higher probability than with transfer-only attacks. We validate
our attack on GPT-3.5 and OpenAI’s safety classifier; we can cause GPT-3.5 to
emit harmful strings that current transfer attacks fail at, and we can evade the
OpenAI and Llama Guard safety classifiers with nearly 100% probability.

1

Introduction

The rapid progress of transformers [33] in the field of language modeling has prompted significant
interest in developing strong adversarial examples [4, 30] that cause a language model to misbehave
harmfully. Recent work [36] has shown that by appropriately tuning optimization attacks from the
literature [28, 14], it is possible to construct adversarial text sequences that cause a model to respond
in a targeted manner.
These attacks allow an adversary to cause an otherwise “aligned” model—that typically refuses
requests such as “how do I build a bomb?” or “swear at me!”—to comply with such requests, or
even to emit exact targeted unsafe strings (e.g., a malicious plugin invocation [3]). These attacks can
cause various forms of harm, ranging from reputational damage to the service provider, to potentially
more significant harm if the model has the ability to take actions on behalf of users [13] (e.g., making
payments, or reading and sending emails).
The class of attacks introduced by Zou et al. [36] are white-box optimization attacks: they require
complete access to the underlying model to be effective—something that is not true in practice for
the largest production language models today. Fortunately (for the adversary), the transferability
property of adversarial examples [26] allows an attacker to construct an adversarial sequence on a
local model and simply replay it on a larger production model to great effect. This allowed Zou
et al. [36] to fool GPT-4 and Bard with 46% and 66% attack success rate by transferring adversarial
examples initially crafted on the Vicuña [11] family of open-source models.
Contributions. In this paper, we design an optimization attack that directly constructs adversarial
examples on a remote language model, without relying on transferability.1 This has two key benefits:
• Targeted attacks: Query-based attacks can elicit specific harmful outputs, which is not
feasible for transfer attacks.
1
There exist other black-box jailbreak methods that rely on either a language model to refine candidate
attacks [22, 8] or on greedy search [2]. These techniques are weaker than ours though, and do not succeed in
making a target model output exact harmful strings, which we do.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

