Weight decay induces low-rank attention layers

Seijin Kobayashi∗ 1,2 , Yassir Akram∗1
Johannes von Oswald2
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
2
Google, Paradigms of Intelligence Team
{seijink, jvoswald}@google.com, yakram@ethz.ch

Abstract
The effect of regularizers such as weight decay when training deep neural networks is not well understood. We study the influence of weight decay as well
as L2-regularization when training neural network models in which parameter
matrices interact multiplicatively. This combination is of particular interest as
this parametrization is common in attention layers, the workhorse of transformers.
Here, key-query, as well as value-projection parameter matrices, are multiplied
T
directly with each other: WK
WQ and P WV . We extend previous results and
show on one hand that any local minimum of a L2-regularized loss of the form
L(AB ⊤ ) + λ(∥A∥2 + ∥B∥2 ) coincides with a minimum of the nuclear normregularized loss L(AB ⊤ ) + λ∥AB ⊤ ∥∗ , and on the other hand that the 2 losses
become identical exponentially quickly during training. We thus complement
existing works linking L2-regularization with low-rank regularization, and in particular, explain why such regularization on the matrix product affects early stages
of training. Based on these theoretical insights, we verify empirically that the
T
key-query and value-projection matrix products WK
WQ , P WV within attention
layers, when optimized with weight decay, as usually done in vision tasks and
T
language modelling, indeed induce a significant reduction in the rank of WK
WQ
and P WV , even in fully online training. We find that, in accordance with existing
work, inducing low rank in attention matrix products can damage language model
performance, and observe advantages when decoupling weight decay in attention
layers from the rest of the parameters.

1

Introduction

The influence of L2-regularization, as well as weight decay regularization when training deep neural
network models remains poorly understood and is still a subject of active research [van Laarhoven,
2017, Zhang et al., 2021, 2019, Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019, Zhang et al., 2021, Xie et al., 2023,
Andriushchenko et al., 2023]. Given a model parametrized by matrix W , the standard motivation of
adding λ2 ∥W ∥2 to the optimization loss L(W ) comes from framing learning the model weights W
as maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation and choosing a Gaussian prior with zero mean [Mackay,
1995, Krogh and Hertz, 1991].
Previous works have studied the effect of regularization on the rank of weight matrices when training
a model with gradient-based optimization [Ziyin and Wang, 2023, Arora et al., 2019, Li et al., 2021,
Razin and Cohen, 2020, Gunasekar et al., 2017]. Here, we focus on the effect of L2-regularization on
models using a factorized parametrization, where some weight matrices are parametrized as products
∗

Equal contribution, order determined randomly

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

