Linear Uncertainty Quantification of Graphical Model
Inference
Chenghua Guo1* , Han Yu2* , Jiaxin Liu3 , Chao Chen4 , Qi Li5 , Sihong Xie6† , Xi Zhang1†
1

Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service (MoE),
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
College of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University, USA
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China
5
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University, USA
6
AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
{chenghuaguo, zhangx}@bupt.edu.cn, yuhan2021@bupt.edu.cn,
jilb17@lehigh.edu, cha01nbox@gmail.com, qli@iastate.edu,
xiesihong1@gmail.com

Abstract
Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) is vital for decision makers as it offers insights into
the potential reliability of data and model, enabling more informed and risk-aware
decision-making. Graphical models, capable of representing data with complex dependencies, are widely used across domains. Existing sampling-based UQ methods
are unbiased but cannot guarantee convergence and are time-consuming on largescale graphs. There are fast UQ methods for graphical models with closed-form
solutions and convergence guarantee but with uncertainty underestimation. We propose LinUProp, a UQ method that utilizes a novel linear propagation of uncertainty
to model uncertainty among related nodes additively instead of multiplicatively, to
offer linear scalability, guaranteed convergence, and closed-form solutions without
underestimating uncertainty. Theoretically, we decompose the expected prediction
error of the graphical model and prove that the uncertainty computed by LinUProp
is the generalized variance component of the decomposition. Experimentally,
we demonstrate that LinUProp is consistent with the sampling-based method but
with linear scalability and fast convergence. Moreover, LinUProp outperforms
competitors in uncertainty-based active learning on four real-world graph datasets,
achieving higher accuracy with a lower labeling budget.

1

Introduction

Graphical models are known for their capability to represent data with complex dependencies. These
models have been extensively applied to various fields, ranging from social networks [9, 39], fraud
detection [26, 8], recommendation [14, 37] and crowdsourcing [25, 16], to more recent applications
in enhancing graph neural networks (GNNs) [10, 28] and large language models (LLMs) [15, 34].
Among the many inference techniques in graphical models [19, 13, 12, 17], Belief Propagation (BP)
[27] stands out as a powerful iterative message-passing algorithm. BP takes an initial guess (or “prior
belief”) of each node and refines it using information propagation, resulting in an updated, more
accurate estimate called “posterior belief”. However, a crucial limitation of BP is that it only provides
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding authors.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

