Provably Mitigating Overoptimization in RLHF: Your
SFT Loss is Implicitly an Adversarial Regularizer
Zhihan Liu1∗
Miao Lu2∗
Shenao Zhang1
Boyi Liu3
1
3
2
Hongyi Guo
Yingxiang Yang
Jose Blanchet
Zhaoran Wang1
1
Northwestern University 2 Stanford University 3 ByteDance Inc.
{zhihanliu2027,shenaozhang2028,hongyiguo2025}@u.northwestern.edu
{miaolu, jose.blanchet}@stanford.edu, zhaoranwang@gmail.com
{boyi.liu01, yingxiang.yang}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Aligning generative models with human preference via RLHF typically suffers
from overoptimization, where an imperfectly learned reward model can misguide
the generative model to output undesired responses. We investigate this problem
in a principled manner by identifying the source of the misalignment as a form
of distributional shift and uncertainty in learning human preferences. To mitigate
overoptimization, we first propose a theoretical algorithm that chooses the best
policy for an adversarially chosen reward model; one that simultaneously minimizes the maximum likelihood estimation of the loss and a reward penalty term.
The penalty term is introduced to prevent the policy from choosing actions with
spurious high proxy rewards, resulting in provable sample efficiency of the algorithm under a partial coverage style condition. Moving from theory to practice, the
proposed algorithm further enjoys an equivalent but surprisingly easy-to-implement
reformulation. Using the equivalence between reward models and the corresponding optimal policy, the algorithm features a simple objective that combines: (i) a
preference optimization loss that directly aligns the policy with human preference,
and (ii) a supervised learning loss that explicitly imitates the policy with a (suitable)
baseline distribution. In the context of aligning large language models (LLM), this
objective fuses the direct preference optimization (DPO) loss with the supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) loss to help mitigate the overoptimization towards undesired
responses, for which we name the algorithm Regularized Preference Optimization
(RPO). Experiments of aligning LLMs demonstrate the improved performance of
RPO compared with DPO baselines. Our work sheds light on the interplay between
preference optimization and SFT in tuning LLMs with both theoretical guarantees
and empirical evidence.

1

Introduction

A key step in building state-of-the-art LLMs is Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) [12, 87], which aligns pretrained LLMs with human preferences using human assessment
data, making the model more helpful, truthful, and harmless [42, 10]. Typically, RLHF first learns a
reward model from data (pair-wise comparisons of responses) to quantify the human preferences of
LLM outputs. Then it fine-tunes the LLM to maximize the learned reward using RL techniques.
In this pipeline, a crucial challenge is reward overoptimization or reward hacking [40, 62, 25]. Since
the reward model is learned from finite data, it might not be perfectly aligned with the underlying
human preference. Optimizing the LLM towards such an imperfectly learned and potentially overfitted
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

