Leveraging Catastrophic Forgetting to Develop Safe
Diffusion Models against Malicious Finetuning

Jiadong Pan1,2∗, Hongcheng Gao2∗, Zongyu Wu3 , Taihang Hu4
Li Su2 , Qingming Huang1,2 , Liang Li1†
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
The Pennsylvania State University 4 Nankai University
panjiadong23s@ict.ac.cn, gaohongcheng23@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have demonstrated remarkable proficiency in producing
images based on textual prompts. Numerous methods have been proposed to ensure
these models generate safe images. Early methods attempt to incorporate safety
filters into models to mitigate the risk of generating harmful images but such external filters do not inherently detoxify the model and can be easily bypassed. Hence,
model unlearning and data cleaning are the most essential methods for maintaining
the safety of models, given their impact on model parameters. However, malicious fine-tuning can still make models prone to generating harmful or undesirable
images even with these methods. Inspired by the phenomenon of catastrophic
forgetting, we propose a training policy using contrastive learning to increase the latent space distance between clean and harmful data distribution, thereby protecting
models from being fine-tuned to generate harmful images due to forgetting. The
experimental results demonstrate that our methods not only maintain clean image
generation capabilities before malicious fine-tuning but also effectively prevent
DMs from producing harmful images after malicious fine-tuning. Our method
can also be combined with other safety methods to maintain their safety against
malicious fine-tuning further.
WARNING: This paper contains offensive images generated by models.

1

Introduction

The realm of text-to-image (T2I) generation has seen significant progress in recent years, primarily
driven by diffusion models (DMs) trained on extensive and diverse datasets. Recently, many highperformance T2I DMs have been developed, including Stable Diffusion (SD) [38], Imagen [41],
DALL-E 2 [35], VQ-Diffusion [13], among others. They have shown great power in generating
high-quality images that closely match the textual prompt.
Yet, DMs can be misused by malicious individuals to create inappropriate content, such as images
depicting nudity, violence, or illegal activities [42, 11, 36]. To address this issue, early-stage DMs
were designed to reject the generation of inappropriate images through NSFW (Not Safe For Work)
filters [36]. Nevertheless, this approach does not inherently prevent the model from producing
harmful imagery and can be readily disabled, leading to security vulnerabilities [3, 38]. Subsequently,
many methods such as filtering the training data 3 or employing model unlearning techniques [4]
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
3
https://stability.ai/news/stable-diffusion-v2-release

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

