Banded Square Root Matrix Factorization for
Differentially Private Model Training

Nikita Kalinin
Institute of Science and Technology (ISTA)
Klosterneuburg, Austria
nikita.kalinin@ist.ac.at

Christoph Lampert
Institute of Science and Technology (ISTA)
Klosterneuburg, Austria
chl@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art methods for differentially private model training are based
on matrix factorization techniques. However, these methods suffer from high
computational overhead because they require numerically solving a demanding
optimization problem to determine an approximately optimal factorization prior
to the actual model training. In this work, we present a new matrix factorization
approach, BSR, which overcomes this computational bottleneck. By exploiting
properties of the standard matrix square root, BSR allows to efficiently handle
also large-scale problems. For the key scenario of stochastic gradient descent
with momentum and weight decay, we even derive analytical expressions for
BSR that render the computational overhead negligible. We prove bounds on the
approximation quality that hold both in the centralized and in the federated learning
setting. Our numerical experiments demonstrate that models trained using BSR
perform on par with the best existing methods, while completely avoiding their
computational overhead.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of differentially private (DP) model training with stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) in the setting of either federated or centralized learning. This task has recently emerged
as one of the most promising ways to train powerful machine learning models but nevertheless
guarantee the privacy of the used data, which led to a number of studies, both theoretical as well
as application-driven [Abadi et al., 2016, Yu et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2021, Kairouz et al., 2021,
Denisov et al., 2022]. The state of the art in the field are approaches based on the matrix factorization
(MF) mechanism [Li et al., 2015, Henzinger et al., 2024], which combines theoretical guarantees
with practical applicability [Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a,c,b, 2024]1 It is based on the observation
that all iterates of SGD are simply linear combinations of model gradients, which are computed at
intermediate time steps. Consequently, the iterates can be written formally as the result of multiplying
the matrix of coefficients, called workload matrix, with the row-stacked gradient vectors. To preserve
the privacy of the training data in this process one adds suitably scaled Gaussian noise at intermediate
steps of the computation. The MF mechanism provides a way to select the noise covariance structure
based on a factorization of the workload matrix into two matrices.
Identifying the minimal amount of noise necessary to achieve a desired privacy level requires solving
an optimization problem over all possible factorizations, subject to data participation constraints. For
some specific settings, the optimal solutions have been characterized: for streaming learning, when
each data batch contributes at most once to the gradients, Li et al. [2015] presented a formulation of
this problem as a semi-definite program. Henzinger et al. [2024] proved that a square root factorization
1

Note that this specific type of MF should not be confused with other occurrences of matrix factorization in,
potentially private, machine learning, such as in recommender systems [Shin et al., 2018, Li et al., 2021].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

