Randomized Truthful Auctions with Learning Agents

Gagan Aggarwal
Google Research
gagana@google.com

Anupam Gupta
New York University, Google Research
anupam.g@nyu.edu

Andres Perlroth
Google Research
perlroth@google.com

Grigoris Velegkas∗
Yale University
grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu

Abstract
We study a setting where agents use no-regret learning algorithms to participate
in repeated auctions. Kolumbus and Nisan (2022a) showed, rather surprisingly,
that when bidders participate in second-price auctions using no-regret bidding
algorithms, no matter how large the number of interactions T is, the runner-up
bidder may not converge to bidding truthfully. Our first result shows that this
holds for general deterministic truthful auctions. We also show that the ratio of the
learning rates of the bidders can qualitatively affect the convergence of the bidders.
Next, we consider the problem of revenue maximization in this environment. In
the setting with fully rational bidders, Myerson (1981) showed that revenue can be
maximized by using a second-price auction with reserves. We show that, in stark
contrast, in our setting with learning bidders, randomized auctions can have strictly
better revenue guarantees than second-price auctions with reserves, when T is large
enough. Finally, we study revenue maximization in the non-asymptotic regime.
We define a notion of auctioneer regret comparing the revenue generated to the
revenue of a second price auction with truthful bids. When the auctioneer has to
use the same auction throughout the interaction, we show an (almost) tight regret
Θ(T 3/4 ). If the auctioneer can change auctions during the interaction,
bound of e
√ but
Θ( T ).
in a way that is oblivious to the bids, we show an (almost) tight bound of e

1

Introduction

In auction design, truthfulness is a highly sought-after property. It allows bidders to simply reveal their
true valuations, simplifying the bidding process. In the standard single item setting with fully rational
profit-maximizing bidders, Myerson’s seminal paper Myerson (1981) shows that an auctioneer can
achieve optimal revenue by using a truthful and deterministic auction mechanism – a Second Price
Auction (SPA) with a reserve price.
In many applications nowadays, buyers no longer bid directly in the auction but, instead, use learning
algorithms to bid on their behalf. For example, in online advertising, platforms offer automated
bidding tools that manage ad campaigns on behalf of advertisers. Such bidders learn to bid over many
rounds and are not fully rational. In a surprising result, Kolumbus and Nisan (2022a) show that some
appealing properties of second-price auctions break down in the presence of such learning bidders.
In particular, when (profit-maximizing) bidders use no-regret learning algorithms, the second-price
auction does not achieve as much revenue as with fully rational bidders. Indeed, bidders do not learn
to bid their value, and consequently, the runner-up bidder’s bid is less than their value with positive
probability, which diminishes the second price auction’s revenue. Moreover, Kolumbus and Nisan
∗

Part of the work was done while the author was a research intern at Google Research in Mountain View.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

