Genetic-guided GFlowNets
for Sample Efficient Molecular Optimization

1

Hyeonah Kim1∗ Minsu Kim1
Sanghyeok Choi1
Jinkyoo Park1,2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 2 OMELET

Abstract
The challenge of discovering new molecules with desired properties is crucial
in domains like drug discovery and material design. Recent advances in deep
learning-based generative methods have shown promise but face the issue of sample
efficiency due to the computational expense of evaluating the reward function. This
paper proposes a novel algorithm for sample-efficient molecular optimization by
distilling a powerful genetic algorithm into deep generative policy using GFlowNets
training, the off-policy method for amortized inference. This approach enables
the deep generative policy to learn from domain knowledge, which has been
explicitly integrated into the genetic algorithm. Our method achieves state-of-theart performance in the official molecular optimization benchmark, significantly
outperforming previous methods. It also demonstrates effectiveness in designing
inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2 with substantially fewer reward calls.

1

Introduction

Discovering new molecules is one of the fundamental tasks in the chemical domain, with applications
in drug discovery [1] and material design [2]. Particularly, de novo molecular design focuses on
generating novel molecules with desired properties from scratch. In this context, deep learning-based
generative methods have emerged, showing promising results (e.g., [3–7]). However, these methods
still face a key challenge: the reward function is computationally expensive (e.g., assessing binding
affinity through docking simulations), while the molecule space is combinatorially large.
Sample-efficient molecular optimization is thus crucial for discovering high-reward molecular structures with limited reward calls, especially for real-world applicability. The recently proposed benchmark, Practical Molecular Optimization (PMO) [8], has extensively assessed the sample efficiency
of various algorithms, including reinforcement learning [3, 9], active learning [10], variational autoencoders [4, 5], generative flow networks (GFlowNets) [6, 11], and classical optimization methods
like Bayesian optimization [12] and genetic algorithms [13, 14]. Interestingly, the PMO benchmark
has revealed a shift in algorithm rankings, with classical algorithms often outperforming recently
proposed methods such as GFlowNets when the sample efficiency is considered.
Recent investigations [15, 16], including those highlighted by the PMO benchmark [8], indicate that
the classical frameworks, especially genetic algorithms (GA), still exhibit competitive performances
compared to recently proposed deep learning methods. These studies underscore that GAs effectively
navigate the chemical space using domain-specific genetic operators. In contrast, deep learning
methods usually do not leverage domain-specific knowledge, relying instead on deep networks to
autonomously learn these insights. It can lead to inefficient training processes due to the lack of expert
guidance [17]. To address this limitation, Genetic Expert Guided Learning (GEGL) [17] has been
introduced, which enhances deep learning by distilling GA-generated samples into a deep generative
policy using maximum likelihood estimation. This approach enables the deep generative policy to
∗

hyeonah_kim@kaist.ac.kr

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

