Interpreting Learned Feedback Patterns
in Large Language Models
Luke Marks∗†

Amir Abdullah ∗† ♢

David Krueger⊙
†

Apart Research
‡

Clement Neo†

Philip Torr‡
♢

Cynch.ai

⊙

Rauno Arike†

Fazl Barez∗† ‡

University of Cambridge

Department of Engineering Sciences, University of Oxford

Abstract
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is widely used to train
large language models (LLMs). However, it is unclear whether LLMs accurately
learn the underlying preferences in human feedback data. We coin the term
Learned Feedback Pattern (LFP) for patterns in an LLM’s activations learned during
RLHF that improve its performance on the fine-tuning task. We hypothesize that
LLMs with LFPs accurately aligned to the fine-tuning feedback exhibit consistent
activation patterns for outputs that would have received similar feedback during
RLHF. To test this, we train probes to estimate the feedback signal implicit in
the activations of a fine-tuned LLM. We then compare these estimates to the
true feedback, measuring how accurate the LFPs are to the fine-tuning feedback.
Our probes are trained on a condensed, sparse and interpretable representation
of LLM activations, making it easier to correlate features of the input with our
probe’s predictions. We validate our probes by comparing the neural features they
correlate with positive feedback inputs against the features GPT-4 describes and
classifies as related to LFPs. Understanding LFPs can help minimize discrepancies
between LLM behavior and training objectives, which is essential for the safety
and alignment of LLMs.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are often fine-tuned using reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF), but it is not understood whether RLHF results in LLMs accurately learning the
preferences that underlie human feedback data. We refer to patterns in an LLM’s activations learned
during RLHF that enable it to perform well on the task it was fine-tuned for as the LLM’s Learned
Feedback Patterns (LFPs). Formally, for an input X and activations H(X, θ) from a fine-tuned LLM
parameterized by θ, we describe its LFPs as the differences in H(X, θ) caused by training θ, that
result in the outputs performing better under the fine-tuning loss. LFPs are a major component of
what an LLM has learned about the fine-tuning feedback.
For example, consider a sentiment analysis task where the ground truth dataset labels the word
“precious" as having positive sentiment. However, the fine-tuned LLM’s activations, when probed,
predict negative sentiment. This discrepancy, where the LLM’s output would receive negative
feedback according to the true preferences, is an example of divergence between LFPs and the
preferences underlying the human feedback data used in fine-tuning.
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

