What Matters in Graph Class Incremental Learning?
An Information Preservation Perspective

Jialu Li1,2,3,∗
jialuli@tju.edu.cn

Yu Wang1,2,3,∗
wang.yu@tju.edu.cn

Wanyu Lin4
wan-yu.lin@polyu.edu.hk

Pengfei Zhu1,2,3,†
zhupengfei@tju.edu.cn

Qinghua Hu1,2,3
huqinghua@tju.edu.cn

1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Engineering Research Center of City Intelligence and Digital Governance,
Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, Tianjin, China
3
Haihe Lab of ITAI, Tianjin, China
4
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
2

Abstract
Graph class incremental learning (GCIL) requires the model to classify emerging nodes of new classes while remembering old classes. Existing methods are
designed to preserve effective information of old models or graph data to alleviate forgetting, but there is no clear theoretical understanding of what matters in
information preservation. In this paper, we consider that present practice suffers
from high semantic and structural shifts assessed by two devised shift metrics. We
provide insights into information preservation in GCIL and find that maintaining
graph information can preserve information of old models in theory to calibrate
node semantic and graph structure shifts. We correspond graph information into
low-frequency local-global information and high-frequency information in spatial
domain. Based on the analysis, we propose a framework, Graph Spatial Information
Preservation (GSIP). Specifically, for low-frequency information preservation, the
old node representations obtained by inputting replayed nodes into the old model
are aligned with the outputs of the node and its neighbors in the new model, and
then old and new outputs are globally matched after pooling. For high-frequency
information preservation, the new node representations are encouraged to imitate
the near-neighbor pair similarity of old node representations. GSIP achieves a 10%
increase in terms of the forgetting metric compared to prior methods on large-scale
datasets. Our framework can also seamlessly integrate existing replay designs. The
code is available through https://github.com/Jillian555/GSIP.

1

Introduction

In real-world applications, graph data is continuously generated. For instance, in citation networks,
new types of papers and their citations may constantly emerge, an ideal literature classifier needs
to continuously distinguish literature in emerging research areas [1, 2]. Therefore, it is critical
for a graph model to incrementally integrate new classes on an extended graph, which is referred
to as Graph class incremental learning (GCIL). However, this poses a major challenge known as
catastrophic forgetting, where the model needs to preserve previous information while continuously
acquiring new information [3, 4].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

