Diffusion Tuning: Transferring Diffusion Models via
Chain of Forgetting

Jincheng Zhong∗, Xingzhuo Guo∗, Jiaxiang Dong, Mingsheng Long
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
{zjc22,gxz23,djx20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have significantly advanced the field of generative modeling.
However, training a diffusion model is computationally expensive, creating a
pressing need to adapt off-the-shelf diffusion models for downstream generation
tasks. Current fine-tuning methods focus on parameter-efficient transfer learning
but overlook the fundamental transfer characteristics of diffusion models. In
this paper, we investigate the transferability of diffusion models and observe a
monotonous chain of forgetting trend of transferability along the reverse process.
Based on this observation and novel theoretical insights, we present Diff-Tuning,
a frustratingly simple transfer approach that leverages the chain of forgetting
tendency. Diff-Tuning encourages the fine-tuned model to retain the pre-trained
knowledge at the end of the denoising chain close to the generated data while
discarding the other noise side. We conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate
Diff-Tuning, including the transfer of pre-trained Diffusion Transformer models
to eight downstream generations and the adaptation of Stable Diffusion to five
control conditions with ControlNet. Diff-Tuning achieves a 24.6% improvement
over standard fine-tuning and enhances the convergence speed of ControlNet
by 24%. Notably, parameter-efficient transfer learning techniques for diffusion
models can also benefit from Diff-Tuning. Code is available at this repository:
https://github.com/thuml/Diffusion-Tuning.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [45, 17, 47] are leading the revolution in modern generative modeling, achieving
remarkable successes across various domains such as image [11, 39, 12], video [43, 19, 55], 3D
shape [34], audio generation [25], etc. Despite these advances, training an applicable diffusion model
from scratch often demands a substantial computational budget, exemplified by the thousands of
TPUs needed, as reported by [55]. Consequently, fine-tuning well pre-trained, large-scale models for
specific tasks has become increasingly crucial in practice [54, 60, 56].
During the past years, the deep learning community has concentrated on how to transfer knowledge
from large-scale pre-trained models with minimal computational and memory demands, a process
known as parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [20, 59, 54, 7, 21, 32]. The central insight of these
approaches is to update as few parameters as possible while avoiding performance decline. However,
the intrinsic transfer properties of diffusion models have remained largely unexplored, with scant
attention paid to effectively fine-tuning from a pre-trained diffusion model.
Previous studies on neural network transferability, such as those by [33, 57], have demonstrated
that lower-level features are generally more transferable than higher-level features. In the context of
diffusion models, which transform noise into data through a reverse process, it is logical to assume
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

