NeuroClips: Towards High-fidelity and Smooth
fMRI-to-Video Reconstruction
Zixuan Gong1 , Guangyin Bao1 , Qi Zhang1,† , Zhongwei Wan2 , Duoqian Miao1,† , Shoujin
Wang3 , Lei Zhu1 , Changwei Wang4 , Rongtao Xu4 , Liang Hu1 , Ke Liu5 , Yu Zhang1
1
Tongji University
Ohio State University
3
University of Technology Sydney
4
Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Beijing Anding Hospital
{gongzx,baogy,zhangqi_cs,dqmiao,izy}@tongji.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Reconstruction of static visual stimuli from non-invasion brain activity fMRI
achieves great success, owning to advanced deep learning models such as CLIP
and Stable Diffusion. However, the research on fMRI-to-video reconstruction
remains limited since decoding the spatiotemporal perception of continuous visual
experiences is formidably challenging. We contend that the key to addressing these
challenges lies in accurately decoding both high-level semantics and low-level perception flows, as perceived by the brain in response to video stimuli. To the end, we
propose NeuroClips, an innovative framework to decode high-fidelity and smooth
video from fMRI. NeuroClips utilizes a semantics reconstructor to reconstruct video
keyframes, guiding semantic accuracy and consistency, and employs a perception
reconstructor to capture low-level perceptual details, ensuring video smoothness.
During inference, it adopts a pre-trained T2V diffusion model injected with both
keyframes and low-level perception flows for video reconstruction. Evaluated on a
publicly available fMRI-video dataset, NeuroClips achieves smooth high-fidelity
video reconstruction of up to 6s at 8FPS, gaining significant improvements over
state-of-the-art models in various metrics, e.g., a 128% improvement in SSIM
and an 81% improvement in spatiotemporal metrics. Our project is available at
https://github.com/gongzix/NeuroClips.

1

Introduction

Decoding visual stimuli from neural activity is crucial and prospective to unraveling the intricate
mechanisms of the human brain. In the context of non-invasive approaches, visual reconstruction
from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), such as fMRI-to-image reconstruction, shows
high fidelity [1, 2, 3, 4], largely benefiting from advanced deep learning models such as CLIP [5, 6]
and Stable Diffusion [7]. This convergence of brain science and deep learning presents a promising
data-driven learning paradigm to explore a comprehensive understanding of the advanced perceptual
and semantic functions of the cerebral cortex. Unfortunately, fMRI-to-video reconstruction still
presents significant hurdles that discourage researchers, since decoding the spatiotemporal perception
of a continuous flow of scenes, motions, and objects is formidably challenging.
At first glance, fMRI measures blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signals by snapshotting a
few seconds of brain activity, leading to differential temporal resolutions between fMRI (low) and
† Corresponding Authors
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

