Consistency Diffusion Bridge Models

Guande He†1∗, Kaiwen Zheng†1∗, Jianfei Chen1 , Fan Bao12 , Jun Zhu‡123
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab
1
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Shengshu Technology, Beijing 3 Pazhou Lab (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
guande.he17@outlook.com; zkwthu@gmail.com;
fan.bao@shengshu.ai; {jianfeic, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have become the dominant paradigm of generative modeling in a variety of domains by learning stochastic processes from noise to data.
Recently, diffusion denoising bridge models (DDBMs), a new formulation of generative modeling that builds stochastic processes between fixed data endpoints based
on a reference diffusion process, have achieved empirical success across tasks with
coupled data distribution, such as image-to-image translation. However, DDBM’s
sampling process typically requires hundreds of network evaluations to achieve
decent performance, which may impede their practical deployment due to high
computational demands. In this work, inspired by the recent advance of consistency
models in DMs, we tackle this problem by learning the consistency function of
the probability-flow ordinary differential equation (PF-ODE) of DDBMs, which
directly predicts the solution at a starting step given any point on the ODE trajectory. Based on a dedicated general-form ODE solver, we propose two paradigms:
consistency bridge distillation and consistency bridge training, which is flexible to
apply on DDBMs with broad design choices. Experimental results show that our
proposed method could sample 4× to 50× faster than the base DDBM and produce
better visual quality given the same step in various tasks with pixel resolution
ranging from 64 × 64 to 256 × 256, as well as supporting downstream tasks such
as semantic interpolation in the data space.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) [53, 21, 60] have reached unprecedented levels as a family of generative
models in various areas, including image generation [10, 50, 48], audio synthesis [5, 45], video
generation [20], as well as image editing [41, 42], solving inverse problems [25, 56], and density
estimation [59, 28, 37, 71]. In the era of AI-generated content, the stable training, scalability &
state-of-the-art generation performance of DMs successfully make them serve as the fundamental
component of large-scale, high-performance text-to-image [14] and text-to-video [18, 2] models.
A critical characteristic of diffusion models is their iterative sampling procedure, which progressively
drives random noise into the data space. Although this paradigm yields a sample quality that
stands out from other generation models, such as VAEs [29, 46], GANs [17], and Normalizing
Flows [11, 12, 30], it also results in a notoriously lower sampling efficiency compared to other arts. In
response to this, consistency models [58] have emerged as an attractive family of generative models
by learning a consistency function that directly predicts the solution of a probability-flow ordinary
differential equation (PF-ODE) at a certain starting timestep given any points in the ODE trajectory,
designed to be a one-step generator that directly maps noise to data. Consistency models can be
∗

Work done during an internship at Shengshu;

†

Equal contribution;

‡

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

The corresponding author.

