Deep Graph Mating

Yongcheng Jing1 Seok-Hee Hong1 Dacheng Tao2
University of Sydney 2 Nanyang Technological University
{yongcheng.jing,seokhee.hong}@sydney.edu.au, dacheng.tao@ntu.edu.sg
1

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the first learning-free model reuse task within the
non-Euclidean domain, termed as Deep Graph Mating (G RAMA). We strive to
create a child Graph Neural Network (GNN) that integrates knowledge from pretrained parent models without requiring re-training, fine-tuning, or annotated labels.
To this end, we begin by investigating the permutation invariance property of
GNNs, which leads us to develop two vanilla approaches for G RAMA: Vanilla
Parameter Interpolation (VPI) and Vanilla Alignment Prior to Interpolation (VAPI),
both employing topology-independent interpolation in the parameter space. However, neither approach has achieved the anticipated results. Through theoretical
analysis of VPI and VAPI, we identify critical challenges unique to G RAMA, including increased sensitivity to parameter misalignment and further the inherent
topology-dependent complexities. Motivated by these findings, we propose the
Dual-Message Coordination and Calibration (DuMCC) methodology, comprising
the Parent Message Coordination (PMC) scheme to optimise the permutation matrices for parameter interpolation by coordinating aggregated messages, and the
Child Message Calibration (CMC) scheme to mitigate over-smoothing identified in
PMC by calibrating the message statistics within child GNNs. Experiments across
diverse domains, including node and graph property prediction, 3D object recognition, and large-scale semantic parsing, demonstrate that the proposed DuMCC
effectively enables training-free knowledge transfer, yielding results on par with
those of pre-trained models.

1

Introduction

The remarkable progress made in deep neural networks has resulted in a growing number of pretrained models being made publicly available for the purpose of performance reproducibility and
further development [64, 12, 27, 23, 61, 24]. As such, there is a mounting interest in the community
on the reusability of existing pre-trained neural networks for the sake of strengthening performance,
reducing model size, or alleviating training efforts, with abundant inspiring works proposed [16, 42,
46, 40, 47, 45, 63, 67]. Despite the growing interests in model reuse, current research endeavors have
predominantly focused on the Euclidean domain, which are specifically designed to handle image
data with regular grid structures [39, 64, 34, 12, 51, 14, 22].
On the other hand, the study of reusing pre-trained Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to tackle nonEuclidean and irregular graph data is still in its early stage and remains limited in scope. Almost
all existing research on GNN reuse is established upon non-Euclidean Knowledge Distillation (KD)
pioneered by Yang et al. [60], where a favourable student GNN is learned from a single pre-trained
teacher [11, 49, 9, 66, 29]. Subsequent research has extended the scope of Yang et al. [60] from a
single-teacher to a multi-teacher context, introducing the novel task of non-Euclidean Knowledge
Amalgamation (KA) [25, 15, 36]. However, all these existing approaches to GNN reuse necessitate
resource-intensive re-training of the student model, imposing substantial computational burdens and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

