Diversify, Contextualize, and Adapt:
Efficient Entropy Modeling for Neural Image Codec

Jun-Hyuk Kim∗ Seungeon Kim Won-Hee Lee Dokwan Oh
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
{jh131.kim, se2.kim, why_wh.lee, dokwan.oh}@samsung.com

Abstract
Designing a fast and effective entropy model is challenging but essential for practical application of neural codecs. Beyond spatial autoregressive entropy models,
more efficient backward adaptation-based entropy models have been recently developed. They not only reduce decoding time by using smaller number of modeling
steps but also maintain or even improve rate–distortion performance by leveraging
more diverse contexts for backward adaptation. Despite their significant progress,
we argue that their performance has been limited by the simple adoption of the
design convention for forward adaptation: using only a single type of hyper latent
representation, which does not provide sufficient contextual information, especially
in the first modeling step. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective entropy
modeling framework that leverages sufficient contexts for forward adaptation without compromising on bit-rate. Specifically, we introduce a strategy of diversifying
hyper latent representations for forward adaptation, i.e., using two additional types
of contexts along with the existing single type of context. In addition, we present
a method to effectively use the diverse contexts for contextualizing the current
elements to be encoded/decoded. By addressing the limitation of the previous
approach, our proposed framework leads to significant performance improvements.
Experimental results on popular datasets show that our proposed framework consistently improves rate–distortion performance across various bit-rate regions, e.g.,
3.73% BD-rate gain over the state-of-the-art baseline on the Kodak dataset.

1

Introduction

Most neural image codecs [8, 9, 11, 15, 17, 18] first transform an image into a quantized latent
representation. It is then encoded into a bitstream via an entropy coding algorithm, which relies on a
learned probability model known as the entropy model. According to the Shannon’s source coding
theorem, the minimum expected length of a bitstream is equal to the entropy of the source. Thus,
accurately modeling entropy of the quantized latent representation is crucial.
Entropy models estimate a joint probability distribution over the elements of the quantized latent
representation. Generally, it is assumed that all elements follow conditionally independent probability
distributions. To satisfy this, the probability distributions are modeled in context-adaptive manners,
which is key to accurate entropy modeling [18]. Recent methods are based on the joint backward and
forward adaptation where the probability distributions adapt by leveraging contexts in two different
ways: directly using previously encoded/decoded elements (i.e., backward adaptation), and extracting
and utilizing an additional hyper latent representation (i.e., forward adaptation). Here, the type of
contexts leveraged can be diverse depending on the spatial range they cover. First, each element has
dependencies with other elements in the same spatial location along the channel dimension. Since
the channel-wise dependencies correspond to the local image area (e.g., a 16 × 16 patch), we denote
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

