Lorentz-Equivariant Geometric Algebra Transformers
for High-Energy Physics

Jonas Spinner∗
Heidelberg University
j.spinner@thphys.uni-heidelberg.de
Pim de Haan
Qualcomm AI Research†

Victor Bresó∗
Heidelberg University
v.breso@thphys.uni-heidelberg.de

Tilman Plehn
Heidelberg University

Jesse Thaler
MIT / IAIFI

Johann Brehmer
Qualcomm AI Research†

Abstract
Extracting scientific understanding from particle-physics experiments requires
solving diverse learning problems with high precision and good data efficiency.
We propose the Lorentz Geometric Algebra Transformer (L-GATr), a new multipurpose architecture for high-energy physics. L-GATr represents high-energy data
in a geometric algebra over four-dimensional space-time and is equivariant under
Lorentz transformations, the symmetry group of relativistic kinematics. At the
same time, the architecture is a Transformer, which makes it versatile and scalable
to large systems. L-GATr is first demonstrated on regression and classification tasks
from particle physics. We then construct the first Lorentz-equivariant generative
model: a continuous normalizing flow based on an L-GATr network, trained with
Riemannian flow matching. Across our experiments, L-GATr is on par with or
outperforms strong domain-specific baselines.

1

Introduction

In the quest to understand nature on the most fundamental level, machine learning is omnipresent [23].
Take the most complex machine ever built: at CERN’s Large Hadron Collider (LHC), protons are
accelerated to close to the speed of light and interact; their remnants are recorded by various detector
components, totalling around 1015 bytes of data per second [24]. These data are filtered, processed,
and compared to theory predictions, as we sketch in Fig. 1. Each step of this pipeline requires making
decisions about high-dimensional data. More often than not, these decisions are rooted in machine
learning, increasingly often deep neural networks [12, 13, 20, 32, 44, 49, 52, 66]. This approach
powers most measurements in high-energy physics, culminating in the Higgs boson discovery in
2012 [5, 30].
High-energy physics analyses put stringent requirements on network architectures. They need to
be able to represent particle data and have to be expressive enough to learn complex relations
in high-dimensional spaces precisely. Moreover, training data often come from precise theory
computations and complex detector simulations, both of which require a considerable computational
cost; architectures therefore need to be data efficient. Generative models of particle-physics data
face additional challenges: because of detector boundaries and selection cuts, densities frequently
feature sharp edges; at the same time, it is often important to model low-density tails of distributions
precisely over multiple orders of magnitude of probability densities.
Off-the-shelf architectures originally developed for vision or language are popular starting points for
∗
†

Equal contribution
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

