Wide Two-Layer Networks can Learn from
Adversarial Perturbations
Soichiro Kumano
The University of Tokyo
kumano@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Hiroshi Kera
Chiba University, Zuse Institute Berlin
kera@chiba-u.jp

Toshihiko Yamasaki
The University of Tokyo
yamasaki@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Adversarial examples have raised several open questions, such as why they can
deceive classifiers and transfer between different models. A prevailing hypothesis to
explain these phenomena suggests that adversarial perturbations appear as random
noise but contain class-specific features. This hypothesis is supported by the success
of perturbation learning, where classifiers trained solely on adversarial examples
and the corresponding incorrect labels generalize well to correctly labeled test
data. Although this hypothesis and perturbation learning are effective in explaining
intriguing properties of adversarial examples, their solid theoretical foundation
is limited. In this study, we theoretically explain the counterintuitive success
of perturbation learning. We assume wide two-layer networks and the results
hold for any data distribution. We prove that adversarial perturbations contain
sufficient class-specific features for networks to generalize from them. Moreover,
the predictions of classifiers trained on mislabeled adversarial examples coincide
with those of classifiers trained on correctly labeled clean samples. The code is
available at https://github.com/s-kumano/perturbation-learning.

1

Introduction

Adversarial examples [41], which are imperceptibly perturbed inputs designed to deceive machine
learning models, have raised significant concerns about the robustness and reliability of these models.
Despite their importance, the underlying mechanisms of adversarial examples are not yet fully
understood. A prevailing hypothesis to explain the intriguing properties of adversarial examples is
the “feature hypothesis” [22]. This hypothesis posits that adversarial perturbations, while appearing
as imperceptible noise to humans, contain class-specific features. The feature hypothesis provides a
unified explanation for several puzzling phenomena associated with adversarial examples, such as
their ability to deceive classifiers, transferability across models, and so on (cf. Section 2.1).
Perturbation learning [22] provides empirical evidence supporting the feature hypothesis. In this learning, classifiers are trained solely on adversarial examples that are mislabeled in human perception,1
yet they demonstrate remarkable generalization to clean test data (Fig. 1). For example, classifiers
achieved 77% accuracy on the correctly labeled clean test dataset of CIFAR-10 [27], even though they
1
This is the critical difference between perturbation learning and adversarial training or training with noisy
labels. Perturbation learning shows the learnability solely from adversarial examples (e.g., a cat adversarial
image) that always have incorrect labels (e.g., the bird label) to classify clean test images with the correct
labels (i.e., bird clean images to the bird class). Perturbation learning does not aim to learn robustly against
adversarial examples or noisy labels. Refer to Appendix A in [28] for further clarifications.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

