Nimbus: Secure and Efficient Two-Party Inference for
Transformers
∗

†

Zhengyi Li1, , Kang Yang3, , Jin Tan4 , Wen-jie Lu4 , Haoqi Wu4 , Xiao Wang5 ,
†
Yu Yu1,2 , Derun Zhao4 , Yancheng Zheng4 , Minyi Guo1,2 , Jingwen Leng1,2,
1
2
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Qizhi Institute, State Key Laboratory of Cryptology
4
Ant Group, 5 Northwestern University

Abstract
Transformer models have gained significant attention due to their power in machine learning tasks. Their extensive deployment has raised concerns about the
potential leakage of sensitive information during inference. However, when being
applied to Transformers, existing approaches based on secure two-party computation (2PC) bring about efficiency limitations in two folds: (1) resource-intensive
matrix multiplications in linear layers, and (2) complex non-linear activation functions like GELU and Softmax. This work presents a new two-party inference
framework Nimbus for Transformer models. For the linear layer, we propose a
new 2PC paradigm along with an encoding approach to securely compute matrix
multiplications based on an outer-product insight, which achieves 2.9× ∼ 12.5×
performance improvements compared to the state-of-the-art (SOTA) protocol. For
the non-linear layer, through a new observation of utilizing the input distribution,
we propose an approach of low-degree polynomial approximation for GELU and
Softmax, which improves the performance of the SOTA polynomial approximation by 2.9× ∼ 4.0×, where the average accuracy loss of our approach is 0.08%
compared to the non-2PC inference without privacy. Compared with the SOTA
two-party inference, Nimbus improves the end-to-end performance of BERTbase
inference by 2.7× ∼ 4.7× across different network settings.

1

Introduction

Transformer models [36] bring about significant advancements in various machine learning tasks,
such as language understanding [19], vision tasks [6], and chatting bot [21]. As Transformer models
handle increasingly sensitive data and tasks, privacy becomes a major concern for deployment. For
example, one hospital (client) wants to use the model from another organization (server) to enhance
its diagnostic capabilities. This raises privacy concerns for both parties: either the hospital has to
upload its private data, or the organization needs to send its proprietary model to the hospital.
Recently, several works [14, 26, 16, 29], building upon secure two-party computation (2PC), realize
secure two-party inference in a privacy-preserving way. These works proceed by having the client and
server jointly execute inference over the “encrypted” input and model, using cryptographic techniques
including homomorphic encryption (HE) [7], additive secret sharing, etc. The client learns nothing
about the model except for inference results and keeps the server unknown for the client’s input.
Privacy protection comes with substantial computation and communication costs due to expensive
cryptographic operations. While existing secure two-party inference for convolution neural networks
could be completed in a few minutes [8, 23, 18, 2, 34, 32, 17], it is more challenging to make secure
∗
†

Email at hobbit@sjtu.edu.cn
Corresponding authors, email at: yangk@sklc.org and leng-jw@sjtu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

