MVInpainter: Learning Multi-View Consistent
Inpainting to Bridge 2D and 3D Editing

Chenjie Cao1,2,3 , Chaohui Yu2,3 , Fan Wang2,3 , Xiangyang Xue1 , Yanwei Fu1∗
1
Fudan University, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, 3 Hupan Lab
{caochenjie.ccj,huakun.ych,fan.w}@alibaba-inc.com
{xyxue,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) and 3D generation have recently achieved prominent improvements. However, these works mainly focus on confined categories
or synthetic 3D assets, which are discouraged from generalizing to challenging
in-the-wild scenes and fail to be employed with 2D synthesis directly. Moreover,
these methods heavily depended on camera poses, limiting their real-world applications. To overcome these issues, we propose MVInpainter, re-formulating
the 3D editing as a multi-view 2D inpainting task. Specifically, MVInpainter
partially inpaints multi-view images with the reference guidance rather than intractably generating an entirely novel view from scratch, which largely simplifies
the difficulty of in-the-wild NVS and leverages unmasked clues instead of explicit
pose conditions. To ensure cross-view consistency, MVInpainter is enhanced by
video priors from motion components and appearance guidance from concatenated reference key&value attention. Furthermore, MVInpainter incorporates slot
attention to aggregate high-level optical flow features from unmasked regions
to control the camera movement with pose-free training and inference. Sufficient scene-level experiments on both object-centric and forward-facing datasets
verify the effectiveness of MVInpainter, including diverse tasks, such as multiview object removal, synthesis, insertion, and replacement. The project page is
https://ewrfcas.github.io/MVInpainter/.

1

Introduction

This paper studies editing 3D scenes by expanding one or few 2D manipulated references to other
observed views. Particularly, with the development of diffusion-based text-to-image (T2I) models [59, 63, 4, 54], we have seen substantial success in novel view synthesis (NVS) [23, 30, 97], 3D
generation [55, 40, 79, 96, 44, 67, 43, 66], and controllable generation [60, 98, 10, 14]. But most
existing synthesis methods [14, 98, 10] have only been proven useful in 2D scenarios. It is intuitive
to extend these pioneering methods to multi-view scenarios to bridge the gap between 2D and 3D
editing. This raises the question: how to make a unified framework to generate vivid multi-view
foreground objects seamlessly integrated with their surroundings?
Despite the achievements in NVS and 3D generation, achieving multi-view consistent scene editing
by inserting, removing, replacing objects like Fig. 1 still present challenges. 1) 3D object generation
struggles to generalize to scene-level editing. Most object-centric 3D generation methods [44, 67, 31]
are trained on large-scale synthetic datasets [18, 17, 31] with simplistic backgrounds, neglecting
real-world factors like illumination and shadows, which are essential for natural editing. While some
methods integrate predefined 3D assets into NeRFs [65] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [15], they
still struggle with blending foreground and background elements seamlessly. 2) NVS methods have
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

