Recognize Any Regions

Haosen Yang1∗ Chuofan Ma2
1

University of Surrey

Bin Wen3
2

Yi Jiang3† Zehuan Yuan3

The University of Hong Kong

3

Xiatian Zhu1†

ByteDance

Abstract
Understanding the semantics of individual regions or patches of unconstrained
images, such as open-world object detection, remains a critical yet challenging
task in computer vision. Building on the success of powerful image-level visionlanguage (ViL) foundation models like CLIP, recent efforts have sought to harness
their capabilities by either training a contrastive model from scratch with an extensive collection of region-label pairs or aligning the outputs of a detection model
with image-level representations of region proposals. Despite notable progress,
these approaches are plagued by computationally intensive training requirements,
susceptibility to data noise, and deficiency in contextual information. To address
these limitations, we explore the synergistic potential of off-the-shelf foundation
models, leveraging their respective strengths in localization and semantics. We introduce a novel, generic, and efficient architecture, named RegionSpot, designed
to integrate position-aware localization knowledge from a localization foundation
model (e.g., SAM) with semantic information from a ViL model (e.g., CLIP).
To fully exploit pretrained knowledge while minimizing training overhead, we
keep both foundation models frozen, focusing optimization efforts solely on a
lightweight attention-based knowledge integration module. Extensive experiments
in open-world object recognition show that our RegionSpot achieves significant
performance gain over prior alternatives, along with substantial computational
savings (e.g., training our model with 3 million data in a single day using 8 V100
GPUs). RegionSpot outperforms GLIP-L by 2.9 in mAP on LVIS val set, with an
even larger margin of 13.1 AP for more challenging and rare categories, and a 2.5
AP increase on ODinW. Furthermore, it exceeds GroundingDINO-L by 11.0 AP
for rare categories on the LVIS minival set.

1

Introduction

Remarkable progress has been achieved in the realm of purpose-generic image-level Vision-Language
(ViL) representation learning, as exemplified by foundation models like CLIP [24] and ALIGN [11].
These advancements have led to significant performance improvements across a diverse spectrum of
vision and multi-modal downstream tasks [7, 44]. The efficacy of these approaches can be largely
attributed to their utilization of extensive datasets, typically encompassing millions, if not billions,
of training samples replete with rich information. In the pursuit of a more nuanced approach to
visual analysis, researchers have also ventured into the realm of universal region-level (e.g., objects)
comprehension. This is evident in recent research endeavors [7, 39, 23, 4, 43, 16, 19, 22]. A common
approach to this involves learning the semantics of image regions by applying an image-level pretrained model (e.g., CLIP) to cropped regions, followed by representational distillation using the
output of a detection model [7, 39], as depicted in Figure 1(a). However, utilizing individual cropped
∗
†

This work was performed when Haosen Yang worked as an intern at ByteDance.
Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

