RestoreAgent: Autonomous Image Restoration Agent
via Multimodal Large Language Models

Haoyu Chen1 , Wenbo Li2 , Jinjin Gu3 , Jingjing Ren1 , Sixiang Chen1 ,
Tian Ye1 , Renjing Pei2 , Kaiwen Zhou2 , Fenglong Song2 , Lei Zhu1,4∗
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
The University of Sydney 4 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Project page: https://haoyuchen.com/RestoreAgent

Abstract
Natural images captured by mobile devices often suffer from multiple types of
degradation, such as noise, blur, and low light. Traditional image restoration
methods require manual selection of specific tasks, algorithms, and execution
sequences, which is time-consuming and may yield suboptimal results. All-in-one
models, though capable of handling multiple tasks, typically support only a limited
range and often produce overly smooth, low-fidelity outcomes due to their broad
data distribution fitting. To address these challenges, we first define a new pipeline
for restoring images with multiple degradations, and then introduce RestoreAgent,
an intelligent image restoration system leveraging multimodal large language
models. RestoreAgent autonomously assesses the type and extent of degradation
in input images and performs restoration through (1) determining the appropriate
restoration tasks, (2) optimizing the task sequence, (3) selecting the most suitable
models, and (4) executing the restoration. Experimental results demonstrate the
superior performance of RestoreAgent in handling complex degradation, surpassing
human experts. Furthermore, the system’s modular design facilitates the fast
integration of new tasks and models.

1

Introduction

Image restoration, a classical research area in computer vision, focuses on recovering high-quality
images from degraded observations. Traditional methods are usually tailored to specific tasks
like denoising [55, 61, 49, 29, 30, 12, 3], super-resolution [56, 34, 53, 4, 45, 47, 48], and deblurring [28, 22, 51, 32, 44, 17]. However, real-world images often suffer from multiple simultaneous
degradations. For example, a low-quality image may exhibit noise, blur, and rain concurrently. There
may exist complex interactions and dependencies among different degradation phenomena, and each
degradation may require distinct handling methods. The combination and sequence of these methods
are crucial for the final restoration outcome. Recent advancements in the field have been driven by
leveraging expert knowledge and developing all-in-one models. To provide a thorough understanding
of this field and clarify our motivation, we present a detailed analysis below.
1.1 All-in-One Models
All-in-one models [38, 31, 24, 40, 33, 14, 27, 37, 1, 25] seek to use a single framework to handle
multiple degradations simultaneously. By training on multi-task datasets, these models learn to
manage various restoration tasks. However, several limitations continue to impede the practicality of
these models in complex real-world scenarios:
Restricted task scope. All-in-one models often struggle to process degradations outside of their
training data. Even for the same type of degradation, as shown in Figure 2 a1, these models may have
difficulty effectively processing data if the degradation distribution varies between the training and
testing sets. Given that existing models only cover a limited number of tasks, employing specialized
single-task restoration models is often more flexible and effective.
∗

Lei Zhu (leizhu@ust.hk) is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

