Unlocking Tokens as Data Points for Generalization
Bounds on Larger Language Models

1

Sanae Lotfi1,∗

Yilun Kuang1,∗

Micah Goldblum3

Marc Finzi4

New York University

2

Meta AI

3

Brandon Amos2,†
Andrew Gordon Wilson1

Columbia University

4

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) with billions of parameters excel at predicting the
next token in a sequence. Recent work computes non-vacuous compression-based
generalization bounds for LLMs, but these bounds are vacuous for large models at
the billion-parameter scale. Moreover, these bounds are obtained through restrictive
compression techniques, bounding compressed models that generate low-quality
text. Additionally, the tightness of these existing bounds depends on the number
of IID documents in a training set rather than the much larger number of non-IID
constituent tokens, leaving untapped potential for tighter bounds. In this work, we
instead use properties of martingales to derive generalization bounds that benefit
from the vast number of tokens in LLM training sets. Since a dataset contains
far more tokens than documents, our generalization bounds not only tolerate but
actually benefit from far less restrictive compression schemes. With Monarch
matrices, Kronecker factorizations, and post-training quantization, we achieve
non-vacuous generalization bounds for LLMs as large as LLaMA2-70B. Unlike
previous approaches, our work achieves the first non-vacuous bounds for models
that are deployed in practice and generate high-quality text.

1

Introduction

Despite the impressive empirical performance of large language models (LLMs), our theoretical
understanding of their performance is lacking. PAC-Bayes and the related finite hypothesis generalization bounds [5, 13, 17] offer a compelling framework for understanding this good performance
through the lens of compression. These bounds tell us that a model will provide good generalization
if it is capable of fitting its training data while simultaneously being compressible relative to the
size of its training set. The generalization bounds literature includes many techniques for achieving
tighter bounds on image classification problems, ranging from improved bounds themselves to new
compression methods [53, 14, 18, 38, 31].
Recent work presented the first non-vacuous generalization bounds for large language models, considering training points to be independent and identically distributed (IID) documents [32]. The
authors compute generalization bounds for the expected bits-per-dimension (BPD) loss, defined for
a document X composed of k tokens and a language model h as the average negative log probaPk
bility BPD(h, X) = − k1 i log2 ph (xi |x<i ). These bounds are only non-vacuous for compressed
∗

Equal contribution, order decided by coin flip. Correspondence to: Sanae Lotfi <sl8160@nyu.edu>, Yilun
Kuang <yilun.kuang@nyu.edu>, Andrew Gordon Wilson <andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.
†
Meta-affiliated author was involved only in an advisory role. All experimentation and data processing were
conducted at NYU.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

