Fine-Tuning Personalization in Federated Learning
to Mitigate Adversarial Clients

Youssef Allouah∗
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
Nirupam Gupta
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark

Abdellah El Mrini†
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

Rachid Guerraoui
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

Rafael Pinot
Sorbonne Université and Université Paris Cité,
CNRS, F-75005 Paris, France

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is an appealing paradigm that allows a group of machines
(a.k.a. clients) to learn collectively while keeping their data local. However, due
to the heterogeneity between the clients’ data distributions, the model obtained
through the use of FL algorithms may perform poorly on some client’s data.
Personalization addresses this issue by enabling each client to have a different
model tailored to their own data while simultaneously benefiting from the other
clients’ data. We consider an FL setting where some clients can be adversarial, and
we derive conditions under which full collaboration fails. Specifically, we analyze
the generalization performance of an interpolated personalized FL framework in the
presence of adversarial clients, and we precisely characterize situations when full
collaboration performs strictly worse than fine-tuned personalization. Our analysis
determines how much we should scale down the level of collaboration, according
to data heterogeneity and the tolerable fraction of adversarial clients. We support
our findings with empirical results on mean estimation and binary classification
problems, considering synthetic and benchmark image classification datasets.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is the de facto standard for a group of machines (also referred to as clients)
to learn a common model on their collective data (Kairouz et al., 2021). The benefit of this method is
twofold: the clients (1) retain control over their local data (as they do not communicate them to a
central server) and (2) share the computational workload during the learning procedure. Although
FL is a promising learning paradigm, it also comes with its own technical challenges, the first of
which is data heterogeneity. Indeed, each client holds only a portion of the common dataset, which is
not necessarily a faithful representation of the entire population. This could lead to disagreements
amongst clients on model updates, rendering the task of learning an accurate model in this context
cumbersome. Nevertheless, when all machines correctly follow a prescribed algorithm, this problem
can be solved using either a distributed implementation of the stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
algorithm or variants of the federated averaging scheme (McMahan et al., 2017; Khaled et al., 2020;
Karimireddy et al., 2020). Another negative impact of data heterogeneity is the non-uniformity of
model accuracy. Specifically, while an FL algorithm outputs a model that is accurate on average, the
accuracy of this model on different clients’ local data could vary significantly.
∗
†

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Correspondence to : Abdellah El Mrini <abdellah.elmrini@epfl.ch>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

