Accelerating Nash Equilibrium Convergence in Monte
Carlo Settings Through Counterfactual Value Based
Fictitious Play

Ju Qi1,2,† , Hei Falin1,2 , Feng Ting1,2 , Yi Dengbing1,2 , Fang Zhemei1,2,† , Luo Yunfeng1,2
1. School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2. National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing
{juqi, heifalin, fenting, yidengbing, zmfang2018, yfluo}@hust.edu.cn
†
Corresponding author.

Abstract
Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) and its variants are widely recognized
as effective algorithms for solving extensive-form imperfect information games.
Recently, many improvements have been focused on enhancing the convergence
speed of the CFR algorithm. However, most of these variants are not applicable
under Monte Carlo (MC) conditions, making them unsuitable for training in largescale games. We introduce a new MC-based algorithm for solving extensive-form
imperfect information games, called MCCFVFP (Monte Carlo Counterfactual
Value-Based Fictitious Play). MCCFVFP combines CFR’s counterfactual value
calculations with fictitious play’s best response strategy, leveraging the strengths of
fictitious play to gain significant advantages in games with a high proportion of
dominated strategies. Experimental results show that MCCFVFP achieved convergence speeds approximately 20%∼50% faster than the most advanced MCCFR
variants in games like poker and other test games.

1

Introduction

Game theory investigates mathematical models of strategic interactions among rational agents,
aiming to identify a Nash Equilibrium (NE) where no participant can gain by deviating from the
established strategy. For complete information games, it is possible to segment the game into smaller
sub-games and apply backward induction to determine the equilibrium. In contrast, in incomplete
information games, the inability to directly apply sub-game payoffs in the backward induction
algorithm significantly increases the complexity of finding an equilibrium.
The Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) algorithm Zinkevich et al. [2007] is crucial for
solving extensive-form games with incomplete information. CFR has numerous variants, such as
CFR+ Tammelin [2014], Lazy CFR Zhou et al. [2018], PCFR Farina et al. [2021], DCFR Brown and
Sandholm [2019a], and PDCFR Xu et al. [2024]. Nevertheless, these variants typically require a full
traversal of the entire game tree, which is impractical for real-world applications. In contrast, games
like no-limit Texas hold’em, DouDizhu, and Mahjong have 10162 Moravík et al. [2017], 1083 Zha et
al. [2021], and 10121 Li et al. [2020] information sets, respectively, making full traversal infeasible.
To address this, Lanctot et al. Lanctot et al. [2010] proposed Monte Carlo CFR (MCCFR), which
reduces the number of game tree nodes visited in each iteration through sampling. This makes
MCCFR the preferred algorithm for training large-scale games. However, most CFR variants cannot
improve the convergence speed in the case of MCCFR. Only a few variants, such as Discount
MCCFR Brown and Sandholm [2019a] and VR-MCCFR Schmid et al. [2019], are currently suitable
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

