Training Binary Neural Networks
via Gaussian Variational Inference
and Low-Rank Semidefinite Programming

Lorenzo Orecchia
University of Chicago
Zhe Wang
I2 R, A*STAR

Jiawei Hu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Xulei Yang
I2 R, A*STAR

Xue He
Northeastern University of China

Min Wu∗
I2 R, A*STAR

Xue Geng
I2 R, A*STAR

Abstract
Improving the training of Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) is a longstanding
challenge whose outcome can significantly affect our ability to deploy deep learning
ubiquitously. Current methods heavily rely on latent weights and the heuristic
straight-through estimator (STE), which enable the application of SGD-based
optimizers to the combinatorial training problem, but remain theoretically poorly
understood. In this paper, we propose an optimization framework for BNN training
based on Gaussian variational inference. Our approach yields a non-convex linear
programming formulation that theoretically motivates the use of latent weights, STE
and weight clipping. More importantly, it allows us to go beyond latent weights
to formulate and solve low-rank semidefinite programming (SDP) relaxations
that explicitly model and learn pairwise correlations between weights during
training, resulting in improved accuracy. Our empirical evaluation on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, Tiny-ImageNet and ImageNet datasets shows our method consistently
outperforms all state-of-the-art algorithms for training BNNs.

1

Introduction

The advent of deep learning has revolutionized the field of machine learning and enabled stunning
technological advances in numerous application areas, including computer vision [He et al., 2017],
speech recognition [Baevski et al., 2020] and natural language processing [Devlin et al., 2018].
Despite these achievements, the broader application of deep learning is impeded by high computational demands, requiring the advanced hardware and energy consumption typically reserved for
supercomputers [Thompson et al., 2022], both for training and inference. This barrier is particularly
formidable when deep learning is deployed on resource-constrained devices, like smartphones and
IoT devices, where limitations in memory, processing power and energy are critical [Sze et al., 2017].
To address these issues, Muller and Indiveri [2015] and Courbariaux et al. [2015b] noted that
neural networks could provide the same level of performance while restricting the precision of the
representation of parameters to a small number of bits, effectively quantizing the space of weights.
To reap the full benefits of quantization, Courbariaux et al. [2015b, 2016] and Kim and Smaragdis
[2016] independently introduced binarized neural networks (BNNs), which use 1-bit representations
for each weight, directly leading to a 32-fold reduction in model size compared to single-precision
weights. When activation is further binarized [Hubara et al., 2016], the multiplication and addition
operations can be replaced by much faster and cheaper XNOR and popcount operations, resulting in
* Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

