Trajectory Flow Matching with Applications to
Clinical Time Series Modeling

Xi Zhang1,2 ∗
Yuan Pu3 ∗
Yuki Kawamura4
Andrew Loza3
2,5,6
3 †
Yoshua Bengio
Dennis L. Shung
Alexander Tong2,5 †
1

McGill University, 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute,
3
Yale School of Medicine
4
School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge,
5
Université de Montréal, 6 CIFAR Fellow

Abstract
Modeling stochastic and irregularly sampled time series is a challenging problem
found in a wide range of applications, especially in medicine. Neural stochastic
differential equations (Neural SDEs) are an attractive modeling technique for
this problem, which parameterize the drift and diffusion terms of an SDE with
neural networks. However, current algorithms for training Neural SDEs require
backpropagation through the SDE dynamics, greatly limiting their scalability and
stability. To address this, we propose Trajectory Flow Matching (TFM), which
trains a Neural SDE in a simulation-free manner, bypassing backpropagation
through the dynamics. TFM leverages the flow matching technique from generative
modeling to model time series. In this work we first establish necessary conditions
for TFM to learn time series data. Next, we present a reparameterization trick
which improves training stability. Finally, we adapt TFM to the clinical time
series setting, demonstrating improved performance on four clinical time series
datasets both in terms of absolute performance and uncertainty prediction, a crucial
parameter in this setting.

1

Introduction

Real world problems often involve systems that evolve continuously over time, yet these systems
are usually noisy and irregularly sampled. In addition, real-world time series often relate to other
covariates, leading to complex patterns such as intersecting trajectories. For instance, in the context
of clinical trajectories in healthcare, patients’ vital sign evolution can follow drastically different,
crossing paths even if the initial measurements are similar, due to the influence of the covariates such
as medication intervention and underlying health conditions. These covariates can be time-varying or
static, and often sparse.
Differential equation-based dynamical models are proficient at learning continuous variables without imputations [Chen et al., 2018, Rubanova et al., 2019, Kidger et al., 2021b]. Nevertheless,
systems governed by ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or stochastic differential equations
(SDEs) are unable to accommodate intersecting trajectories, and thus requires modifications such
as augmentation or modelling higher-order derivatives [Dupont et al., 2019]. While ODEs model
deterministic systems, SDEs contain a diffusion term and can better represent the inherent uncertainty
and fluctuations present in many real world systems. However, fitting stochastic equations to real life
∗
†

Joint first authorship
Joint senior authorship. Correspondence to alexander.tong@mila.quebec
Code available at: https://github.com/nZhangx/TrajectoryFlowMatching

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

