Cross-model Control: Improving Multiple Large
Language Models in One-time Training

Jiayi Wu1 , Hao Sun2 , Hengyi Cai3 , Lixin Su4 ,
Shuaiqiang Wang4 , Dawei Yin4 , Xiang Li1∗, Ming Gao1,5,6
1
School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University
2
Peking University 3 Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Baidu Inc
5
KLATASDS-MOE, School of Statistics, East China Normal University
6
Guizhou Zhuwen ECNU Data Power Institute
jiayiwu@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, sunhao@stu.pku.edu.cn
caihengyi@ict.ac.cn, {sulixin,wangshuaiqiang}@baidu.com
yindawei@acm.org, {xiangli,mgao}@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The number of large language models (LLMs) with varying parameter scales and
vocabularies is increasing. While they deliver powerful performance, they also face
a set of common optimization needs to meet specific requirements or standards,
such as instruction following or avoiding the output of sensitive information from
the real world. However, how to reuse the fine-tuning outcomes of one model
to other models to reduce training costs remains a challenge. To bridge this
gap, we introduce Cross-model Control (CMC), a method that improves multiple
LLMs in one-time training with a portable tiny language model. Specifically,
we have observed that the logit shift before and after fine-tuning is remarkably
similar across different models. Based on this insight, we incorporate a tiny
language model with a minimal number of parameters. By training alongside
a frozen template LLM, the tiny model gains the capability to alter the logits
output by the LLMs. To make this tiny language model applicable to models
with different vocabularies, we propose a novel token mapping strategy named
PM-MinED. We have conducted extensive experiments on instruction tuning and
unlearning tasks, demonstrating the effectiveness of CMC. Our code is available at
https://github.com/wujwyi/CMC.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been an increasing number of large language models (LLMs) with varying
parameter scales and vocabularies, whose outstanding performance has significantly impacted human
society (Achiam et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023). At the same time, although large pre-trained
language models have gained the ability to handle various natural language processing tasks after
pre-training, they generally face a series of common optimization needs to meet specific application
requirements or ethical standards. For instance, in the case of instruction following (Wei et al.,
2022), after pre-training, vanilla models typically require instruction tuning to develop the capacity
to comprehend user instructions accurately. Alternatively, unlearning and detoxification are also
necessary considerations (Gehman et al., 2020; Chen and Yang, 2023). During the training process,
models may encounter data containing real-world personal privacy information or content that is
harmful, offensive, or prejudiced. This could lead them to output these information during the
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

