AdaNCA: Neural Cellular Automata as Adaptors for
More Robust Vision Transformer
Yitao Xu Tong Zhang Sabine Süsstrunk
Image and Visual Representation Lab
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne,Lausanne, Switzerland
{yitao.xu,tong.zhang,sabine.susstrunk}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) demonstrate remarkable performance in image classification through visual-token interaction learning, particularly when equipped with
local information via region attention or convolutions. Although such architectures
improve the feature aggregation from different granularities, they often fail to contribute to the robustness of the networks. Neural Cellular Automata (NCA) enables
the modeling of global visual-token representations through local interactions, as its
training strategies and architecture design confer strong generalization ability and
robustness against noisy input. In this paper, we propose Adaptor Neural Cellular
Automata (AdaNCA) for Vision Transformers that uses NCA as plug-and-play
adaptors between ViT layers, thus enhancing ViT’s performance and robustness
against adversarial samples as well as out-of-distribution inputs. To overcome the
large computational overhead of standard NCAs, we propose Dynamic Interaction
for more efficient interaction learning. Using our analysis of AdaNCA placement
and robustness improvement, we also develop an algorithm for identifying the most
effective insertion points for AdaNCA. With less than a 3% increase in parameters,
AdaNCA contributes to more than 10% of absolute improvement in accuracy under
adversarial attacks on the ImageNet1K benchmark. Moreover, we demonstrate
with extensive evaluations across eight robustness benchmarks and four ViT architectures that AdaNCA, as a plug-and-play module, consistently improves the
robustness of ViTs.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformers (ViTs) exhibit impressive performance in image classification, through globally
modeling token interactions via self-attention mechanisms [11, 14, 77]. Recent works show that
integrating local information into ViTs, e.g., using region attention [26, 38, 39, 54, 65, 70, 73] or
convolution [8, 10, 16, 22, 23, 37, 42, 52, 68, 71, 75], further enhances the ViT’s capabilities in image
classification. Although advanced local structures contribute to better captures of local information,
the robustness of ViTs has not increased. They remain vulnerable to noisy input such as adversarial
samples [5, 9, 13, 41, 42] and out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs [17, 18, 28, 30, 67].
Recently, Neural Cellular Automata (NCA) was proposed as a lightweight architecture for modeling
local cell interactions [44], where cells are represented by 1D vectors. To perform downstream tasks,
similarly to the idea of token interactions in ViTs, cells in NCA interact with each other by alternating
between a convolution-based Interaction stage and an MLP-based Update stage [46, 49]. The critical
difference, however, is that cell interactions in NCA evolve over time by recurrent application of the
two stages, whereas ViT computes the token interaction in a single step per layer. During this process,
cells dynamically modulate their representations, based on the interactions with their neighbors, and
they gradually enlarge their receptive fields. Unlike commonly used convolutional neural networks,
NCA maintains resolution during neighborhood expansion. The recurrent update scheme enables the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

