Almost Surely Asymptotically Constant Graph Neural
Networks
Sam Adam-Day∗

Michael Benedikt
İsmail İlkan Ceylan
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK

Ben Finkelshtein

Abstract
We present a new angle on the expressive power of graph neural networks (GNNs)
by studying how the predictions of real-valued GNN classifiers, such as those
classifying graphs probabilistically, evolve as we apply them on larger graphs
drawn from some random graph model. We show that the output converges to
a constant function, which upper-bounds what these classifiers can uniformly
express. This strong convergence phenomenon applies to a very wide class of
GNNs, including state of the art models, with aggregates including mean and the
attention-based mechanism of graph transformers. Our results apply to a broad class
of random graph models, including sparse and dense variants of the Erdős–Rényi
model, the stochastic block model, and the Barabási-Albert model. We empirically
validate these findings, observing that the convergence phenomenon appears not
only on random graphs but also on some real-world graphs.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [44, 21] have
become prominent for graph machine learning with applications in domains such as life
sciences [47, 11, 25, 55]. Their empirical success motivated work investigating their theoretical properties, pertaining to their expressive
power [52, 39, 4, 8, 1, 43, 23, 19, 54], generalization capabilities [18, 33, 38, 45, 40], and
convergence properties [28, 27, 38, 32, 2].
We consider GNNs outputting real-valued vectors, such as those which classify graphs probabilistically, and ask: how do the outputs of
these GNNs evolve as we apply them on larger
graphs drawn from a random graph model?
Figure 1: The output of the considered GNNs evenOur study provides a surprising answer to this tually become constant as the graph sizes increase.
question: the output of many GNNs eventually
become independent of their inputs – each model eventually outputs the same values on all graphs
– as graph sizes increase (Figure 1). This “almost sure convergence” to a constant distribution is
much stronger than convergence to some limit object [28, 27, 32]. The immediate consequence of
this strong convergence phenomenon is to upper bound the uniform expressiveness of the considered
model architectures: these architectures can uniformly express only the classifiers that are almost
∗

Corresponding author. Email: me@samadamday.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

