On the Identifiability of Poisson Branching Structural
Causal Model Using Probability Generating Function

1

Yu Xiang1∗, Jie Qiao1∗, Zhefeng Liang1 , Zihuai Zeng1 , Ruichu Cai1,2†, Zhifeng Hao3
School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China
{thexiang2000, qiaojie.chn, lzfeng011021, zzhuaiiii, cairuichu}@gmail.com,
haozhifeng@stu.edu.cn

Abstract
Causal discovery from observational data, especially for count data, is essential
across scientific and industrial contexts, such as biology, economics, and network
operation maintenance. For this task, most approaches model count data using
Bayesian networks or ordinal relations. However, they overlook the inherent
branching structures that are frequently encountered, e.g., a browsing event might
trigger an adding cart or purchasing event. This can be modeled by a binomial
thinning operator (for branching) and an additive independent Poisson distribution
(for noising), known as Poisson Branching Structure Causal Model (PB-SCM).
There is a provably sound cumulant-based causal discovery method that allows the
identification of the causal structure under a branching structure. However, we show
that there still remains a gap in that there exist causal directions that are identifiable
while the algorithm fails to identify them. In this work, we address this gap by
exploring the identifiability of PB-SCM using the Probability Generating Function
(PGF). By developing a compact and exact closed-form solution for the PGF of PBSCM, we demonstrate that each component in this closed-form solution uniquely
encodes a specific local structure, enabling the identification of the local structures
by testing their corresponding component appearances in the PGF. Building on
this, we propose a practical algorithm for learning causal skeletons and identifying
causal directions of PB-SCM using PGF. The effectiveness of our method is
demonstrated through experiments on both synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery from observational data, particularly for count data is a crucial task that arises
in numerous applications, including biology (Wiuf and Stumpf [2006]), economic (Weiß and Kim
[2014]), network operation maintenance (Qiao et al. [2023], Cai et al. [2022]), etc. Much effort has
been made to model and discover the causal structure from count data. One line of research models
the count data as a type of Poisson Bayesian network (Park and Raskutti [2015, 2017]) or ordinal
functional model (Ni and Mallick [2022]), based on which various types of discovering methods are
investigated. However, the Bayesian network and ordinal modeling ignore the inherent branching
structure among the counting relationship, which is frequently encountered in real world (Weiß
[2018]). Take Fig. 1 (a) as an example, in online shopping, the purchasing event can be inherited
from browsing, cart added, or promotion event, which exhibits a branching structure such that website
browsing (X1 ) may lead to either purchasing (X4 ) directly without adding to the cart, or adding
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

