The Factorization Curse: Which Tokens You Predict
Underlie the Reversal Curse and More
Ouail Kitouni∗1 , Niklas Nolte 2 , Diane Bouchacourt 2 , Adina Williams 2 , Mike Rabbat 2 , and
Mark Ibrahim 2
1

IAIFI, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1
FAIR at Meta

Abstract
Today’s best language models still struggle with hallucinations: factually incorrect generations, which impede their ability to reliably retrieve information seen
during training. The reversal curse, where models cannot recall information when
probed in a different order than was encountered during training, exemplifies this
in information retrieval. We reframe the reversal curse as a factorization curse —
a failure of models to learn the same joint distribution under different factorizations. Through a series of controlled experiments with increasing levels of realism
including WikiReversal, a setting we introduce to closely simulate a knowledge intensive finetuning task, we find that the factorization curse is an inherent failure of
the next-token prediction objective used in popular large language models. Moreover, we demonstrate reliable information retrieval cannot be solved with scale,
reversed tokens, or even naive bidirectional-attention training. Consequently, various approaches to finetuning on specialized data would necessarily provide mixed
results on downstream tasks, unless the model has already seen the right sequence
of tokens. Across five tasks of varying levels of complexity, our results uncover
a promising path forward: factorization-agnostic objectives can significantly mitigate the reversal curse and hint at improved knowledge storage and planning capabilities.

1

Introduction

Although today’s best language models produce impressively cogent, articulate text by learning the
statistics of language, they still struggle to reliably retrieve information seen during training. Models
are known to suffer from hallucinations, potentially responding with fabricated content that differs
from the knowledge present in training data. Hallucinations pose a significant hurdle to the adoption
of language models, especially in domains where reliable knowledge retrieval is paramount (Dahl
et al., 2024). A well-studied failure mode underlying hallucinations is the reversal curse, which
ascribes this deficiency to the precise order of words presented to the model at train-time (Berglund
et al., 2023; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023). For example, a model trained on sentences where Paris always
appears as the subject of the sentence, such as “Paris is the capital of France”, can be tuned to
answer “Paris is the capital of which country?” but not “What is the capital of France?”, even
though these two formulations encode the same underlying information. Existing approaches aimed
at mitigating the reversal curse have focused on data augmentations that involve training on both the
forward and reversed tokens (Golovneva et al., 2024). In this work, we focus on learning objectives.
In Section 2, we propose the factorization curse, a framework that characterizes the reversal curse as
a failure to model the same joint distribution under different factorizations. We show the prevailing
∗

Work done while interning at FAIR, Meta.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

