Interpretable Concept-Based Memory Reasoning

David Debot
KU Leuven
david.debot@kuleuven.be

Pietro Barbiero
Universita’ della Svizzera Italiana
University of Cambridge
barbiero@tutanota.com

Francesco Giannini
Scuola Normale Superiore
francesco.giannini@sns.it

Gabriele Ciravegna
DAUIN, Politecnico di Torino
gabriele.ciravegna@polito.it

Michelangelo Diligenti
University of Siena
michelangelo.diligenti@unisi.it

Giuseppe Marra
KU Leuven
giuseppe.marra@kuleuven.be

Abstract
The lack of transparency in the decision-making processes of deep learning systems presents a significant challenge in modern artificial intelligence (AI), as it
impairs users’ ability to rely on and verify these systems. To address this challenge,
Concept-Based Models (CBMs) have made significant progress by incorporating
human-interpretable concepts into deep learning architectures. This approach
allows predictions to be traced back to specific concept patterns that users can
understand and potentially intervene on. However, existing CBMs’ task predictors are not fully interpretable, preventing a thorough analysis and any form of
formal verification of their decision-making process prior to deployment, thereby
raising significant reliability concerns. To bridge this gap, we introduce Conceptbased Memory Reasoner (CMR), a novel CBM designed to provide a humanunderstandable and provably-verifiable task prediction process. Our approach is
to model each task prediction as a neural selection mechanism over a memory
of learnable logic rules, followed by a symbolic evaluation of the selected rule.
The presence of an explicit memory and the symbolic evaluation allow domain
experts to inspect and formally verify the validity of certain global properties of
interest for the task prediction process. Experimental results demonstrate that
CMR achieves better accuracy-interpretability trade-offs to state-of-the-art CBMs,
discovers logic rules consistent with ground truths, allows for rule interventions,
and allows pre-deployment verification.

1

Introduction

The opaque decision process of deep learning (DL) systems represents one of the most fundamental
problems in modern artificial intelligence (AI). For this reason, eXplainable AI (XAI) [1–3] is
currently one of the most active research areas in AI. Among XAI techniques, Concept-Based Models
(CBMs) [4–8] represented a significant innovation that made DL models explainable-by-design by
introducing a layer of human-interpretable concepts within DL architectures. CBMs consist of at
least two functions: a concept encoder, which maps low-level raw features (e.g. an image’s pixels) to
high-level interpretable concepts (e.g. “red” and “round”), and a task predictor, which uses the learned
concepts to solve a downstream task (e.g. “apple”). This way, each task prediction can be traced back
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

