A New Multi-Source Light Detection Benchmark and
Semi-Supervised Focal Light Detection

Jae-Yong Baek
Yong-Sang Yoo
Seung-Hwan Bae∗
Inha University, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Vision and Learning Lab.
{jy1213, cpp0094}@inha.edu, shbae@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper addresses a multi-source light detection (LD) problem from vehicles,
traffic signals, and streetlights under driving scenarios. Albeit it is crucial for
autonomous driving and night vision, this problem has not been yet focused on
as much as other object detection (OD). One of the main reasons is the absence
of a public available LD benchmark dataset. Therefore, we construct a new large
LD dataset consisting of different light sources via heavy annotation:YouTube
Driving Light Detection dataset (YDLD). Compared to the existing LD datasets,
our dataset has much more images and box annotations for multi-source lights. We
also provide rigorous statistical analysis and transfer learning comparison of other
well-known detection benchmark datasets to prove the generality of our YDLD.
For the recent object detectors, we achieve the extensive comparison results on
YDLD. However, they tend to yield the low mAP scores due to the intrinsic challenges of LD caused by very tiny size and similar appearance. To resolve those,
we design a novel lightness focal loss which penalizes miss-classified samples
more and a lightness spatial attention prior by reflecting a global scene context.
In addition, we develop a semi-supervised focal light detection (SS-FLD) by embedding our lightness focal loss into the semi-supervised object detection (SSOD).
We prove that our methods can consistently boost mAP to the variety of types
of recent detectors on YDLD. We will open both YDLD and SS-FLD code at
https://github.com/YDLD-dataset/YDLD.

1

Introduction

Light detection (LD) in a driving environment is a fundamental technology for autonomous driving
and night vision. During the past few years, there have been efforts to detect light sources [1, 2] or
remove unnecessary light effects (e.g. sun glare) [2]. Nevertheless, its progress still lags behind the
other detection studies [3–6] and the solid baseline for light detection is not yet designed. The main
reason comes from the lack of public available multi-source LD datasets. In specific, the existing
dataset is limited to the binary detection problem. However, each light source should be disentangled
since they convey the different contexts of understanding an image scene.
Therefore, we release a novel multi-source light detection dataset: YouTube Driving Light Detection
(YDLD). Our dataset contains 3.5k images and 116k box annotations for three light sources: a vehicle
light, a traffic signal, and a streetlight. We select these classes since they are important cues to predict
the behaviors of other vehicles and understand the road environment. To build this dataset, we first
collect a huge amount of images captured in different times and spaces from YouTube and then tailor
appropriate frames which contain many light sources. The most images were captured on real driving
environment at night or evening time. Then, we perform the costly bounding box annotation per
image. In particular, we strive to annotate very tiny light sources carefully as shown in Fig. 1.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

