Opponent Modeling with In-context Search

Yuheng Jing1,2 Bingyun Liu1,2 Kai Li1,2,† Yifan Zang1,2
Haobo Fu6 Qiang Fu6 Junliang Xing5 Jian Cheng1,3,4,†
†
denotes corresponding authors
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
AiRiA 5 Tsinghua University 6 Tencent AI Lab
{jingyuheng2022,liubingyun2021,kai.li,zangyifan2019,jian.cheng}
@ia.ac.cn, {haobofu,leonfu}@tencent.com, jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Opponent modeling is a longstanding research topic aimed at enhancing decisionmaking by modeling information about opponents in multi-agent environments.
However, existing approaches often face challenges such as having difficulty generalizing to unknown opponent policies and conducting unstable performance. To
tackle these challenges, we propose a novel approach based on in-context learning and decision-time search named Opponent Modeling with In-context Search
(OMIS). OMIS leverages in-context learning-based pretraining to train a Transformer model for decision-making. It consists of three in-context components: an
actor learning best responses to opponent policies, an opponent imitator mimicking
opponent actions, and a critic estimating state values. When testing in an environment that features unknown non-stationary opponent agents, OMIS uses pretrained
in-context components for decision-time search to refine the actor’s policy. Theoretically, we prove that under reasonable assumptions, OMIS without search converges
in opponent policy recognition and has good generalization properties; with search,
OMIS provides improvement guarantees, exhibiting performance stability. Empirically, in competitive, cooperative, and mixed environments, OMIS demonstrates
more effective and stable adaptation to opponents than other approaches. See our
project website at https://sites.google.com/view/nips2024-omis.

1

Introduction

Opponent Modeling (OM) is a pivotal topic in artificial intelligence research, aiming to develop autonomous agents capable of modeling the behaviors, goals, beliefs, or other properties of adversaries
or teammates (collectively termed as opponents). Such modelings are used to reduce uncertainty
in multi-agent environments and enhance decision-making [4, 59, 101, 28, 107, 63, 53, 92, 105, 17,
102, 66, 68]. Despite the methodologies and insights proposed by existing OM approaches, their
processes generally boil down to two stages: (1) Pretraining: pretrain a model with designed OM
methodology on a training set of opponent policies; (2) Testing: deploying the pretrained model in a
certain way on a testing set of opponent policies to benchmark adaptability to unknown opponents.
For these two processes, different OM approaches usually have their respective focuses: (1)
Pretraining-Focused Approach (PFA) [29, 28, 63, 107] focuses on acquiring knowledge of responding
to various opponents during pretraining and generalizing it to the testing stage; (2) Testing-Focused
Approach (TFA) [3, 41, 101] focuses on updating the pretrained model during testing to reason and
respond to unknown opponents effectively. However, existing PFAs and TFAs have their respective
common and noteworthy drawbacks. For PFAs, they have limited generalization abilities, as the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

