TripletCLIP: Improving Compositional Reasoning of
CLIP via Synthetic Vision-Language Negatives

Maitreya Patel♢∗ Abhiram Kusumba♢† Sheng Cheng♢† Changhoon Kim♢
Tejas Gokhale♡ Chitta Baral♢ Yezhou Yang♢
♢
Arizona State University ♡ University of Maryland, Baltimore County
tripletclip.github.io

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) models maximize the mutual information between textual and visual modalities to learn representations. However,
the lack of compositional diversity in contemporary image-text datasets limits the
compositional reasoning ability of CLIP. We show that generating “hard” negative
captions via in-context learning and synthesizing corresponding negative images
with text-to-image generators offers a solution. We introduce a novel contrastive
pre-training strategy that leverages these hard negative captions and images in
an alternating fashion to train CLIP. We demonstrate that our method, named
TripletCLIP, when applied to existing datasets such as CC3M and CC12M,
enhances the compositional capabilities of CLIP, resulting in an absolute improvement of over 9% on the SugarCrepe benchmark on an equal computational budget,
as well as improvements in zero-shot image classification and image retrieval. Our
code, models, and data are available at: tripletclip.github.io.

1

Introduction

Large-scale vision-language models, such as CLIP [41], have significantly advanced multi-modal
learning by employing contrastive learning to acquire shared semantic representations from paired
datasets. This approach has resulted in improved performance in vision-language tasks as well as
zero-shot image classification [51] and segmentation [23, 62]. Beyond vision-language tasks, the
individual components of these models, such as the vision encoder and the language encoder, are
integral to several multimodal architectures and generative models such as multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) [30, 26] and text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [45, 37, 38]. Yet, compositional
reasoning remains challenging and multimodal models continue to exhibit naïve “bag of words”
behavior, frequently failing to distinguish between expressions like “bulb in the grass” and “grass in
the bulb” [58, 53]. Addressing this challenge remains critical for enhancing vision-language models
and their downstream applications.
Contrastive learning of representations benefits from “hard negative samples” (i.e., points that are
difficult to distinguish from an anchor point) [43]. However, at each optimization step for training
CLIP, image-text pairs are randomly sampled from the training dataset – this random sampling seldom
exposes the model to highly similar negative pairs. We hypothesize that the limited compositional
understanding of CLIP may stem from such issues in the optimization objective and sampling from
training datasets. A straightforward solution could involve iteratively identifying hard negative pairs
for each training iteration. However, due to the noisy captions and the scarcity of such pairs in existing
datasets, prior work generates hard negative captions as a form of augmentation using rule-based
strategies [58, 61]. For instance, given an image-text pair labeled “a brown horse”, an additional
∗

Corresponding author: maitreya.patel@asu.edu. † indicates the equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

