H AWK:
Learning to Understand Open-World Video Anomalies

Jiaqi Tang1,2,3∗ Hao Lu1,2∗ Ruizheng Wu4 Xiaogang Xu5,6 Ke Ma7
Cheng Fang7 Bin Guo7 Jiangbo Lu3,4 Qifeng Chen2 Ying-Cong Chen1,2,3†
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 HKUST(GZ) – SmartMore Joint Lab
4
SmartMore Corporation 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 6 Zhejiang University
7
Northwestern Polytechnical University
{jtang092, hlu585}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
{ruizheng.wu, jiangbo}@smartmore.com xiaogangxu00@gmail.com
{2544552413, sura}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn guob@nwpu.edu.cn
cqf@ust.hk yingcongchen@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) systems can autonomously monitor and identify
disturbances, reducing the need for manual labor and associated costs. However,
current VAD systems are often limited by their superficial semantic understanding
of scenes and minimal user interaction. Additionally, the prevalent data scarcity in
existing datasets restricts their applicability in open-world scenarios. In this paper,
we introduce H AWK, a novel framework that leverages interactive large Visual
Language Models (VLM) to interpret video anomalies precisely. Recognizing the
difference in motion information between abnormal and normal videos, H AWK explicitly integrates motion modality to enhance anomaly identification. To reinforce
motion attention, we construct an auxiliary consistency loss within the motion and
video space, guiding the video branch to focus on the motion modality. Moreover,
to improve the interpretation of motion-to-language, we establish a clear supervisory relationship between motion and its linguistic representation. Furthermore,
we have annotated over 8,000 anomaly videos with language descriptions, enabling
effective training across diverse open-world scenarios, and also created 8,000
question-answering pairs for users’ open-world questions. The final results demonstrate that H AWK achieves SOTA performance, surpassing existing baselines in
both video description generation and question-answering. Our codes/dataset/demo
will be released at https://github.com/jqtangust/hawk.

1

Introduction
"Have eyes like a H AWK!" – Longman Dictionary

In recent years, the deployment of Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) systems has seen a significant
uptick across a diverse array of domains, including but not limited to, autonomous driving [45, 25],
surveillance [6, 23], and crime scene analysis [33]. The inherent capability of these systems to
autonomously monitor and identify disturbances within a scene has markedly diminished the reliance
on manual labor, thereby streamlining operational efficiency and reducing associated costs.
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

