Computation-Aware Gaussian Processes:
Model Selection And Linear-Time Inference
Jonathan Wenger1

Kaiwen Wu2

Geoff Pleiss4

Philipp Hennig3

Jacob R. Gardner2

John P. Cunningham1

Columbia University
University of Pennsylvania
3
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center
4
University of British Columbia, Vector Institute
1

2

Abstract
Model selection in Gaussian processes scales prohibitively with the size of the
training dataset, both in time and memory. While many approximations exist,
all incur inevitable approximation error. Recent work accounts for this error in
the form of computational uncertainty, which enables—at the cost of quadratic
complexity—an explicit tradeoff between computational efficiency and precision.
Here we extend this development to model selection, which requires significant
enhancements to the existing approach, including linear-time scaling in the size of
the dataset. We propose a novel training loss for hyperparameter optimization and
demonstrate empirically that the resulting method can outperform SGPR, CGGP
and SVGP, state-of-the-art methods for GP model selection, on medium to largescale datasets. Our experiments show that model selection for computation-aware
GPs trained on 1.8 million data points can be done within a few hours on a single
GPU. As a result of this work, Gaussian processes can be trained on large-scale
datasets without significantly compromising their ability to quantify uncertainty—
a fundamental prerequisite for optimal decision-making.

1

Introduction

Gaussian Processes (GPs) remain a popular probabilistic model class, despite the challenges in scaling them to large datasets. Since both computational and memory resources are limited in practice,
approximations are necessary for both inference and model selection. Among the many approximation methods, perhaps the most common approach is to map the data to a lower-dimensional
representation. The resulting posterior approximations typically have a functional form similar to
the exact GP posterior, except where posterior mean and covariance feature low-rank updates. This
strategy can be explicit—by either defining feature functions (e.g. Nyström [1], RFF [2])—or a
lower-dimensional latent inducing point space (e.g. SoR, DTC, FITC [3], SGPR [4], SVGP [5]), or
implicit—by using an iterative numerical method (e.g. CGGP [6–10]). All of these methods then
compute coefficients for this lower-dimensional representation from the full set of observations by
direct projection (e.g. CGGP) or via an optimization objective (e.g. SGPR, SVGP).
While effective and widely used in practice, the inevitable approximation error adversely impacts
predictions, uncertainty quantification, and ultimately downstream decision-making. Many proposed methods come with theoretical error bounds [e.g. 2, 11–14], offering insights into the scaling
and asymptotic properties of each method. However, theoretical bounds often require too many assumptions about the data-generating process to offer “real-world” guarantees [15], and in practice,
the fidelity of the approximation is ultimately determined by the available computational resources.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

