Activation Map Compression through Tensor
Decomposition for Deep Learning

Le-Trung Nguyen
Aël Quélennec
Enzo Tartaglione
Samuel Tardieu
Van-Tam Nguyen
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
{name.surname}@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
Internet of Things and Deep Learning are synergetically and exponentially growing
industrial fields with a massive call for their unification into a common framework called Edge AI. While on-device inference is a well-explored topic in recent
research, backpropagation remains an open challenge due to its prohibitive computational and memory costs compared to the extreme resource constraints of
embedded devices. Drawing on tensor decomposition research, we tackle the main
bottleneck of backpropagation, namely the memory footprint of activation map
storage. We investigate and compare the effects of activation compression using
Singular Value Decomposition and its tensor variant, High-Order Singular Value
Decomposition. The application of low-order decomposition results in considerable memory savings while preserving the features essential for learning, and
also offers theoretical guarantees to convergence. Experimental results obtained
on main-stream architectures and tasks demonstrate Pareto-superiority over other
state-of-the-art solutions, in terms of the trade-off between generalization and
memory footprint.1

1

Introduction

Recent advances in Deep Learning have enabled Deep Neural
Memory
networks to be used as an efficient solution for a wide variety of
use cases, including computer vision [21, 39, 30], speech recognition [8, 31] and natural language processing [45, 42]. Much
of this performance improvement is linked to the exponential
increase in the number of parameters in the neural architectures.
According to Sevilla et al., the release of AlphaGo [47] in late
Memory
2015 marks the advent of a new era, which they call the “Large
Scale Era”, in reference to the computational cost of training
doubling every 8 to 17 months [38]. At the root of exponential
growth in neural network size is the improvement in hardware
capabilities, particularly those designed for large-scale parallel
computing, such as GPUs and TPUs [1]. While this trend demonCompress
Efficient
Forward
Backward
strates the strength of neural networks as a powerful generalizaand store
reconstruction
tion tool in many fields, it goes in the opposite direction when it
comes to environmental concerns [41], making the deployment Figure 1: We compress the activaof newer architectures increasingly difficult. This is particularly tions that will be later employed
true for edge devices such as mobile phones and embedded sys- for backpropagation.
a

a

1

Code: https://github.com/Le-TrungNguyen/NeurIPS2024-ActivationCompression.git

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

