CooHOI: Learning Cooperative Human-Object
Interaction with Manipulated Object Dynamics

Jiawei Gao ∗1,2 , Ziqin Wang ∗1,3 , Zeqi Xiao1,4 , Jingbo Wang1 , Tai Wang1 , Jinkun Cao5 ,
Xiaolin Hu2 , Si Liu†3 , Jifeng Dai†2 , Jiangmiao Pang†1
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Beihang University,
4
Nanyang Technological University, 5 Carnegie Mellon University,

Abstract
Enabling humanoid robots to clean rooms has long been a pursued dream within
humanoid research communities. However, many tasks require multi-humanoid
collaboration, such as carrying large and heavy furniture together. Given the
scarcity of motion capture data on multi-humanoid collaboration and the efficiency
challenges associated with multi-agent learning, these tasks cannot be straightforwardly addressed using training paradigms designed for single-agent scenarios.
In this paper, we introduce Cooperative Human-Object Interaction (CooHOI), a
framework designed to tackle the challenge of multi-humanoid object transportation problem through a two-phase learning paradigm: individual skill learning and
subsequent policy transfer. First, a single humanoid character learns to interact
with objects through imitation learning from human motion priors. Then, the
humanoid learns to collaborate with others by considering the shared dynamics
of the manipulated object using centralized training and decentralized execution
(CTDE) multi-agent RL algorithms. When one agent interacts with the object,
resulting in specific object dynamics changes, the other agents learn to respond
appropriately, thereby achieving implicit communication and coordination between
teammates. Unlike previous approaches that relied on tracking-based methods for
multi-humanoid HOI, CooHOI is inherently efficient, does not depend on motion
capture data of multi-humanoid interactions, and can be seamlessly extended to
include more participants and a wide range of object types.

1

Introduction

Imagine the scenario where you’re moving home and seeking help from humanoid robots. However, certain items, like beds and sofas, are too large and heavy for a single robot to manage
effectively. Despite significant advancements in learning and control of physics-based humanobject interactions [6, 43, 21, 37, 20, 45, 7] and humanoid robots performing complex operations [29, 19, 26, 2, 42, 41, 10, 9, 39], the area of multiple humanoids collaboratively transporting
objects—particularly when a single individual may find it challenging to handle heavy or long
items—remains relatively under-investigated. Some previous efforts [44] tried to address these
challenges using tracking-based methods, capturing interactions between two characters during tasks
like box carrying, and training policies to mimic these actions. However, obtaining comprehensive
motion data on interactions involving multiple participants is costly, and tracking-based methods
struggle to adapt to scenarios with varying object sizes and an increased number of agents. Another
straightforward idea might be to directly train a multi-agent policy from scratch, using an approach
∗
†

Equal contributions. Email: winstongu20@gmail.com, wzqin@buaa.edu.com
Corresponding author. Email: pangjiangmiao@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

