Referencing Where to Focus: Improving Visual
Grounding with Referential Query

Yabing Wang 1 , Zhuotao Tian 2 , Qingpei Guo 3 ,
Zheng Qin 1 , Sanping Zhou 1 , Ming Yang 3 , Le Wang 1∗
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
AntGroup
{wyb7wyb7,qinzheng}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
tianzhuotao@link.cuhk.edu.hk
{spzhou, lewang}@xjtu.edu.cn
{qingpei.gqp, m.yang}@antgroup.com

Abstract
Visual Grounding aims to localize the referring object in an image given a natural
language expression. Recent advancements in DETR-based visual grounding methods have attracted considerable attention, as they directly predict the coordinates
of the target object without relying on additional efforts, such as pre-generated proposal candidates or pre-defined anchor boxes. However, existing research primarily
focuses on designing stronger multi-modal decoder, which typically generates
learnable queries by random initialization or by using linguistic embeddings. This
vanilla query generation approach inevitably increases the learning difficulty for
the model, as it does not involve any target-related information at the beginning
of decoding. Furthermore, they only use the deepest image feature during the
query learning process, overlooking the importance of features from other levels. To address these issues, we propose a novel approach, called RefFormer.
It consists of the query adaption module that can be seamlessly integrated into
CLIP and generate the referential query to provide the prior context for decoder,
along with a task-specific decoder. By incorporating the referential query into
the decoder, we can effectively mitigate the learning difficulty of the decoder,
and accurately concentrate on the target object. Additionally, our proposed query
adaption module can also act as an adapter, preserving the rich knowledge within
CLIP without the need to tune the parameters of the backbone network. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed method,
outperforming state-of-the-art approaches on five visual grounding benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Visual grounding is a challenging multi-modal task that involves localizing a specific object based on
a given natural language description. This task requires algorithms to comprehend fine-grained human
language expressions and accurately establish correspondences with the target objects. In recent
years, it has gained significant attention in research due to its potential for advancing vision-language
understanding, such as cross-modal retrieval [42, 30, 44, 9, 41, 43] and image captioning [14, 29].
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

