Rule Based Rewards for Language Model Safety

Tong Mu∗

Alec Helyar∗

Ian Kivlichan

Johannes Heidecke

Molly Lin

Alex Beutel

Joshua Achiam

Andrea Vallone

John Schulman

Lilian Weng

OpenAI
Content may include language related to racism, erotic themes, self-harm, or other offensive material.

Abstract
Reinforcement learning based fine-tuning of large language models (LLMs) on
human preferences has been shown to enhance both their capabilities and safety
behavior. However, in cases related to safety, without precise instructions to human
annotators, the data collected may cause the model to become overly cautious,
or to respond in an undesirable style, such as being judgmental. Additionally, as
model capabilities and usage patterns evolve, there may be a costly need to add or
relabel data to modify safety behavior. We propose a novel preference modeling
approach that utilizes AI feedback and only requires a small amount of human
data. Our method, Rule Based Rewards (RBR), uses a collection of rules for
desired or undesired behaviors (e.g. refusals should not be judgmental) along with
a LLM grader. In contrast to prior methods using AI feedback, our method uses
fine-grained, composable, LLM-graded few-shot prompts as reward directly in RL
training, resulting in greater control, accuracy and ease of updating. We show that
RBRs are an effective training method, achieving an F1 score of 97.1, compared
to a human-feedback baseline of 91.7, resulting in much higher safety-behavior
accuracy through better balancing usefulness and safety.

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) grow in capabilities and prevalence, it becomes increasingly
important to ensure their safety and alignment. Much recent work has focused on using human
preference data to align models, such as the line of work on reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF)[1–8]. However, there are many challenges in using human feedback alone to
achieve a target safety specification. Collecting and maintaining human data for model safety is often
costly and time-consuming, and the data can become outdated as safety guidelines evolve with model
capability improvements or changes in user behaviors. Even when requirements are relatively stable,
they can still be hard to convey to annotators. This is especially the case for safety, where desired model
responses are complex, requiring nuance on whether and how to respond to requests. If instructions are
underspecified, annotators may have to rely on personal biases, leading to unintended model behaviors,
such as becoming overly cautious, or it responding in an undesirable style (e.g. being judgmental).
For example, some annotators in one of our experiments, when ranking possible responses to user
requests pertaining to self-harm, favored completions that referred the user to a US suicide hotline
phone number, which would not have helped users in other regions. Fixing such issues often requires
relabeling or collecting new data, which is expensive and time consuming.
To address these issues, methods that use AI feedback [9–12] have recently gained popularity, most
prominently Constitutional AI [10]. These methods use AI feedback to synthetically generate training
data to combine with the human data for the supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reward model (RM)
∗

Equal Contribution, Corresponding Authors: {tongm, alec.helyar}@openai.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

