Probabilistic Emulation of a Global Climate Model
with Spherical DYffusion

Salva Rühling Cachay
UC San Diego

Brian Henn
Allen Institute for AI

Christopher S. Bretherton
Allen Institute for AI

Oliver Watt-Meyer
Allen Institute for AI
Rose Yu
UC San Diego

Abstract
Data-driven deep learning models are transforming global weather forecasting.
It is an open question if this success can extend to climate modeling, where the
complexity of the data and long inference rollouts pose significant challenges.
Here, we present the first conditional generative model that produces accurate and
physically consistent global climate ensemble simulations by emulating a coarse
version of the United States’ primary operational global forecast model, FV3GFS.
Our model integrates the dynamics-informed diffusion framework (DYffusion)
with the Spherical Fourier Neural Operator (SFNO) architecture, enabling stable
100-year simulations at 6-hourly timesteps while maintaining low computational
overhead compared to single-step deterministic baselines. The model achieves near
gold-standard performance for climate model emulation, outperforming existing
approaches and demonstrating promising ensemble skill. This work represents
a significant advance towards efficient, data-driven climate simulations that can
enhance our understanding of the climate system and inform adaptation strategies.1

1

Introduction

Climate models are foundational tools used to understand how the Earth system evolves over long time
periods and how it may change as a response to possible greenhouse gas emission scenarios. Such
climate simulations are currently very expensive to generate due to the computational complexity of
the underlying physics-based climate models, which must be run on supercomputers. As a result,
scientists and policymakers are limited to exploring only a small subset of possibilities for different
mitigation and adaptation strategies [48].
Training relatively cheap-to-run data-driven surrogates to
emulate global climate models could provide a compelling
alternative [15]. Although recent deep learning models are
on the verge of transforming the conceptually similar field
of medium-range weather forecasting [5, 38, 11, 51], these
advances do not directly transfer to long-term climate projections [37]. Indeed, most such models only report forecasts
up to two weeks into the future and may diverge or become
physically inconsistent over longer simulations. In contrast,
climate projections demand accurate and stable simulations
of the global Earth system spanning decades or centuries,
requiring reliable reproduction of long-term statistics.
1

Figure 1: Weather performance (xaxis) is not a strong indicator of climate performance (y-axis). Each dot
corresponds to a distinct sample or
checkpoint epoch.

Code is available at https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/spherical-dyffusion

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

