Semi-Random Matrix Completion
via Flow-Based Adaptive Reweighting

Jonathan A. Kelner∗

Jerry Li†

Allen Liu‡

Aaron Sidford§

Kevin Tian¶

Abstract
We consider the well-studied problem of completing a rank-r, µ-incoherent matrix
M ∈ Rd×d from incomplete observations. We focus on this problem in the semirandom setting where each entry is independently revealed with probability at
d)
least p = poly(r,µ,log
. Whereas multiple nearly-linear time algorithms have
d
been established in the more specialized fully-random setting where each entry is
revealed with probablity exactly p, the only known nearly-linear time algorithm in
the semi-random setting is due to [17], whose sample complexity has a polynomial
dependence on the inverse accuracy and condition number and thus cannot achieve
high-accuracy recovery. Our main result is the first high-accuracy nearly-linear
time algorithm for solving semi-random matrix completion, and an extension to the
noisy observation setting. Our result builds upon the recent short-flat decomposition
framework of [42, 43] and leverages fast algorithms for flow problems on graphs
to solve adaptive reweighting subproblems efficiently.

1

Introduction

How can we ensure learning algorithms do not overfit to generative assumptions on their input
data? Since worst-case statistical inference problems are often intractable (i.e., without distributional
assumptions), to develop efficient algorithms, we often introduce a generative model as a proxy for
average-case, real-world behavior. However, if these algorithms are to be useful practically, we must
ensure they do not depend too strongly on any artificial properties of the generative model. Ideally,
they should require only what is statistically and algorithmically necessary, and no more.
In this paper, we consider this question in the context of matrix completion, one of the most
fundamental and well-studied linear inverse problems. In matrix completion, the goal is to recover
a symmetric rank-r matrix M ∈ Rd×d where r ≪ d,6 given a small (typically sublinear) number
of entries revealed independently and at random. In a seminal line of work [13, 11, 12, 61], it was
shown that under natural structural assumptions on M, one can fully recover M given ≈ dr randomly
revealed entries in polynomial time, via semidefinite programming (SDP). Subsequently, there has
been extensive work attempting to improve upon statistical and computational guarantees for matrix
completion. In an oversimplification of the literature (see Section 1.3 for a more detailed and nuanced
discussion), this has resulted in two categories of matrix completion algorithms.
• SDP-based algorithms achieve the nearly-optimal sample complexity, but are based on solving
SDPs, which requires time Ω(d3.5 ) even with state of the art solvers [39, 34].
• First-order iterative methods require a slightly higher sample complexity, namely, they require
m ≈ pd2 revealed entries for an observation probability p = Ω(poly(r, log d)) · d1 . However,
∗

MIT, kelner@mit.edu.
Microsoft Research, jerrl@microsoft.com.
‡
MIT, cliu568@mit.edu.
§
Stanford University, sidford@stanford.edu.
¶
University of Texas at Austin, kjtian@cs.utexas.edu.
6
Our results also hold for asymmetric, rectangular matrices. See the discussion at the end of Appendix A.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

