Designs for Enabling Collaboration in
Human-Machine Teaming via Interactive and
Explainable Systems

Rohan Paleja
MIT Lincoln Laboratory
Lexington, MA 02142
rohan.paleja@ll.mit.edu

Michael Munje
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
michaelmunje@utexas.edu

Kimberlee Chestnut Chang, Reed Jensen
MIT Lincoln Laboratory
Lexington, MA 02142
{chestnut, rjensen}@ll.mit.edu

Mathew Gombolay
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
matthew.gombolay@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Collaborative robots and machine learning-based virtual agents are increasingly entering the human workspace with the aim of increasing productivity and enhancing
safety. Despite this, we show in a ubiquitous experimental domain, Overcooked-AI,
that state-of-the-art techniques for human-machine teaming (HMT), which rely on
imitation or reinforcement learning, are brittle and result in a machine agent that
aims to decouple the machine and human’s actions to act independently rather than
in a synergistic fashion. To remedy this deficiency, we develop HMT approaches
that enable iterative, mixed-initiative team development allowing end-users to
interactively reprogram interpretable AI teammates. Our 50-subject study provides
several findings that we summarize into guidelines. While all approaches underperform a simple collaborative heuristic (a critical, negative result for learning-based
methods), we find that white-box approaches supported by interactive modification
can lead to significant team development, outperforming white-box approaches
alone, and that black-box approaches are easier to train and result in better HMT
performance, highlighting a tradeoff between explainability and interactivity versus
ease-of-training. Together, these findings present three important future research
directions: 1) Improving the ability to generate collaborative agents with white-box
models, 2) Better learning methods to facilitate collaboration rather than individualized coordination, and 3) Mixed-initiative interfaces that enable users, who may
vary in ability, to improve collaboration.

1

Introduction

Successful human-machine teaming (HMT) has long been sought after for its wide utility across
potential applications, ranging from virtual agents such as “clippy" that provide on-demand support
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A. Approved for public release. Distribution is unlimited. This material is based upon work supported
by the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering under Air Force Contract No. FA8702-15-D-0001. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering. Delivered to the U.S. Government with Unlimited Rights, as defined in DFARS Part
252.227-7013 or 7014 (Feb 2014). Notwithstanding any copyright notice, U.S. Government rights in this work are defined by DFARS
252.227-7013 or DFARS 252.227-7014 as detailed above. Use of this work other than as specifically authorized by the U.S. Government may
violate any copyrights that exist in this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

