C OUNT GD: Multi-Modal Open-World Counting

Niki Amini-Naieni
Tengda Han
Andrew Zisserman
Visual Geometry Group (VGG)
University of Oxford
{nikian,htd,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to improve the generality and accuracy of open-vocabulary
object counting in images. To improve the generality, we repurpose an openvocabulary detection foundation model (GroundingDINO) for the counting task,
and also extend its capabilities by introducing modules to enable specifying the
target object to count by visual exemplars. In turn, these new capabilities – being
able to specify the target object by multi-modalites (text and exemplars) – lead
to an improvement in counting accuracy. We make three contributions: first, we
introduce the first open-world counting model, C OUNT GD, where the prompt
can be specified by a text description or visual exemplars or both; second, we
show that the performance of the model significantly improves the state of the art
on multiple counting benchmarks – when using text only, C OUNT GD is comparable to or outperforms all previous text-only works, and when using both text
and visual exemplars, we outperform all previous models; third, we carry out
a preliminary study into different interactions between the text and visual exemplar prompts, including the cases where they reinforce each other and where
one restricts the other. The code and an app to test the model are available at
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/vgg/research/countgd/.

"apple"

"elephant"

"the young
women"

"strawberry"

"the cats staring
at the sign"

Pred: 3, GT: 3

Visual
Exemplar only
Pred: 174, GT: 174

Pred: 20, GT: 20

Visual Exemplars & Text

(a)

Pred: 16,
GT: 16

Text Only

Pred:128
16,
GT: 16

Exemplar Only

(b)

Pred: 5, GT: 5

Pred: 2, GT: 2

Pred: 1, GT: 1

Pred: 1, GT: 1

Exemplar
+ "left"

Exemplar
+ "right"

Text Only

Visual Exemplar & Text Interactions

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: C OUNT GD is capable of taking both visual exemplars and text prompts to produce highly accurate
object counts (a), but also seamlessly supports counting with only text queries or only visual exemplars (b).
The multi-modal visual exemplar and text queries bring extra flexibility to the open-world counting task, such
as using a short phrase (c), or adding additional constraints (the words ‘left’ or ‘right’) to select a sub-set of
the objects (d). These examples are taken from the FSC-147 [42] and CountBench [39] test sets. The visual
exemplars are shown as yellow boxes. (d) visualizes the predicted confidence map of the model, where a high
color intensity indicates a high level of confidence.

1

Introduction

Open-world object counting methods aim to enumerate all the instances of any category of object in
an image. The ‘open-world’ refers to the model’s ability to count objects beyond the set of categories
seen at training, thus enabling the user to specify categories of interest at inference without the need
for model retraining. Recent techniques allow the user to specify the target object with only visual
exemplars – bounding boxes around a few example objects in the image – [32, 35], or only text
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

