L O F I T: Localized Fine-tuning on LLM
Representations

Fangcong Yin
The University of Texas at Austin
fangcongyin@utexas.edu

Xi Ye
Princeton University
xi.ye@princeton.edu

Greg Durrett
The University of Texas at Austin
gdurrett@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Recent work in interpretability shows that large language models (LLMs) can be
adapted for new tasks in a learning-free way: it is possible to intervene on LLM
representations to elicit desired behaviors for alignment. For instance, adding
certain bias vectors to the outputs of certain attention heads is reported to boost the
truthfulness of models. In this work, we show that localized fine-tuning serves as
an effective alternative to such representation intervention methods. We introduce
a framework called Localized Fine-Tuning on LLM Representations (L O F I T),
which identifies a subset of attention heads that are most important for learning a
specific task, then trains offset vectors to add to the model’s hidden representations
at those selected heads. L O F I T localizes to a sparse set of heads (3% − 10%)
and learns the offset vectors from limited training data, comparable to the settings
used for representation intervention. For truthfulness and reasoning tasks, we
find that L O F I T’s intervention vectors are more effective for LLM adaptation
than vectors from representation intervention methods such as Inference-time
Intervention. We also find that the localization step is important: selecting a taskspecific set of attention heads can lead to higher performance than intervening on
heads selected for a different task. Finally, across 7 tasks we study, L O F I T achieves
comparable performance to other parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods such as
LoRA, despite modifying 20x-200x fewer parameters than these methods.1

1

Introduction

A significant body of work has studied how to localize model behavior within pre-trained Transformer
language models [7, 32, 30, 23, 45]. One practical benefit of this localization is that we can use
lightweight interventions on the localized modules to modify that behavior, such as to change entity
knowledge [30], steer the style of generated text [47, 43], correct a model’s reasoning [12, 38],
or improve factuality [21, 60]. These approaches are unified in recent work on representation
intervention [60, 54], which adds offset vectors into various layer representations of a model to
achieve desired behaviors. Computing these vectors from model activations is reported to require less
data and compute than fine-tuning approaches [21].
At the same time, a distinct line of work has established the effectiveness of parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) methods [16, 2, 13, 22] by updating only parts of the pre-trained weights.
Very recently, new PEFT methods have been proposed to change models’ representations rather
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/fc2869/lo-fit.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

