OpenGaussian: Towards Point-Level 3D
Gaussian-based Open Vocabulary Understanding

Yanmin Wu1,2

Jiarui Meng1

Chen Zhao3

Haijie Li1

Haocheng Feng3

Chenming Wu3∗ Yahao Shi4

Errui Ding3

Jingdong Wang3

Xinhua Cheng1

Jian Zhang1,2∗

1

2

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
3
4
Baidu VIS
Beihang University

Abstract
This paper introduces OpenGaussian, a method based on 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) capable of 3D point-level open vocabulary understanding. Our primary
motivation stems from observing that existing 3DGS-based open vocabulary methods mainly focus on 2D pixel-level parsing. These methods struggle with 3D
point-level tasks due to weak feature expressiveness and inaccurate 2D-3D feature
associations. To ensure robust feature presentation and 3D point-level understanding, we first employ SAM masks without cross-frame associations to train
instance features with 3D consistency. These features exhibit both intra-object
consistency and inter-object distinction. Then, we propose a two-stage codebook to discretize these features from coarse to fine levels. At the coarse level,
we consider the positional information of 3D points to achieve location-based
clustering, which is then refined at the fine level. Finally, we introduce an instancelevel 3D-2D feature association method that links 3D points to 2D masks, which
are further associated with 2D CLIP features. Extensive experiments, including open vocabulary-based 3D object selection, 3D point cloud understanding,
click-based 3D object selection, and ablation studies, demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. The source code is available at our project page
https://3d-aigc.github.io/OpenGaussian.

1

Introduction

The recently proposed neural rendering method 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [19] has rapidly gained
popularity and is being widely applied in various areas such as 3D reconstruction [18, 10, 38], 4D
reconstruction [23, 28, 42, 47], generation [41, 25, 49], and understanding [44, 51]. This is primarily
due to its fast training, real-time rendering capabilities, and explicit point-based representation.
Within the realm of 3D vision learning, 3D scene understanding has embraced the 3DGS framework
to achieve an integrated process encompassing explicit reconstruction, novel view synthesis, and
semantic understanding. Incorporating open vocabulary for 3D understanding is considered a more
promising, practical, and natural approach for intelligent agent understanding, interaction, and
decision-making. In this paper, we specifically concentrate on point-level open-vocabulary 3D scene
understanding based on the 3DGS framework.
Despite several efforts [33, 37, 52, 48, 54, 15, 24] to incorporate learnable language attributes into
3DGS, aiming to enhance them with language-grounded capabilities, the primary objective of these
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

