Multi-scale Consistency for Robust 3D Registration via
Hierarchical Sinkhorn Tree
Chengwei Ren1,2 Yifan Feng3 Weixiang Zhang2 Xiao-Ping Zhang1,2∗ Yue Gao3∗
{1 Shenzhen Ubiquitous Data Enabling Key Lab, 2 Shenzhen International Graduate School,
3
BNRist, THUIBCS, School of Software}, Tsinghua University
rcw22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, evanfeng97@gmail.com, zhang-wx22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
xpzhang@ieee.org, gaoyue@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the problem of retrieving accurate correspondence through multi-scale
consistency (MSC) for robust point cloud registration. Existing works in a coarseto-fine manner either suffer from severe noisy correspondences caused by unreliable
coarse matching or struggle to form outlier-free coarse-level correspondence sets.
To tackle this, we present Hierarchical Sinkhorn Tree (HST), a pruned tree structure
designed to hierarchically measure the local consistency of each coarse correspondence across multiple feature scales, thereby filtering out the local dissimilar ones.
In this way, we convert the modeling of MSC for each correspondence into a BFS
traversal with pruning of a K-ary tree rooted at the superpoint, with its K nearest
neighbors in the feature pyramid serving as child nodes. To achieve efficient pruning and accurate vicinity characterization, we further propose a novel overlap-aware
Sinkhorn Distance, which retains only the most likely overlapping points for local
measurement and next level exploration. The modeling process essentially involves
traversing a pair of HSTs synchronously and aggregating the consistency measures
of corresponding tree nodes. Extensive experiments demonstrate HST consistently
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on both indoor and outdoor benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Point cloud registration is a crucial task in 3D computer vision that involves aligning a pair of partially overlapped point clouds to create a
unified scene representation. The most common approaches [1, 2, 3]
follow the two stage technical roadmap, i.e., matching and transformation. They first form a set of high confident correspondences
through repeatable feature descriptors, and then a robust estimator is
utilized to calculate the rigid transformation. Although extensively
studied over the past decades, the task remains challenging due to
limited overlap, severe noise, etc.

Coarse
scale
ive
Putat
h
Matc

Sinkhorn
Distance

Sinkhorn
Distance

Fine

scale
Recent advances [4, 5, 6, 7] have made substantial progress in
learning-based methods. The key idea is to train a shared network
to extract point-wise features and establish reliable correspondences Figure 1: Illustration of the
based on them. Inspired by the progress in image registration counter- proposed HST for measuring
parts [8, 9, 10, 11], a coarse-to-fine strategy [12, 13] is leveraged to MSC. It extracts local patches
avoid keypoint detection and unrepeatable correspondence searching. at multi-scales in the feature
It has demonstrated superior performance over the state-of-the-art pyramid and then calculates
methods. They establish sparse superpoint correspondences on the their similarity layer by layer.
downsampled input point clouds (coarse level) and then refine them to point level to yield dense point
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

