Reducing Transformer Key-Value Cache Size with
Cross-Layer Attention

William Brandon∗
MIT CSAIL
wbrandon@csail.mit.edu

Mayank Mishra∗
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Rameswar Panda
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Aniruddha Nrusimha
MIT CSAIL

Jonathan Ragan-Kelley
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Key-value (KV) caching plays an essential role in accelerating decoding for
transformer-based autoregressive large language models (LLMs). However, the
amount of memory required to store the KV cache can become prohibitive at long
sequence lengths and large batch sizes. Since the invention of the transformer, two
of the most effective interventions discovered for reducing the size of the KV cache
have been Multi-Query Attention (MQA) and its generalization, Grouped-Query
Attention (GQA). MQA and GQA both modify the design of the attention block so
that multiple query heads can share a single key/value head, reducing the number of
distinct key/value heads by a large factor while only minimally degrading accuracy.
In this paper, we show that it is possible to take Multi-Query Attention a step
further by also sharing key and value heads between adjacent layers, yielding a new
attention design we call Cross-Layer Attention (CLA). With CLA, we find that it
is possible to reduce the size of the KV cache by another 2× while maintaining
nearly the same accuracy as unmodified MQA. In experiments training 1B- and
3B-parameter models from scratch, we demonstrate that CLA provides a Pareto improvement over the memory/accuracy tradeoffs which are possible with traditional
MQA, potentially enabling future models to operate at longer sequence lengths
and larger batch sizes than would otherwise be possible.

1

Introduction

The memory footprint of the key-value (KV) cache can be a bottleneck when serving large language
models (LLMs). Because the size of the KV cache scales proportionally with both sequence length
and batch size, the memory overhead of KV cache storage can limit batch sizes when operating on
long sequence lengths [Chowdhery et al., 2022], and can require employing costly techniques like
offloading when on-device memory is scarce [Sheng et al., 2023]. It is also desirable to be able to
persist KV caches over long periods of time in order to minimize redundant computations [Gao et al.,
2024, Google, 2024]. However, the size of the KV cache directly determines the cost of storing and
retrieving such persistent caches. As new applications of LLMs emerge which demand ever-longer
sequence lengths, the memory footprint of the KV cache is becoming an increasingly important
consideration in the design of efficient transformer-based language models.
Existing work has proposed a variety of methods for decreasing the memory footprint of the KV
cache, including storing KV activations in low precision [Hooper et al., 2024, Zhang et al., 2024b],
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

