Noisy Ostracods: A Fine-Grained, Imbalanced
Real-World Dataset for Benchmarking Robust
Machine Learning and Label Correction Methods
Jiamian Hu1 , Yuanyuan Hong1 , Yihua Chen1,2 , He Wang1,3 , Moriaki Yasuhara1
1

The University of Hong Kong
2
The University of Tokyo
3
Nanjing Institute of Geology and Palaeontology, CAS
{jiamianh, u3001143, yihuaac}@connect.hku.hk, hwang@nigpas.ac.cn, yasuhara@hku.hk

Abstract
We present the Noisy Ostracods, a noisy dataset for genus and species classification
of crustacean ostracods with specialists’ annotations. Over the 71466 specimens
collected, 5.58% of them are estimated to be noisy (possibly problematic) at genus
level. The dataset is created to addressing a real-world challenge: creating a
clean fine-grained taxonomy dataset. The Noisy Ostracods dataset has diverse
noises from multiple sources. Firstly, the noise is open-set, including new classes
discovered during curation that were not part of the original annotation. The
dataset has pseudo-classes, where annotators misclassified samples that should
belong to an existing class into a new pseudo-class. The Noisy Ostracods dataset
is highly imbalanced with a imbalance factor ρ = 22429. This presents a unique
challenge for robust machine learning methods, as existing approaches have not
been extensively evaluated on fine-grained classification tasks with such diverse
real-world noise. Initial experiments using current robust learning techniques
have not yielded significant performance improvements on the Noisy Ostracods
dataset compared to cross-entropy training on the raw, noisy data. On the other
hand, noise detection methods have underperformed in error hit rate compared
to naive cross-validation ensembling for identifying problematic labels. These
findings suggest that the fine-grained, imbalanced nature, and complex noise
characteristics of the dataset present considerable challenges for existing noiserobust algorithms. By openly releasing the Noisy Ostracods dataset, our goal
is to encourage further research into the development of noise-resilient machine
learning methods capable of effectively handling diverse, real-world noise in finegrained classification tasks. The dataset, along with its evaluation protocols, can be
accessed at https://github.com/H-Jamieu/Noisy_ostracods.

1

Introduction

Ostracods are micro-crustaceans inhabiting in marine, non-marine and some semi-terrestrial habitats[1]. Their calcified shells preserved in the sediments provided rich material for paleoenvironmental
reconstruction, ecological monitoring and bio-diversity analyses [2]. However, conducting such
studies requires massive efforts in counting, sorting, and identifying ostracods [3]. With advancements in image acquisition technologies and deep learning methods [4, 5, 6], building an automatic
identification system for ostracods has become a feasible solution to reduce human labor. Such a
system necessitates a large amount of annotated data. In our practical work, the annotated dataset also
serves as a taxonomy reference material for teaching. In these applications, any incorrect taxonomy
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

