DEFT: Efficient Fine-Tuning of Diffusion Models by
Learning the Generalised h-transform

Alexander Denker∗
University College London
a.denker@ucl.ac.uk

Francisco Vargas*
University of Cambridge
fav25@cam.ac.uk

Shreyas Padhy*
University of Cambridge
sp2058@cam.ac.uk

Kieran Didi*
University of Cambridge
ked48@cam.ac.uk

Simon Mathis*
University of Cambridge
svm34@cam.ac.uk

Vincent Dutordoir
University of Cambridge
vd309@cam.ac.uk

Riccardo Barbano
Atinary Technologies
rbarbano@atinary.com

Emile Mathieu
University of Cambridge
ebm32@cam.ac.uk

Urszula Julia Komorowska
University of Cambridge
ujk21@cam.ac.uk

Pietro Lio
University of Cambridge
pl219@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Generative modelling paradigms based on denoising diffusion processes have
emerged as a leading candidate for conditional sampling in inverse problems. In
many real-world applications, we often have access to large, expensively trained
unconditional diffusion models, which we aim to exploit for improving conditional
sampling. Most recent approaches are motivated heuristically and lack a unifying framework, obscuring connections between them. Further, they often suffer
from issues such as being very sensitive to hyperparameters, being expensive to
train or needing access to weights hidden behind a closed API. In this work, we
unify conditional training and sampling using the mathematically well-understood
Doob’s h-transform. This new perspective allows us to unify many existing methods under a common umbrella. Under this framework, we propose DEFT (Doob’s
h-transform Efficient FineTuning), a new approach for conditional generation that
simply fine-tunes a very small network to quickly learn the conditional h-transform,
while keeping the larger unconditional network unchanged. DEFT is much faster
than existing baselines while achieving state-of-the-art performance across a variety
of linear and non-linear benchmarks. On image reconstruction tasks, we achieve
speedups of up to 1.6×, while having the best perceptual quality on natural images
and reconstruction performance on medical images. Further, we also provide initial
experiments on protein motif scaffolding and outperform reconstruction guidance
methods.

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models are a powerful class of generative models where noise is gradually added
to data samples until they converge to pure noise. The time reversal of this noising process then
∗

equal contributions

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

