Optimal Design for Human Preference Elicitation

Subhojyoti Mukherjee
University of Wisconsin-Madison∗
smukherjee27@wisc.edu
Aniket Deshmukh
AWS AI Labs

Ge Liu
UIUC∗

Anusha Lalitha
AWS AI Labs

Kousha Kalantari
AWS AI Labs

Yifei Ma
AWS AI Labs

Branislav Kveton
Adobe Research∗

Abstract
Learning of preference models from human feedback has been central to recent
advances in artificial intelligence. Motivated by the cost of obtaining high-quality
human annotations, we study efficient human preference elicitation for learning
preference models. The key idea in our work is to generalize optimal designs, an
approach to computing optimal information-gathering policies, to lists of items
that represent potential questions with answers. The policy is a distribution over
the lists and we elicit preferences from them proportionally to their probabilities.
To show the generality of our ideas, we study both absolute and ranking feedback
models on items in the list. We design efficient algorithms for both and analyze
them. Finally, we demonstrate that our algorithms are practical by evaluating them
on existing question-answering problems.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has been effective in aligning and fine-tuning
large language models (LLMs) [68, 36, 15, 77, 39]. The main difference from classic reinforcement
learning (RL) [81] is that the agent learns from human feedback, which is expressed as preferences
for different potential choices [2, 49, 71, 10, 90]. The human feedback allows LLMs to be adapted
beyond the distribution of data that was used for their pre-training and generate answers that are more
preferred by humans [15]. The feedback can be incorporated by learning a preference model. When
the human decides between two choices, the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model [12] can be used. For
multiple choices, the Plackett-Luce (PL) model [65, 54] can be adopted. A good preference model
should correctly rank answers to many potential questions. Therefore, learning of a good preference
model can be viewed as learning to rank, and we adopt this view in this work. Learning to rank has
been studied extensively in both offline [14] and online [67, 43, 83, 80, 46] settings.
To effectively learn preference models, we study efficient methods for human preference elicitation.
We formalize this problem as follows. We have a set of L lists representing questions, each with K
items representing answers. The objective of the agent is to learn to rank all items in all lists. The
agent can query humans for feedback. Each query is a question with K answers represented as a list.
The human provides feedback on it. We study two feedback models: absolute and ranking. In the
absolute feedback model, a human provides noisy feedback for each item in the list. This setting is
motivated by how annotators assign relevance judgments in search [30, 57]. The ranking feedback is
motivated by learning reward models in RLHF [68, 36, 15, 77, 39]. In this model, a human ranks all
items in the list according to their preferences. While K = 2 is arguably the most common case, we
study K ≥ 2 for the sake of generality and allowing a higher-capacity communication channel with
the human [102]. The agent has a budget for the number of queries. To learn efficiently within the
∗

The work was done at AWS AI Labs.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

