Treeffuser: Probabilistic Predictions via Conditional
Diffusions with Gradient-Boosted Trees
Nicolas Beltran-Velez∗1 Alessandro Antonio Grande∗ 2,3 Achille Nazaret∗ 1,3
Alp Kucukelbir1,4
David Blei1,5
1

Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, USA
Halvorsen Center for Computational Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, USA
3
Irving Institute for Cancer Dynamics, Columbia University, New York, USA
4
Fero Labs, New York, USA
5
Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, USA
2

Abstract
Probabilistic prediction aims to compute predictive distributions rather than single point predictions. These distributions enable practitioners to quantify uncertainty, compute risk, and detect outliers. However, most probabilistic methods
assume parametric responses, such as Gaussian or Poisson distributions. When
these assumptions fail, such models lead to bad predictions and poorly calibrated
uncertainty. In this paper, we propose Treeffuser, an easy-to-use method for
probabilistic prediction on tabular data. The idea is to learn a conditional diffusion model where the score function is estimated using gradient-boosted trees.
The conditional diffusion model makes Treeffuser flexible and non-parametric,
while the gradient-boosted trees make it robust and easy to train on CPUs. Treeffuser learns well-calibrated predictive distributions and can handle a wide range
of regression tasks—including those with multivariate, multimodal, and skewed
responses. We study Treeffuser on synthetic and real data and show that it outperforms existing methods, providing better calibrated probabilistic predictions.
We further demonstrate its versatility with an application to inventory allocation
under uncertainty using sales data from Walmart. We implement Treeffuser in
https://github.com/blei-lab/treeffuser.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we develop a new method for probabilistic prediction from tabular data. This problem
is important to many fields, such as power generation [1], finance [2], and healthcare [3]. It drives
decision processes such as supply chain planning [4], risk assessment [5, 6], and policy-making [7].
Example: Manufacturing plants measure information as they operate. This information—properties of
raw materials, operational flows, temperatures, and level measurements—collectively determine the
output of the plant [8]. From this data, how can manufacturers adapt operations to reduce emissions
while maximizing profits? The answer requires both good predictions and estimates of uncertainty,
so as to trade off the risk of failure with the reward of lower emissions and higher profit. More
broadly, such industrial workflow problems often rely on predictions from vast amounts of tabular
data—observations of variables arranged in a table [9, 10].
∗

Equal contribution, authors listed in alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

