A Neuro-Symbolic Benchmark Suite for Concept
Quality and Reasoning Shortcuts

Samuele Bortolotti1∗ Emanuele Marconato2,1∗ Tommaso Carraro3,6 Paolo Morettin1
Emile van Krieken4 Antonio Vergari4 Stefano Teso5,1 Andrea Passerini1
1
DISI, University of Trento 2 DI, University of Pisa 3 Fondazione Bruno Kessler
4
University of Edinburgh 5 CIMeC, University of Trento 6 University of Padova
{name.surname}@unitn.it
tcarraro@fbk.eu
{Emile.van.Krieken, avergari}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
The advent of powerful neural classifiers has increased interest in problems that
require both learning and reasoning. These problems are critical for understanding
important properties of models, such as trustworthiness, generalization, interpretability, and compliance to safety and structural constraints. However, recent
research observed that tasks requiring both learning and reasoning on background
knowledge often suffer from reasoning shortcuts (RSs): predictors can solve the
downstream reasoning task without associating the correct concepts to the highdimensional data. To address this issue, we introduce rsbench, a comprehensive
benchmark suite designed to systematically evaluate the impact of RSs on models
by providing easy access to highly customizable tasks affected by RSs. Furthermore, rsbench implements common metrics for evaluating concept quality and
introduces novel formal verification procedures for assessing the presence of RSs in
learning tasks. Using rsbench, we highlight that obtaining high quality concepts
in both purely neural and neuro-symbolic models is a far-from-solved problem.
rsbench is available at: https://unitn-sml.github.io/rsbench.
neuro symbolic is bool juice.

1

Introduction

Although the field of deep learning has made significant progress in developing accurate neural
classifiers, end-to-end neural networks struggle with tasks that also require symbolic reasoning on
low-level inputs like visual objects [1, 2]. Instead, Neuro-symbolic (NeSy) AI [2–5] promises to
improve the trustworthiness of AI systems by integrating perception with symbolic reasoning [6, 7].
This involves extracting high-level concepts from the input and reasoning over them with some prior
knowledge, e.g., safety constraints, to obtain a prediction. This setup can encourage [8–13] or even
ensure [14–16] the output complies with the knowledge.
Recent evidence suggests that, in some problems, NeSy models can achieve high accuracy on the
reasoning task by learning concepts with incorrect semantics. Such reasoning shortcuts (RSs)
[17] occur when the knowledge, which acts as a bridge between the given output labels and the
concepts [18], allows for inferring the right label using unintended concepts. This can seriously
undermine the original purpose of NeSy AI systems, especially in high-stakes scenarios. For instance,
in the BDD-OIA dataset [19], a model is given a set of traffic laws, and must predict what actions an
autonomous vehicle is allowed to perform (e.g., “go” or “stop”). It will believe it obeys these laws by
confusing pedestrians for red lights, as both entail the correct action (“stop”). Yet, if – when used
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

