Label Delay in Online Continual Learning
∗

∗

Botos Csaba1,3 ,
Wenxuan Zhang2 ,
Matthias Müller3 ,
Ser-Nam Lim4 ,
2
1
Mohamed Elhoseiny ,
Philip H.S. Torr ,
Adel Bibi1
1

2

University of Oxford
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
3
Intel Labs
4
University of Central Florida

Abstract
A critical yet often overlooked aspect in online continual learning is the label delay,
where new data may not be labeled due to slow and costly annotation processes.
We introduce a new continual learning framework with explicit modeling of the
label delay between data and label streams over time steps. In each step, the
framework reveals both unlabeled data from the current time step t and labels
delayed with d steps, from the time step t − d. In our extensive experiments
amounting to 25000 GPU hours, we show that merely increasing the computational
resources is insufficient to tackle this challenge. Our findings highlight significant
performance declines when solely relying on labeled data when the label delay
becomes significant. More surprisingly, state-of-the-art Self-Supervised Learning
and Test-Time Adaptation techniques that utilize the newer, unlabeled data, fail
to surpass the performance of a naïve method that simply trains on the delayed
supervised stream. To this end, we propose a simple, robust method, called
Importance Weighted Memory Sampling that can effectively bridge the accuracy
gap caused by label delay by prioritising memory samples that resemble the most
to the newest unlabeled samples. We show experimentally that our method is the
least affected by the label delay factor, and successfully recovers the accuracy of
the non-delayed counterpart. The implementation for reproducing our experiments
can be found at https://github.com/botcs/label-delay-exp.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models have become the de facto standard for a wide range of applications,
including social media [1], finance [2], and healthcare [3]. However, these models usually struggle
when the distribution from which the data is sampled is constantly changing over time, which is
common in real-world scenarios. This challenge continues to be an active area of research known as
Continual Learning (CL). However, most prior art in CL examines this problem with a presumption
of the immediate availability of labels once the data is collected. This assumption rarely holds in
real-world scenarios.
Consider the task of monitoring recovery trends in patients after surgeries. Doctors gather health data
from numerous post-operative patients regularly. However, this data does not immediately indicate
broader recovery trends or potential common complications. To make informed determinations, several weeks of extensive checks and tests across multiple patients are needed. Only after these checks
are completed, the gathered data can be labeled as indicating broader “recovery” or “complication”
trends. However, by the time the data is gathered, assessed, labeled, and a model is trained, new
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

