FlexMol: A Flexible Toolkit for Benchmarking
Molecular Relational Learning

Sizhe Liu1∗ , Jun Xia2∗† , Lecheng Zhang2∗ , Yuchen Liu1 , Yue Liu3 , Wenjie Du4 ,
Zhangyang Gao2 , Bozhen Hu2 , Cheng Tan2 , Hongxin Xiang5 , Stan Z. Li2†
1
University of Southern California 2 Westlake University 3 National University of Singapore
4
University of Science and Technology of China 5 Hunan University
sliu0727@usc.edu
{xiajun, zhanglecheng, stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Molecular relational learning (MRL) is crucial for understanding the interaction
behaviors between molecular pairs, a critical aspect of drug discovery and development. However, the large feasible model space of MRL poses significant challenges
to benchmarking, and existing MRL frameworks face limitations in flexibility and
scope. To address these challenges, avoid repetitive coding efforts, and ensure fair
comparison of models, we introduce FlexMol, a comprehensive toolkit designed to
facilitate the construction and evaluation of diverse model architectures across various datasets and performance metrics. FlexMol offers a robust suite of preset model
components, including 16 drug encoders, 13 protein sequence encoders, 9 protein
structure encoders, and 7 interaction layers. With its easy-to-use API and flexibility,
FlexMol supports the dynamic construction of over 70, 000 distinct combinations
of model architectures. Additionally, we provide detailed benchmark results and
code examples to demonstrate FlexMol’s effectiveness in simplifying and standardizing MRL model development and comparison. FlexMol is open-sourced and
available at https://github.com/Steven51516/FlexMol.

1

Introduction

Molecular relational learning (MRL) aims to understand the interaction behavior between molecular
pairs[23]. Among all interaction types, those involving drugs and proteins are of particular interest
due to their significant impact on therapeutic discovery and development. Drug-target interactions
(DTIs) play a crucial role in various aspects of drug development, such as virtual screening, drug
repurposing, and predicting potential side effects [56]. Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) reveal new
potential therapeutic targets by enhancing our understanding of protein structural characteristics and
cellular molecular machinery [42, 27]. Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) are vital for understanding
the effects of concurrent drug use, which can inform strategies to prevent adverse drug reactions and
ensure patient safety [5, 12].
MRL has significantly advanced through the integration of deep learning models and substantial
AI-ready datasets [14, 54]. MRL models typically consist of several key components: modules
for encoding molecule 1, modules for encoding molecule 2, modules for modeling interactions
between molecules, and additional auxiliary modules [38, 22, 60, 30, 16, 46, 59, 55]. The variety of
encoding methods and interaction layers available allows for the easy construction of new models by
recombining these components. This flexibility, however, results in a substantial model space, posing
significant challenges for benchmarking processes.
* Equal contribution. Correspondence: {xiajun, stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

