Kaleido Diffusion: Improving Conditional Diffusion
Models with Autoregressive Latent Modeling

Jiatao Gu†∗ , Ying Shen♢∗ , Shuangfei Zhai† , Yizhe Zhang† , Navdeep Jaitly† , Josh Susskind†
†
Apple ♢ University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign ∗ equal contribution
†
{jgu32, szhai, yizzhang,njaitly, jsusskind}@apple.com ♢ ying22@illinois.edu

Figure 1: Comparison of the generated image samples given the caption “a cat sat on the mat”. Our
models generate more diverse images with the help of autoregressive latent modeling.

Abstract
Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful tool for generating high-quality images from textual descriptions. Despite their successes, these models often exhibit
limited diversity in the sampled images, particularly when sampling with a high
classifier-free guidance weight. To address this issue, we present Kaleido, a novel
approach that enhances the diversity of samples by incorporating autoregressive
latent priors. Kaleido integrates an autoregressive language model that encodes the
original caption and generates latent variables, serving as abstract and intermediary
representations for guiding and facilitating the image generation process. In this
paper, we explore a variety of discrete latent representations, including textual
descriptions, detection bounding boxes, object blobs, and visual tokens. These
representations diversify and enrich the input conditions to the diffusion models,
enabling more diverse outputs. Our experimental results demonstrate that Kaleido
effectively broadens the diversity of the generated image samples from a given
textual description while maintaining high image quality. Furthermore, we show
that Kaleido adheres closely to the guidance provided by the generated latents,
demonstrating its capability to effectively control the image generation process.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have become pervasive in many text-to-image generation tasks for their ability to
generate high-quality images based on textual descriptions. A pivotal mechanism in these models is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

