GTA: A Benchmark for General Tool Agents

Jize Wang1,2 Zerun Ma2 Yining Li2 Songyang Zhang2
Cailian Chen1 Kai Chen2∗ Xinyi Le1∗
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{jizewang2000,cailianchen,lexinyi}@sjtu.edu.cn
{mazerun,liyining,zhangsongyang,chenkai}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Significant focus has been placed on integrating large language models (LLMs)
with various tools in developing general-purpose agents. This poses a challenge
to LLMs’ tool-use capabilities. However, there are evident gaps between existing
tool-use evaluations and real-world scenarios. Current evaluations often use AIgenerated queries, single-step tasks, dummy tools, and text-only interactions,
failing to effectively reveal the agents’ real-world problem-solving abilities. To
address this, we propose GTA, a benchmark for General Tool Agents, featuring
three main aspects: (i) Real user queries: human-written queries with simple
real-world objectives but implicit tool-use, requiring the LLM to reason the suitable
tools and plan the solution steps. (ii) Real deployed tools: an evaluation platform
equipped with tools across perception, operation, logic, and creativity categories to
evaluate the agents’ actual task execution performance. (iii) Real multimodal inputs:
authentic image files, such as spatial scenes, web page screenshots, tables, code
snippets, and printed/handwritten materials, used as the query contexts to align
with real-world scenarios closely. We design 229 real-world tasks and executable
tool chains to evaluate mainstream LLMs. Our findings show that real-world user
queries are challenging for existing LLMs, with GPT-4 completing less than 50%
of the tasks and most LLMs achieving below 25%. This evaluation reveals the
bottlenecks in the tool-use capabilities of current LLMs in real-world scenarios,
which provides future direction for advancing general-purpose tool agents. Dataset
and code are available at https://github.com/open-compass/GTA.

1

Introduction

Integrating tools with large language models (LLMs) has attracted broad research interest as a
potential approach towards general AI assistants. Notable works include LangChain [5], AutoGPT [8],
and ChatGPT Plugins [19]. These systems decompose workflow into two interactive parts: planning
and execution, respectively handled by LLM controllers and callable tools. Solving complex realworld tasks requires multiple types of tools, including perception, operation, logic, and creativity,
posing great challenges to LLMs’ tool-use proficiency. Consequently, evaluating the models’ tool-use
capabilities for real-world tasks is crucial for enhancing the effectiveness of agent systems.
Despite the progress on benchmarking the tool-use capability of LLMs made by recent works,
especially on collecting massive APIs and AI-generated user queries to enable scalable testing, there
remain noticeable gaps regarding real-world scenarios, as shown in Table 1. First, AI-generated
user queries, limited by the generative model, often result in overly brief or monotonous solutions.
∗

Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

