Binarized Diffusion Model for Image Super-Resolution

Zheng Chen1 , Haotong Qin2∗, Yong Guo3 , Xiongfei Su4 ,
Xin Yuan4 , Linghe Kong1 , Yulun Zhang1∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 ETH Zürich,
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 4 Westlake University

Abstract
Advanced diffusion models (DMs) perform impressively in image super-resolution
(SR), but the high memory and computational costs hinder their deployment. Binarization, an ultra-compression algorithm, offers the potential for effectively
accelerating DMs. Nonetheless, due to the model structure and the multi-step
iterative attribute of DMs, existing binarization methods result in significant performance degradation. In this paper, we introduce a novel binarized diffusion model,
BI-DiffSR, for image SR. First, for the model structure, we design a UNet architecture optimized for binarization. We propose the consistent-pixel-downsample
(CP-Down) and consistent-pixel-upsample (CP-Up) to maintain dimension consistent and facilitate the full-precision information transfer. Meanwhile, we design the
channel-shuffle-fusion (CS-Fusion) to enhance feature fusion in skip connection.
Second, for the activation difference across timestep, we design the timestep-aware
redistribution (TaR) and activation function (TaA). The TaR and TaA dynamically
adjust the distribution of activations based on different timesteps, improving the
flexibility and representation alability of the binarized module. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our BI-DiffSR outperforms existing binarization methods. Code is released at: https://github.com/zhengchen1999/BI-DiffSR.

1

Introduction

Image super-resolution (SR) is a fundamental task in low-level vision and image processing. It
aims to reconstruct high-resolution (HR) images from low-resolution (LR) counterparts. Currently,
the mainstream methods for this task are deep neural networks, which employ learning-based
techniques to map LR images to HR images [10, 70, 31, 54, 6, 68]. Among these methods, generative
models [62, 9, 44] have garnered widespread attention for their ability to restore more realism results.
Especially, the diffusion model (DM) [16, 58, 52], a newly proposed generative model, exhibits
impressive performance. With its superior generation quality and more stable training, diffusion
model is widely used in various image tasks, including image SR [54, 63]. Specifically, the diffusion
model transforms a standard Gaussian distribution into a high-quality image through a stochastic
iterative denoising process. In image SR, it further constrains the generation scope by conditioning
on the LR image to produce the targeted HR image.
However, to produce high-quality results, diffusion models require thousands of iterative steps,
leading to slow inference processes and high computational costs. Some methods [58, 40, 37]
implement faster sampling strategies via learning sample trajectories, effectively reducing the number
of iterations to tens. Yet, a single inference step still demands substantial memory usage and floatingpoint computations, especially for SR tasks involving high-resolution images. Meanwhile, most
edge devices (e.g., mobile and IoT devices), have limited storage and computational resources.
This hampers the deployment of diffusion models on these platforms and limits their application.
Therefore, it is essential to compress diffusion models to accelerate inference speed and reduce
computational costs while maintaining model performance.
∗

Corresponding authors: Haotong Qin, qinhaotong@gmail.com; Yulun Zhang, yulun100@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

