RL in Latent MDPs is Tractable:
Online Guarantees via Off-Policy Evaluation

Jeongyeol Kwon
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jeongyeol.kwon@wisc.edu
Constantine Caramanis
University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

Shie Mannor
Technion / NVIDIA AI
shie@ee.technion.ac.il
Yonathan Efroni
Meta AI
jonathan.efroni@gmail.com

Abstract
In many real-world decision problems there is partially observed, hidden or latent
information that remains fixed throughout an interaction. Such decision problems
can be modeled as Latent Markov Decision Processes (LMDPs), where a latent
variable is selected at the beginning of an interaction and is not disclosed to the
agent. In the last decade, there has been significant progress in solving LMDPs
under different structural assumptions. However, for general LMDPs, even in the
tabular case, no algorithm is known to provably match the existing lower bound [41].
We introduce the first sample-efficient algorithm for LMDPs without any additional
distributional assumptions. Our result builds off a new perspective on the role of offpolicy evaluation guarantees and coverage coefficients in LMDPs, a perspective, that
has been overlooked in the context of exploration in partially observed environments.
Specifically, we establish a novel off-policy evaluation lemma and introduce a new
coverage coefficient for LMDPs. Then, we show how these can be used to derive
near-optimal guarantees of an optimistic exploration algorithm. These results, we
believe, can be valuable for a wide range of interactive learning problems beyond
LMDPs, and especially, for partially observed environments.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (RL) [54], an agent aims to maximize the long-term cumulative rewards
through interactions within an unknown environment. Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are perhaps
the most well-studied and popular framework for this goal. As the name suggests, MDPs heavily
rely on the Markovian assumption that requires the state to be fully observable. However, many
real-world decision problems involve critical partially observed or latent information, such as sensitive
or unknown preference information of users in recommendation systems [28], undiagnosed illness in
medical treatments [62, 53], and adaptation to uninformed tasks in robotics [67, 48]. Even when such
latent factors remain fixed throughout a period of interactions the fundamental Markovian property of
MDPs is no longer valid.
A line of work has proposed efficient RL algorithms in the presence of latent contexts [12, 24, 11, 21,
41, 37] within the framework that we here collectively refer to as Latent Markov Decision Processes
(LMDP) following [41]. In LMDPs, nature selects an MDP from a finite set of M candidate MDP
models at the beginning of a period of interactions (a.k.a. episode), and an agent interacts with the
chosen MDP for H time steps of an episode (the horizon). However, the identity of the chosen MDP
is not given to the agent. We call this unknown identity the latent context.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

