Bridging Gaps: Federated Multi-View Clustering in
Heterogeneous Hybrid Views

Xinyue Chen1 Yazhou Ren1,2,∗ Jie Xu1
Fangfei Lin1 Xiaorong Pu1,2 Yang Yang1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China, China; 2 Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China

Abstract
Recently, federated multi-view clustering (FedMVC) has emerged to explore cluster structures in multi-view data distributed on multiple clients. Many existing
approaches tend to assume that clients are isomorphic and all of them belong to
either single-view clients or multi-view clients. While these methods have succeeded, they may encounter challenges in practical FedMVC scenarios involving
heterogeneous hybrid views, where a mixture of single-view and multi-view clients
exhibit varying degrees of heterogeneity. In this paper, we propose a novel FedMVC framework, which concurrently addresses two challenges associated with
heterogeneous hybrid views, i.e., client gap and view gap. To address the client gap,
we design a local-synergistic contrastive learning approach that helps single-view
clients and multi-view clients achieve consistency for mitigating heterogeneity
among all clients. To address the view gap, we develop a global-specific weighting
aggregation method, which encourages global models to learn complementary
features from hybrid views. The interplay between local-synergistic contrastive
learning and global-specific weighting aggregation mutually enhances the exploration of the data cluster structures distributed on multiple clients. Theoretical
analysis and extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can handle the
heterogeneous hybrid views in FedMVC and outperforms state-of-the-art methods.
The code is available at https://github.com/5Martina5/FMCSC.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in sensors and the internet have allowed many distributed clients to collect
unlabeled data from multiple views/modalities[10, 17, 25]. Utilizing these unlabeled data while
considering the need for data privacy among clients has given rise to an emerging field of federated
multi-view clustering (FedMVC) [8], which enables multiple clients to collaboratively train consistent
clustering models without exposing private data. The clustering models across distributed clients can
be applied in many applications (e.g., recommendation [15] and medicine [5]) and thus FedMVC
attracts increasing research interest [14, 26, 35].
Existing FedMVC methods tend to assume that clients are isomorphic and all of them belong to either
single-view clients or multi-view clients. For instance, FedDMVC [8] assumes that a dataset with V
views is distributed across V single-view clients, each having the same set of samples. FedMVFPC
[14] assumes that the data are distributed among multiple multi-view clients, with each client having
V views and non-overlapping samples among clients. Despite the achieved success, they may
encounter challenges when handling some practical FedMVC scenarios involving heterogeneous
∗

Corresponding author (yazhou.ren@uestc.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

