Bag of Tricks: Benchmarking of Jailbreak Attacks
on LLMs
Zhao XU
AI Thrust
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
zxu674@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
Fan LIU
AI Thrust
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
fliu236@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
Hao LIU∗
AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
Guangzhou HKUST Fok Ying Tung Research Institute
CSE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
liuh@ust.hk

Abstract
Although Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant capabilities in executing complex tasks in a zero-shot manner, they are susceptible to
jailbreak attacks and can be manipulated to produce harmful outputs. Recently, a
growing body of research has categorized jailbreak attacks into token-level and
prompt-level attacks. However, previous work primarily overlooks the diverse
key factors of jailbreak attacks, with most studies concentrating on LLM vulnerabilities and lacking exploration of defense-enhanced LLMs. To address these
issues, we introduced JailTrickBench to evaluate the impact of various attack
settings on LLM performance and provide a baseline for jailbreak attacks, encouraging the adoption of a standardized evaluation framework. Specifically, we
evaluate the eight key factors of implementing jailbreak attacks on LLMs from
both target-level and attack-level perspectives. We further conduct seven representative jailbreak attacks on six defense methods across two widely used datasets,
encompassing approximately 354 experiments with about 55,000 GPU hours on
A800-80G. Our experimental results highlight the need for standardized benchmarking to evaluate these attacks on defense-enhanced LLMs. Our code is available
at https://github.com/usail-hkust/JailTrickBench.
WARNING: This paper contains model outputs that may be considered offensive.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant capabilities in executing complex
tasks, yet they remain vulnerable to jailbreak attacks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. These attacks manipulate
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

