COLD: Causal reasOning in cLosed Daily activities

Abhinav Joshi∗
Areeb Ahmad∗
Ashutosh Modi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur (IIT Kanpur)
Kanpur, India
{ajoshi,areeb,ashutoshm}@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown state-of-the-art performance in a variety of tasks, including arithmetic and reasoning; however, to gauge the intellectual
capabilities of LLMs, causal reasoning has become a reliable proxy for validating
a general understanding of the mechanics and intricacies of the world similar to humans. Previous works in natural language processing (NLP) have either focused on
open-ended causal reasoning via causal commonsense reasoning (CCR) or framed
a symbolic representation-based question answering for theoretically backed-up
analysis via a causal inference engine. The former adds an advantage of real-world
grounding but lacks theoretically backed-up analysis/validation, whereas the latter
is far from real-world grounding. In this work, we bridge this gap by proposing the
COLD (Causal reasOning in cLosed Daily activities) framework, which is built
upon human understanding of daily real-world activities to reason about the causal
nature of events. We show that the proposed framework facilitates the creation
of enormous causal queries (∼ 9 million) and comes close to the mini-turing test,
simulating causal reasoning to evaluate the understanding of a daily real-world
task. We evaluate multiple LLMs on the created causal queries and find that causal
reasoning is challenging even for activities trivial to humans. We further explore
(the causal reasoning abilities of LLMs) using the backdoor criterion to determine
the causal strength between events.

1

Introduction

In recent times, Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable generalization capabilities
[Devlin et al., 2019, Radford et al., 2019, Brown et al., 2020]. Consequently, the ability to perform
causal reasoning (often considered a core feature of intelligence [Penn and Povinelli, 2007, Pearl
and Mackenzie, 2018]) has sparked research interest in the context of LLMs, aiming to answer if
causal reasoning is possible with LLMs [Weber et al., 2020, Jin et al., 2023, 2024, Cohrs et al., 2023,
Romanou et al., 2023, Yang et al., 2023, Mitchell et al., 2023, Vashishtha et al., 2023, Stolfo et al.,
2023]. On a broader level, there are two lines of work; first, that treats the causal reasoning via
learning relationships between the events that are grounded in the real world [Gordon et al., 2012,
Ho et al., 2022, Zečević et al., 2023, Zhang et al., 2023, Wang et al., 2023]. Second line of work
relies on a causal inference engine and establishes relationships between variables via symbolic
representation [Jin et al., 2023, 2024]. The former relies on understanding real-world events but lacks
formal definitions that adhere to the causal inference theory. The latter solves the issue using a causal
inference engine but uses symbolic representations not grounded in the world, making the causal
queries more like a test for the understanding of causal theory. Though the first line of work includes
real-world events, the causal queries are often limited and could be answered by memorizing the
causal relationships between the events. Recent findings that include rigorous analysis using a causal
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

