Towards Human-AI Complementarity
with Prediction Sets
Giovanni De Toni∗
Fondazione Bruno Kessler & University of Trento
Trento, Italy
giovanni.detoni@unitn.it
Suhas Thejaswi
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
thejaswi@mpi-sws.org

Nastaran Okati
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
nastaran@mpi-sws.org
Eleni Straitouri
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
estraitouri@mpi-sws.org

Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Decision support systems based on prediction sets have proven to be effective at
helping human experts solve classification tasks. Rather than providing singlelabel predictions, these systems provide sets of label predictions constructed using
conformal prediction, namely prediction sets, and ask human experts to predict
label values from these sets. In this paper, we first show that the prediction sets
constructed using conformal prediction are, in general, suboptimal in terms of
average accuracy. Then, we show that the problem of finding the optimal prediction sets under which the human experts achieve the highest average accuracy is
NP-hard. More strongly, unless P = NP, we show that the problem is hard to
approximate to any factor less than the size of the label set. However, we introduce
a simple and efficient greedy algorithm that, for a large class of expert models and
non-conformity scores, is guaranteed to find prediction sets that provably offer
equal or greater performance than those constructed using conformal prediction.
Further, using a simulation study with both synthetic and real expert predictions,
we demonstrate that, in practice, our greedy algorithm finds near-optimal prediction
sets offering greater performance than conformal prediction.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been increasing excitement about the potential of decision support systems
based on machine learning to help human experts make more accurate predictions in a variety of
application domains, including medicine, education and science [1–3]. In this context, the ultimate
goal is human-AI complementarity—the predictions made by the human expert who uses a decision
support system are more accurate than the predictions made by the expert on their own and by the
classifier used by the decision support system [4–8].
The conventional wisdom is that to achieve human-AI complementarity, decision support systems
should help humans understand when and how to use their predictions to update their own. As a result,
∗

The author contributed to this paper during an internship at the Max Planck Institute for Software Systems.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

