Sequential Signal Mixing Aggregation for Message
Passing Graph Neural Networks

Mitchell Keren Taraday∗
Department of Computer Science
Technion
Haifa, Israel
butovsky.mitchell@gmail.com

Almog David∗
Department of Computer Science
Technion
Haifa, Israel
almogdavid@gmail.com

Chaim Baskin
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Be’er Sheva, Israel
chaimbaskin@bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Message Passing Graph Neural Networks (MPGNNs) have emerged as the preferred method for modeling complex interactions across diverse graph entities.
While the theory of such models is well understood, their aggregation module has
not received sufficient attention. Sum-based aggregators have solid theoretical foundations regarding their separation capabilities. However, practitioners often prefer
using more complex aggregations and mixtures of diverse aggregations. In this
work, we unveil a possible explanation for this gap. We claim that sum-based aggregators fail to "mix" features belonging to distinct neighbors, preventing them from
succeeding at downstream tasks. To this end, we introduce Sequential Signal Mixing Aggregation (SSMA), a novel plug-and-play aggregation for MPGNNs. SSMA
treats the neighbor features as 2D discrete signals and sequentially convolves them,
inherently enhancing the ability to mix features attributed to distinct neighbors.
By performing extensive experiments, we show that when combining SSMA with
well-established MPGNN architectures, we achieve substantial performance gains
across various benchmarks, achieving new state-of-the-art results in many settings.
We published our code at https://almogdavid.github.io/SSMA/

1

Introduction

Message-passing Graph Neural Networks (MPGNNs) have established themselves as the major
workhorses for graph representation learning over the past decade [24]. These models have been
proven to be effective in graph-structured problems in a variety of domains, ranging from social
networks [18] to natural sciences [14, 23, 4] and having some non-trivial applications in computer
vision and natural language processing [26, 33, 45, 28].
Such renowned models of this nature owe their success to their high efficiency, along with good
generalization capabilities and simplicity. A typical MPGNN takes graph-structured data containing
node and edge features as input. It then iteratively updates node representations by combining their
egocentric view with a symmetrized aggregation of their proximate neighbor features.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

