Connectivity-Driven Pseudo-Labeling
Makes Stronger Cross-Domain Segmenters

Dong Zhao1∗ , Qi Zang1∗, Shuang Wang1† , Nicu Sebe2 , Zhun Zhong3,4†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Shaanxi, China
2
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
4
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, NG8 1BB Nottingham, UK

Abstract
Presently, pseudo-labeling stands as a prevailing approach in cross-domain semantic segmentation, enhancing model efficacy by training with pixels assigned
with reliable pseudo-labels. However, we identify two key limitations within this
paradigm: (1) under relatively severe domain shifts, most selected reliable pixels
appear speckled and remain noisy. (2) when dealing with wild data, some pixels
belonging to the open-set class may exhibit high confidence and also appear speckled. These two points make it difficult for the pixel-level selection mechanism to
identify and correct these speckled close- and open-set noises. As a result, error
accumulation is continuously introduced into subsequent self-training, leading
to inefficiencies in pseudo-labeling. To address these limitations, we propose a
novel method called Semantic Connectivity-driven Pseudo-labeling (SeCo). SeCo
formulates pseudo-labels at the connectivity level, which makes it easier to locate
and correct closed and open set noise. Specifically, SeCo comprises two key components: Pixel Semantic Aggregation (PSA) and Semantic Connectivity Correction
(SCC). Initially, PSA categorizes semantics into “stuff” and “things” categories
and aggregates speckled pseudo-labels into semantic connectivity through efficient
interaction with the Segment Anything Model (SAM). This enables us not only
to obtain accurate boundaries but also simplifies noise localization. Subsequently,
SCC introduces a simple connectivity classification task, which enables us to locate
and correct connectivity noise with the guidance of loss distribution. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that SeCo can be flexibly applied to various cross-domain
semantic segmentation tasks, i.e. domain generalization and domain adaptation,
even including source-free, and black-box domain adaptation, significantly improving the performance of existing state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/DZhaoXd/SeCo.

1

Introduction

Propelled by deep neural networks, remarkable strides have been achieved in semantic segmentation
technology [8, 10, 80, 31]. However, deep segmentation models encounter a significant decline in
adaptability when confronted with open domains. This challenge is mainly attributed to the inherent
domain shift between the training and testing data [22, 9, 13]. To address cross-domain challenges,
Domain Adaptation (DA) [21] and Domain Generalization (DG) [11] techniques have been proposed
to enhance the segmenter’s adaptability to the target domain or unseen domains.
Pseudo-labeling [67] is a widely used technique in cross-domain semantic segmentation tasks,
enhancing model efficiency by training with pixels assigned reliable pseudo-labels. The core of
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

