A Gradient Accumulation Method for Dense Retriever
under Memory Constraint

Jaehee Kim1 Yukyung Lee2 Pilsung Kang1∗
1
Seoul National University 2 Boston University
{jaehee_kim, pilsung_kang}@snu.ac.kr
ylee5@bu.edu

Abstract
InfoNCE loss is commonly used to train dense retriever in information retrieval
tasks. It is well known that a large batch is essential to stable and effective
training with InfoNCE loss, which requires significant hardware resources. Due
to the dependency of large batch, dense retriever has bottleneck of application
and research. Recently, memory reduction methods have been broadly adopted
to resolve the hardware bottleneck by decomposing forward and backward or
using a memory bank. However, current methods still suffer from slow and
unstable training. To address these issues, we propose Contrastive Accumulation
(C ONTACCUM), a stable and efficient memory reduction method for dense retriever
trains that uses a dual memory bank structure to leverage previously generated query
and passage representations. Experiments on widely used five information retrieval
datasets indicate that C ONTACCUM can surpass not only existing memory reduction
methods but also high-resource scenario. Moreover, theoretical analysis and
experimental results confirm that C ONTACCUM provides more stable dual-encoder
training than current memory bank utilization methods.

1

Introduction

Dense retriever aims to retrieve relevant passages from a database in response to user queries with
neural networks [43]. Karpukhin et al. [16] and Lee et al. [20] introduced the in-batch negative
sampling for training dense retriever with InfoNCE loss [36], where relevant passages from other
queries in the same batch are utilized as negative passages. This negative sampling strategy has been
widely adopted in subsequent dense retriever studies, including supervised retriever [16, 31, 28, 41],
retriever pre-training [7, 8, 24, 12, 5], phrase retriever [19, 25], and generative retriever [34, 13].
Training dense retriever with InfoNCE loss drives the representations of queries and relevant passages
closer and pushes the representations of unrelated passages apart, which can be seen as a form of
metric learning [17].
Many dense retriever methodologies utilize large batch to incorporate more negative samples [41, 7,
28, 12]. Theoretically, it has been demonstrated that more negative samples in InfoNCE loss lead to a
tighter lower bound on mutual information between query and passage [36]. Empirical studies have
shown that the dense retriever performs better with large batch [28, 43, 42]. However, training with
large batches requires high-resource, posing a challenge for dense retriever research and applications.
A line of research has focused on overcoming these limitations by approximating the effects of large
batch sizes. Gradient Accumulation (GradAccum), a common method for approximating large batch,
reduces memory usage by splitting the large batch into smaller batches. However, GradAccum has
limitations in the context of InfoNCE loss because it reduces negative samples per query by the smaller
∗

indicates corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

