HOI-Swap: Swapping Objects in Videos with
Hand-Object Interaction Awareness

Zihui Xue1,2
Mi Luo1
Changan Chen1
1
The University of Texas at Austin

2

Kristen Grauman1,2
FAIR, Meta

Abstract
We study the problem of precisely swapping objects in videos, with a focus on those
interacted with by hands, given one user-provided reference object image. Despite
the great advancements that diffusion models have made in video editing recently,
these models often fall short in handling the intricacies of hand-object interactions
(HOI), failing to produce realistic edits—especially when object swapping results in
object shape or functionality changes. To bridge this gap, we present HOI-Swap, a
novel diffusion-based video editing framework trained in a self-supervised manner.
Designed in two stages, the first stage focuses on object swapping in a single frame
with HOI awareness; the model learns to adjust the interaction patterns, such as the
hand grasp, based on changes in the object’s properties. The second stage extends
the single-frame edit across the entire sequence; we achieve controllable motion
alignment with the original video by: (1) warping a new sequence from the stage-I
edited frame based on sampled motion points and (2) conditioning video generation
on the warped sequence. Comprehensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations
demonstrate that HOI-Swap significantly outperforms existing methods, delivering
high-quality video edits with realistic HOIs.1

1

Introduction

Consider a video depicting the process of a human hand picking up a kettle and moving it around
(Figure 1). What if we want to replace the hand-interacting object in this scene with another item
specified by the user—perhaps a differently-shaped kettle, a bottle, or a bowl? This capability—to
swap the in-contact object in a video with another, while aligning with the original video’s content—is
crucial for enhancing various real-world applications. Such functionality can transform entertainment,
allowing users to create novel video content without the need to re-record or engage in labor-intensive
manual editing. For example, in advertising, there may be situations where a pre-recorded video
needs to adapt to new sponsorship requirements by replacing a soda can in the video with a water
bottle. Additionally, it holds significant promise in robotics, where recent results suggest generative
models can reduce the reliance on manually collected task-specific visual data and thereby enable
large-scale robot learning [25, 58]. For example, imagine a scenario where, from just a single video
of a mug being picked up, a generative model is able to produce numerous variants of this video with
diverse objects such as bottles, bowls and kettles. This capability could greatly streamline the data
collection process, reducing the need for extensive manual data collection.
However, hands are notoriously challenging to work with in image/video editing [62, 66]. They
pose significant hurdles in manual photoshopping and often produce unsatisfactory outputs when
automated by generative models. The precise swapping of hand-interacting objects presents a unique
challenge that existing diffusion models [19, 45, 1, 56], despite their advances in video editing, fail
to address adequately. This difficulty arises from three main factors: the need for (a) HOI-aware
capabilities, (b) spatial alignment with the source context, and (c) controllable temporal alignment
with the source video’s motion patterns.
1

Project webpage: https://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/HOI-Swap.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

