Proportional Fairness in
Non-Centroid Clustering

Ioannis Caragiannis
Aarhus University
iannis@cs.au.dk

Evi Micha
Harvard University
emicha@seas.harvard.edu

Nisarg Shah
University of Toronto
nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We revisit the recently developed framework of proportionally fair clustering,
where the goal is to provide group fairness guarantees that become stronger
for groups of data points (agents) that are large and cohesive. Prior work
applies this framework to centroid clustering, where the loss of an agent is
its distance to the centroid assigned to its cluster. We expand the framework
to non-centroid clustering, where the loss of an agent is a function of the
other agents in its cluster, by adapting two proportional fairness criteria —
the core and its relaxation, fully justified representation (FJR) — to this
setting.
We show that the core can be approximated only under structured loss functions, and even then, the best approximation we are able to establish, using
an adaptation of the GreedyCapture algorithm developed for centroid
clustering [1, 2], is unappealing for a natural loss function. In contrast,
we design a new (inefficient) algorithm, GreedyCohesiveClustering,
which achieves the relaxation FJR exactly under arbitrary loss functions,
and show that the efficient GreedyCapture algorithm achieves a constant approximation of FJR. We also design an efficient auditing algorithm,
which estimates the FJR approximation of any given clustering solution
up to a constant factor. Our experiments on real data suggest that traditional clustering algorithms are highly unfair, whereas GreedyCapture
is considerably fairer and incurs only a modest loss in common clustering
objectives.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental task in unsupervised learning, where the goal is to partition a
set of n points into k clusters C = (C1 , . . . , Ck ) in such a way that points within the same
cluster are close to each other (measured by a distance function d) and points in different
clusters are far from each other. This goal is materialized through a variety of objective
Pk
P
functions, the most popular of which is the k-means objective: i=1 |C1i | · x,y∈Ci d(x, y)2 .
When the points are in a Euclidean space, the k-means objective can be rewritten as
Pk P
P
1
2
i=1
x∈Ci d(x, µi ) , where µi = |Ci |
x∈Ci x is the mean (also called the centroid) of
1
cluster Ci . This gives rise to centroid clustering, where deciding where to place the k
cluster centers is viewed as the task and the clusters are implicitly formed when each point
is assigned to its nearest cluster center.
1

Centroids can be defined in non-Euclidean spaces, e.g., as µi = arg miny |C1i |

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

P
x∈Ci

d(x, y)2 .

