The Surprising Ineffectiveness of Pre-Trained Visual
Representations for Model-Based Reinforcement
Learning

Moritz Schneider 1 2 3 * Robert Krug 1 2 Narunas Vaskevicius 1 2
Luigi Palmieri 1 2 Joschka Boedecker 3 4
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence 2 Bosch Corporate Research
3
University of Freiburg 4 BrainLinks-BrainTools

Abstract
Visual Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods often require extensive amounts
of data. As opposed to model-free RL, model-based RL (MBRL) offers a potential solution with efficient data utilization through planning. Additionally, RL
lacks generalization capabilities for real-world tasks. Prior work has shown that
incorporating pre-trained visual representations (PVRs) enhances sample efficiency
and generalization. While PVRs have been extensively studied in the context
of model-free RL, their potential in MBRL remains largely unexplored. In this
paper, we benchmark a set of PVRs on challenging control tasks in a model-based
RL setting. We investigate the data efficiency, generalization capabilities, and
the impact of different properties of PVRs on the performance of model-based
agents. Our results, perhaps surprisingly, reveal that for MBRL current PVRs are
not more sample efficient than learning representations from scratch, and that they
do not generalize better to out-of-distribution (OOD) settings. To explain this, we
analyze the quality of the trained dynamics model. Furthermore, we show that data
diversity and network architecture are the most important contributors to OOD
generalization performance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) provides an elegant alternative to classic planning and control schemes,
as it allows for complex behaviors to emerge by just specifying a reward, rather than hand-modelling
and tuning environments and agents. Despite their success, most methods need extensive data and
can be used only on their respective task, lacking the generalization capabilities needed to handle
the complexity of real world tasks. On hardware, RL is costly in terms of time and wear, therefore
model-based approaches are attractive as they promise to improve sample efficiency. For many
real-life problems, vision is an invaluable source of state information, but due to its high-dimensional
nature it is challenging to incorporate it in RL algorithms. Therefore, the use of pre-trained visual
representations (PVRs) is attractive as, intuitively, it promises to improve sample efficiency and
generalization. Most existing approaches use or investigate PVRs in the context of model-free RL.
For example, CLIP [1] is already widely used as pre-trained vision model for model-free robotic RL
tasks [2, 3, 4]. One would assume that the benefits such representations yield for model-free settings
equally apply to model-based methods. In model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL), features
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are usually used as visual state representations, whereas
other representation types such as keypoints, surface normals, depth, segmentation and pre-trained
*

Correspondence to: moritz.schneider@de.bosch.com
Project website: https://schneimo.com/pvr4mbrl

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

