Accelerating Augmentation Invariance Pretraining

Jinhong Lin∗ Cheng-En Wu* Yibing Wei Pedro Morgado
University of Wisconsin–Madison
{jlin522, cwu356, wei96, pmorgado}@wisc.edu

Abstract
Our work tackles the computational challenges of contrastive learning methods,
particularly for the pretraining of Vision Transformers (ViTs). Despite the effectiveness of contrastive learning, the substantial computational resources required
for training often hinder their practical application. To mitigate this issue, we
propose an acceleration framework, leveraging ViT’s unique ability to generalize
across inputs of varying sequence lengths. Our method employs a mix of sequence
compression strategies, including randomized token dropout and flexible patch
scaling, to reduce the cost of gradient estimation and accelerate convergence. We
further provide an in-depth analysis of the gradient estimation error of various
acceleration strategies as well as their impact on downstream tasks, offering valuable insights into the trade-offs between acceleration and performance. We also
propose a novel procedure to identify an optimal acceleration schedule to adjust
the sequence compression ratios to the training progress, ensuring efficient training
without sacrificing downstream performance. Our approach significantly reduces
computational overhead across various self-supervised learning algorithms on
large-scale datasets. In ImageNet, our method achieves speedups of 4× in MoCo,
3.3× in SimCLR, and 2.5× in DINO, demonstrating substantial efficiency gains.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a powerful pre-training paradigm, demonstrating
remarkable success across a variety of domains. By designing pretext tasks that leverage unlabeled
data, SSL eliminates the need for costly and labor-intensive manual annotations. Among SSL
methods, contrastive [5, 16] and distillation-based [4, 24] learning are among the most effective.
They learn representations through transformation invariance, meaning that the model learns to create
similar representations for different augmentations of the same image, but different across images.
These approaches have led to the development of state-of-the-art models for tasks ranging from image
recognition [16, 12] to object detection [16] and video object segmentation [4].
Despite these achievements, SSL requires substantial computational resources for pretraining, with
optimal performance often necessitating long training schedules, hindering their practical application.
The computational demands of SSL are particularly high for Vision Transformers (ViTs), a promising
class of neural networks that has recently gained significant attention for visual understanding tasks.
ViTs represent images as sequences of patches, processed through self-attention layers. While
self-attention enables the model to capture long-range dependencies and complex patterns more
effectively than convolutional networks, their enhanced expressiveness (and weaker inductive bias)
require even more extensive pre-training to achieve competitive performance. Our work aims to
address these computational challenges by proposing an acceleration framework specifically tailored
for ViTs.
Existing attempts to accelerate SSL pretraining primarily focus on defining improved learning rates
and data augmentation schedules for faster learning [19] or increasing the strength of supervision
through multiple targets [8]. While beneficial, these methods are not tailored to the ViT architecture,
and can only provide limited acceleration. They also often change the underlying pretraining
∗
Equal Contribution
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

