Autoregressive Image Generation without Vector Quantization

Tianhong Li1
1

Yonglong Tian2

MIT CSAIL

2

He Li3

Google DeepMind

Mingyang Deng1
3

Kaiming He1

Tsinghua University

Abstract
Conventional wisdom holds that autoregressive models for image generation are
typically accompanied by vector-quantized tokens. We observe that while a
discrete-valued space can facilitate representing a categorical distribution, it is not
a necessity for autoregressive modeling. In this work, we propose to model the
per-token probability distribution using a diffusion procedure, which allows us to
apply autoregressive models in a continuous-valued space. Rather than using categorical cross-entropy loss, we define a Diffusion Loss function to model the pertoken probability. This approach eliminates the need for discrete-valued tokenizers. We evaluate its effectiveness across a wide range of cases, including standard
autoregressive models and generalized masked autoregressive (MAR) variants. By
removing vector quantization, our image generator achieves strong results while
enjoying the speed advantage of sequence modeling. We hope this work will motivate the use of autoregressive generation in other continuous-valued domains and
applications. Code is available at https://github.com/LTH14/mar.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive models are currently the de facto solution to generative models in natural language
processing [38, 39, 3]. These models predict the next word or token in a sequence based on the
previous words as input. Given the discrete nature of languages, the inputs and outputs of these
models are in a categorical, discrete-valued space. This prevailing approach has led to a widespread
belief that autoregressive models are inherently linked to discrete representations.
As a result, research on generalizing autoregressive models to continuous-valued domains—most
notably, image generation—has intensely focused on discretizing the data [6, 13, 40]. A commonly
adopted strategy is to train a discrete-valued tokenizer on images, which involves a finite vocabulary
obtained by vector quantization (VQ) [51, 41]. Autoregressive models are then operated on the
discrete-valued token space, analogous to their language counterparts.
In this work, we aim to address the following question: Is it necessary for autoregressive models
to be coupled with vector-quantized representations? We note that the autoregressive nature, i.e.,
“predicting next tokens based on previous ones”, is independent of whether the values are discrete
or continuous. What is needed is to model the per-token probability distribution, which can be
measured by a loss function and used to draw samples from. Discrete-valued representations can
be conveniently modeled by a categorical distribution, but it is not conceptually necessary. If alternative models for per-token probability distributions are presented, autoregressive models can be
approached without vector quantization.
With this observation, we propose to model the per-token probability distribution by a diffusion
procedure operating on continuous-valued domains. Our methodology leverages the principles of
diffusion models [45, 24, 33, 10] for representing arbitrary probability distributions. Specifically,
our method autoregressively predicts a vector z for each token, which serves as a conditioning for
a denoising network (e.g., a small MLP). The denoising diffusion procedure enables us to represent
an underlying distribution p(x|z) for the output x (Figure 1). This small denoising network is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

