Distribution-Aware Data Expansion with
Diffusion Models
Haowei Zhu1 , Ling Yang ∗ 2 , Jun-Hai Yong1 , Hongzhi Yin3 , Jiawei Jiang4 , Meng Xiao5 ,
Wentao Zhang† 2 , Bin Wang † 1
1
Tsinghua University 2 Peking University
3
University of Queensland 4 Wuhan University 5 CNIC, CAS
wentao.zhang@pku.edu.cn wangbins@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The scale and quality of a dataset significantly impact the performance of deep
models. However, acquiring large-scale annotated datasets is both a costly and timeconsuming endeavor. To address this challenge, dataset expansion technologies aim
to automatically augment datasets, unlocking the full potential of deep models. Current data expansion techniques include image transformation and image synthesis
methods. Transformation-based methods introduce only local variations, leading
to limited diversity. In contrast, synthesis-based methods generate entirely new
content, greatly enhancing informativeness. However, existing synthesis methods
carry the risk of distribution deviations, potentially degrading model performance
with out-of-distribution samples. In this paper, we propose DistDiff, a training-free
data expansion framework based on the distribution-aware diffusion model. DistDiff constructs hierarchical prototypes to approximate the real data distribution,
optimizing latent data points within diffusion models with hierarchical energy
guidance. We demonstrate its capability to generate distribution-consistent samples, significantly improving data expansion tasks. DistDiff consistently enhances
accuracy across a diverse range of datasets compared to models trained solely
on original data. Furthermore, our approach consistently outperforms existing
synthesis-based techniques and demonstrates compatibility with widely adopted
transformation-based augmentation methods. Additionally, the expanded dataset
exhibits robustness across various architectural frameworks. Our code is available
at https://github.com/haoweiz23/DistDiff.

1

Introduction

A substantial number of training samples are essential for unlocking the full potential of deep
networks. However, the manual collection and labeling of large-scale datasets are both costly and
time-intensive. This makes it difficult to expand data-scarce datasets. Therefore, it is of great value to
study how to expand high-quality training data in an efficient and scalable way [6].
Automatic data expansion technology can alleviate the data scarcity problem by augmenting or
creating diverse samples, it mitigates the bottleneck associated with limited data, thereby improving model’s downstream performance and fostering greater generalization [14, 78]. One simple
yet effective strategy is employing image transformation techniques such as cropping, rotation,
and erasing to augment samples [59]. Although these methods prove effective and have been
widely applied in various fields, their pre-defined perturbations only introduce local variations
to the images, thereby falling short in providing a diverse range of content change. In recent
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

