ChronoMagic-Bench: A Benchmark for Metamorphic
Evaluation of Text-to-Time-lapse Video Generation

Shenghai Yuan1 , Jinfa Huang3 , Yongqi Xu1 , Yaoyang Liu1 , Shaofeng Zhang5 ,
∗
Yujun Shi6 , Ruijie Zhu7 , Xinhua Cheng1,4 , Jiebo Luo3 , Li Yuan1,2,
1

3

Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory,
University of Rochester, 4 Rabbitpre Intelligence, 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
6
National University of Singapore, 7 University of California Santa Cruz

{yuanshenghai,chengxinhua,xuyongqi}@stu.pku.edu.cn, shi.yujun@u.nus.edu,
yaoyangliu319@gmail.com, sherrylone@sjtu.edu.cn, rzhu48@ucsc.edu,
yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn, {jhuang90@ur,jluo@cs}.rochester.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel text-to-video (T2V) generation benchmark, ChronoMagicBench2 , to evaluate the temporal and metamorphic knowledge skills in time-lapse
video generation of the T2V models (e.g. Sora [9] and Lumiere [4]). Compared to
existing benchmarks that focus on visual quality and text relevance of generated
videos, ChronoMagic-Bench focuses on the models’ ability to generate time-lapse
videos with significant metamorphic amplitude and temporal coherence. The benchmark probes T2V models for their physics, biology, and chemistry capabilities, in
a free-form text control. For these purposes, ChronoMagic-Bench introduces 1,649
prompts and real-world videos as references, categorized into four major types
of time-lapse videos: biological, human creation, meteorological, and physical
phenomena, which are further divided into 75 subcategories. This categorization
ensures a comprehensive evaluation of the models’ capacity to handle diverse and
complex transformations. To accurately align human preference on the benchmark,
we introduce two new automatic metrics, MTScore and CHScore, to evaluate the
videos’ metamorphic attributes and temporal coherence. MTScore measures the
metamorphic amplitude, reflecting the degree of change over time, while CHScore
assesses the temporal coherence, ensuring the generated videos maintain logical
progression and continuity. Based on the ChronoMagic-Bench, we conduct comprehensive manual evaluations of eighteen representative T2V models, revealing
their strengths and weaknesses across different categories of prompts, providing
a thorough evaluation framework that addresses current gaps in video generation
research. More encouragingly, we create a large-scale ChronoMagic-Pro dataset,
containing 460k high-quality pairs of 720p time-lapse videos and detailed captions.
Each caption ensures high physical content and large metamorphic amplitude,
which have a far-reaching impact on the video generation community. 3

1

Introduction

Text-to-video (T2V) generative models [89, 88, 94, 96, 43, 23, 76, 69] have developed rapidly recently.
As the number of models continues to grow, there is an urgent need for evaluation methods that align
∗

Corresponding author
"Chrono" derives from the Greek word "chronos", which means "time".
3
The source data and code are publicly available on https://pku-yuangroup.github.io/ChronoMagic-Bench.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

