OnlineTAS: An Online Baseline for Temporal
Action Segmentation

Qing Zhong1,2∗ Guodong Ding2∗ Angela Yao2
University of Adelaide 2 National University of Singapore
qing.zhong@adelaide.edu.au {dinggd,ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Temporal context plays a significant role in temporal action segmentation. In
an offline setting, the context is typically captured by the segmentation network
after observing the entire sequence. However, capturing and using such context
information in an online setting remains an under-explored problem. This work
presents the an online framework for temporal action segmentation. At the core of
the framework is an adaptive memory designed to accommodate dynamic changes
in context over time, alongside a feature augmentation module that enhances the
frames with the memory. In addition, we propose a post-processing approach to
mitigate the severe over-segmentation in the online setting. On three common
segmentation benchmarks, our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

This work addresses online temporal action segmentation (TAS) of untrimmed videos. Such videos
typically feature procedural activities consisting of multiple actions or steps in a loose temporal
sequence to achieve a goal [6]. For example, “making coffee” has actions: ‘take cup’, ‘pour coffee’,
‘pour water’, ‘pour milk’, ‘pour sugar’ and ‘stir coffee’. Standard TAS models [11, 45, 25, 37] are
offline and segment-only videos of complete procedural activities. An online TAS model, in contrast,
segments only up to the current time point and does not have access to the entire video and, therefore,
the entire activity.
Online TAS faces challenges similar to other online tasks [44, 46] in establishing a scalable network
that can retain useful information from an ever-increasing volume of data and facilitate effective
retrieval when required. Additionally, over-segmentation is a common issue for offline TAS, where the
segmentation model divides an action into many discontinuous sub-segments, leading to fragmented
outputs. This issue is exacerbated in the online setting, as partial data at the onset of an action may
lead to erratic predictions and increased over-segmentation.
Most relevant to our task is online temporal action detection (TAD) [43]. Online TAD aims to identify
whether an action is taking place and the action category. TAD targets datasets like THUMOS [16],
TVSeries [5], and HACS Segment [48]. Among these, 90.8% videos of THUMOS [16] feature
only multiple instances of the same action, while TVSeries [5] comprises diverse yet independent
actions (e.g., ‘open door’, ‘wave’ and ‘write’) in one video. These actions do not necessarily correlate
with one another or impose specific temporal constraints. As such, a direct adaptation of popular
online TAD approaches like LSTR [44] and MAT [41] to online segmentation is non-ideal. For
instance, these models encode temporal context with a fixed set of tokens, which may limit their
capability to handle the relations of procedural videos. Furthermore, these models are typically
trained to prioritize frame-level accuracy while neglecting temporal continuity, which invariably leads
to over-segmentation.
∗

Equal Contribution. The work was done when Qing Zhong was an intern in National University of Singapore.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

