GV-Rep: A Large-Scale Dataset for Genetic Variant
Representation Learning

Zehui Li∗
Imperial College London
Vector Institute
zl6222@ic.ac.uk

Vallijah Subasri∗
University Health Network
Hospital for Sick Children
Vector Institute
vallisubasri@gmail.com

Yiren Zhao
Imperial College London
a.zhao@imperial.ac.uk

Guy-Bart Stan
Imperial College London
g.stan@imperial.ac.uk

Bo Wang †
University Health Network
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
bowang@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract

Genetic variants (GVs) are defined as differences in the DNA sequences among
individuals and play a crucial role in diagnosing and treating genetic diseases. The
rapid decrease in next generation sequencing cost, analogous to Moore’s Law, has
led to an exponential increase in the availability of patient-level GV data. This
growth poses a challenge for clinicians who must efficiently prioritize patientspecific GVs and integrate them with existing genomic databases to inform patient
management. To addressing the interpretation of GVs, genomic foundation models
(GFMs) have emerged. However, these models lack standardized performance
assessments, leading to considerable variability in model evaluations. This poses
the question: How effectively do deep learning methods classify unknown GVs
and align them with clinically-verified GVs? We argue that representation learning, which transforms raw data into meaningful feature spaces, is an effective
approach for addressing both indexing and classification challenges. We introduce
a large-scale genetic variant dataset, named GV-Rep, featuring variable-length
contexts and detailed annotations, designed for deep learning models to learn
GV representations across various traits, diseases, tissue types, and experimental
contexts. Our contributions are three-fold: (i) Construction of a comprehensive
dataset with 7 million records, each labeled with characteristics of the corresponding variants, alongside additional data from 17,548 gene knockout tests across
1,107 cell types, 1,808 variant combinations, and 156 unique clinically-verified
GVs from real-world patients. (ii) Analysis of the structure and properties of the
dataset. (iii) Experimentation of the dataset with pre-trained genomic foundation
models (GFMs). The results highlight a significant disparity between the current
capabilities of GFMs and the accurate representation of GVs. We hope this dataset
will advance genomic deep learning to bridge this gap.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

