Skinned Motion Retargeting with Dense Geometric
Interaction Perception

Zijie Ye1,2∗, Jia-Wei Liu3 , Jia Jia1,2†, Shikun Sun1,2 , Mike Zheng Shou3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
3
Show Lab, National University of Singapore

Abstract
Capturing and maintaining geometric interactions among different body parts is
crucial for successful motion retargeting in skinned characters. Existing approaches
often overlook body geometries or add a geometry correction stage after skeletal
motion retargeting. This results in conflicts between skeleton interaction and geometry correction, leading to issues such as jittery, interpenetration, and contact
mismatches. To address these challenges, we introduce a new retargeting framework, MeshRet, which directly models the dense geometric interactions in motion
retargeting. Initially, we establish dense mesh correspondences between characters
using semantically consistent sensors (SCS), effective across diverse mesh topologies. Subsequently, we develop a novel spatio-temporal representation called the
dense mesh interaction (DMI) field. This field, a collection of interacting SCS
feature vectors, skillfully captures both contact and non-contact interactions between body geometries. By aligning the DMI field during retargeting, MeshRet not
only preserves motion semantics but also prevents self-interpenetration and ensures
contact preservation. Extensive experiments on the public Mixamo dataset and our
newly-collected ScanRet dataset demonstrate that MeshRet achieves state-of-the-art
performance. Code available at https://github.com/abcyzj/MeshRet.

1

Introduction

Skinned character animation is prevalent in virtual reality [16], game development [21], and various
other fields. However, animating these characters often presents significant challenges due to
differences in body proportions between the motion source and the target character, leading to issues
such as loss of motion semantics, mesh interpenetration, and contact mismatches. Consequently,
motion retargeting is essential to adjust for these discrepancies in body proportions. This process is
crucial for maintaining the integrity of the source motion’s characteristics in the animation of the
target character.
Motion retargeting presents challenges due to the complex interactions among character limbs and
the wide range of body geometries. Accurately preserving these interactions is crucial, as incorrect
interactions can result in mesh interpenetration and contact mismatches. Prior research has typically
addressed these interactions from two perspectives: skeleton interactions and geometry corrections.
Early methods [1, 29, 15] employ cycle-consistency to implicitly align skeleton interaction semantics,
yet they do not address the complexities of geometric interactions between different body parts.
Villegas et al. [28] introduced mesh self-contact modeling; however, their approach does not extend
∗
†

Work is partially done during visiting NUS.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

