Discretely Beyond 1/e: Guided Combinatorial
Algorithms for Submodular Maximization

Yixin Chen, Ankur Nath, Chunli Peng, Alan Kuhnle
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Texas A&M University
Colloge Station, TX
{chen777, anath, chunli.peng, kuhnle}@tamu.edu

Abstract
For constrained, not necessarily monotone submodular maximization, all known
approximation algorithms with ratio greater than 1/e require continuous ideas,
such as queries to the multilinear extension of a submodular function and its
gradient, which are typically expensive to simulate with the original set function.
For combinatorial algorithms, the best known approximation ratios for both size
and matroid constraint are obtained by a simple randomized greedy algorithm of
Buchbinder et al. [9]: 1/e ≈ 0.367 for size constraint and 0.281 for the matroid
constraint in O(kn) queries, where k is the rank of the matroid. In this work,
we develop the first combinatorial algorithms to break the 1/e barrier: we obtain
approximation ratio of 0.385 in O(kn) queries to the submodular set function for
size constraint, and 0.305 for a general matroid constraint. These are achieved
by guiding the randomized greedy algorithm with a fast local search algorithm.
Further, we develop deterministic versions of these algorithms, maintaining the
same ratio and asymptotic time complexity. Finally, we develop a deterministic,
nearly linear time algorithm with ratio 0.377.

1

Introduction

A nonnegative set function f : 2U → R+ is submodular iff for all S ⊆ T ⊆ U, x ∈ U \ T ,
f (S ∪ {x})−f (S) ≥ f (T ∪ {x})−f (T ); and f is monotone iff f (S) ≤ f (T ) for all S ⊆ T ⊆ U.
Submodular optimization plays an important role in data science and machine learning [3], particularly
in tasks that involve selecting a representative subset of data or features. Its diminishing returns
property makes it ideal for scenarios where the incremental benefit of adding an element to a set
decreases as the set grows. Applications include sensor placement for environmental monitoring [19,
27], where the goal is to maximize coverage with limited sensors, feature selection [22, 18, 2] in
machine learning to improve model performance and reduce overfitting, and data summarization [23,
31] for creating concise and informative summaries of large datasets. Further, many of these
applications employ submodular objective functions that are non-monotone, e.g. Mirzasoleiman et al.
[23], Tschiatschek et al. [31]. Formally, we study the optimization problem (SM): max f (S) , s.t. S ∈
I, where f is nonnegative, submodular and not necessarily monotone; and I ⊆ 2U is a family of
feasible subsets. Specifically, we consider two cases: when I is a size constraint (all sets of size at
most k); and more generally, when I is an arbitrary matroid of rank k.
In this field, algorithms typically assume access to a value oracle for the submodular function f , and
the efficiency of an algorithm is measured by the number of queries to the oracle, because evaluation
of the submodular function is typically expensive and dominates other parts of the computation. In the
general, not necessarily monotone case, the approximability of constrained submodular optimization
in the value oracle model is not well understood. For several years, 1/e ≈ 0.367 was conjectured
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

