Revisiting, Benchmarking and Understanding
Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation

Meihan Liu1 , Zhen Zhang2∗, Jiachen Tang1 , Jiajun Bu1 , Bingsheng He2 , Sheng Zhou1
1
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible Perception and Intelligent Systems,
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University 2 National University of Singapore
{lmh_zju,tangjc,bjj,zhousheng_zju}@zju.edu.cn
zhen@nus.edu.sg, hebs@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation (UGDA) involves the transfer of knowledge from a label-rich source graph to an unlabeled target graph under domain
discrepancies. Despite the proliferation of methods designed for this emerging
task, the lack of standard experimental settings and fair performance comparisons makes it challenging to understand which and when models perform well
across different scenarios. To fill this gap, we present the first comprehensive
benchmark for unsupervised graph domain adaptation named GDABench, which
encompasses 16 algorithms across diverse adaptation tasks. Through extensive
experiments, we observe that the performance of current UGDA models varies
significantly across different datasets and adaptation scenarios. Specifically, we
recognize that when the source and target graphs face significant distribution
shifts, it is imperative to formulate strategies to effectively address and mitigate
graph structural shifts. We also find that with appropriate neighbourhood aggregation mechanisms, simple GNN variants can even surpass state-of-the-art UGDA
baselines. To facilitate reproducibility, we have developed an easy-to-use library
PyGDA for training and evaluating existing UGDA methods, providing a standardized platform in this community. Our source codes and datasets can be found at
https://github.com/pygda-team/pygda.

1

Introduction

The last decade has witnessed significant advancements in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) with their
successful applications spanning various fields [1, 2], including social network analysis [3, 4], protein
interaction prediction [5], and traffic flow forecasting [6], etc. However, the presence of distribution
shifts [7] and label scarcity in real-world graph data impedes the ability of existing GNN models
to adapt to new domains [8]. To addresses this challenge, Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation
(UGDA) has become an important solution for transferring knowledge from a labeled source graph
to an unlabeled target graph. This powerful paradigm has been widely studied, unlocking broader
application for graph neural networks.
Despite a wide range of researches of UGDA have been developed [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26], the understanding of their capabilities and limitations is inadequate
due to the following reasons:
• Inadequate Evaluation of Domain Distribution Discrepancies. The distribution shifts in node
attributes, graph structures, and label proportions between graphs will significantly influence the
adaptation performance and result in various adaptation scenarios [26, 27]. However, the types
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

