The Road Less Scheduled
Aaron Defazio1
Fundamental AI Research Team, Meta
Harsh Mehta
Google Research

1

Xingyu (Alice) Yang2
Fundamental AI Research Team, Meta

Konstantin Mishchenko
Samsung AI Center

Research Co-lead

Ashok Cutkosky3
Boston University
2
Engineering Co-lead

Ahmed Khaled
Princeton University

3

Senior Author

Abstract
Existing learning rate schedules that do not require specification of the optimization
stopping step T are greatly out-performed by learning rate schedules that depend
on T . We propose an approach that avoids the need for this stopping time by eschewing the use of schedules entirely, while exhibiting state-of-the-art performance
compared to schedules across a wide family of problems ranging from convex
problems to large-scale deep learning problems. Our Schedule-Free approach
introduces no additional hyper-parameters over standard optimizers with momentum. Our method is a direct consequence of a new theory we develop that unifies
scheduling and iterate averaging. An open source implementation of our method is
available1 . Schedule-Free AdamW is the core algorithm behind our winning entry
to the MLCommons 2024 AlgoPerf Algorithmic Efficiency Challenge Self-Tuning
track.

1

Introduction

The theory of optimization, as applied in machine learning, has been successful at providing precise,
prescriptive results for many problems. However, even in the simplest setting of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) applied to convex Lipschitz functions, there are glaring gaps between what our current
theory prescribes and the methods used in practice.
Consider the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) step with step size γ > 0, zt+1 = zt − γgt where gt
is the stochastic (sub-)gradient at time t, computed at the point zt (formally defined in Section 1.1) of
a convex Lipschitz function f . Although standard practice for many classes of problems, classical
convergence theory suggests that the expected loss of this z sequence is suboptimal, and that the
Polyak-Ruppert (PR) average x of the sequence should be returned instead (Polyak, 1990; Ruppert,
1988):
zt+1 = zt − γgt
(1)
xt+1 = (1 − ct+1 ) xt + ct+1 zt+1 ,
(2)
P
T
where using ct+1 = 1/(t + 1) results in xt = T1 t=1 zt . Despite their theoretical optimality, PR
averages give much worse results in practice than using the last-iterate of SGD (Figures 2a,8) — a
folk-law result in the field of optimization, and a large theory-practice gap that is often attributed to
the mismatch between this simplified problem class and the complexity of problems addressed in
practice.
1

https://github.com/facebookresearch/schedule_free

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

