Probing Social Bias in Labor Market Text Generation
by ChatGPT: A Masked Language Model Approach

Lei Ding1∗ , Yang Hu2 , Nicole Denier3 , Enze Shi1 , Junxi Zhang5 ,
Qirui Hu6 , Karen D. Hughes3,4 , Linglong Kong1∗ , Bei Jiang1∗
1
Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta, Canada
2
Department of Sociology, Lancaster University, UK
3
Department of Sociology, University of Alberta, Canada
4
Department of Strategy, Entrepreneurship and Management, University of Alberta, Canada
5
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Concordia University, Canada
6
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Tsinghua University, China
{lding1,nicole.denier,eshi,khughes,lkong,bei1}@ualberta.ca
yang.hu@lancaster.ac.uk, junxi.zhang@concordia.ca, hqr20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
As generative large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT gain widespread
adoption in various domains, their potential to propagate and amplify social biases,
particularly in high-stakes areas such as the labor market, has become a pressing
concern. AI algorithms are not only widely used in the selection of job applicants,
individual job seekers may also make use of generative LLMs to help develop
their job application materials. Against this backdrop, this research builds on a
novel experimental design to examine social biases within ChatGPT-generated job
applications in response to real job advertisements. By simulating the process of
job application creation, we examine the language patterns and biases that emerge
when the model is prompted with diverse job postings. Notably, we present a novel
bias evaluation framework based on Masked Language Models to quantitatively
assess social bias based on validated inventories of social cues/words, enabling a
systematic analysis of the language used. Our findings show that the increasing
adoption of generative AI, not only by employers but also increasingly by individual
job seekers, can reinforce and exacerbate gender and social inequalities in the labor
market through the use of biased and gendered language.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancements in generative Large Language Models (LLM) like ChatGPT [OpenAI,
2023], mark a significant technological shift. These models have not only propelled the field of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) but have also found widespread application across numerous
sectors [Zhao et al., 2023, Yang et al., 2024]. However, as these models are incorporated into social
and economic practices, they bring to the fore critical ethical concerns, especially regarding their
potential to propagate and amplify existing social biases and attendant inequalities, particularly within
high-stakes domains such as the labor market [Liang et al., 2022].
Recognizing the growing potential of generative AI use in employment practices, our research
primarily aims to identify and understand the impact of biases in the application of generative LLM
within the labor market. We focus particularly on ChatGPT, investigating how this widely used LLM
influences the propagation of biases in job advertising and application processes.
∗

Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

