StrategyLLM: Large Language Models as Strategy
Generators, Executors, Optimizers, and Evaluators for
Problem Solving∗

Chang Gao♣† , Haiyun Jiang♢‡ , Deng Cai♡ , Shuming Shi♡ , Wai Lam♣
♣
The Chinese University of Hong Kong ♡ Tencent AI Lab
♢
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{gaochang,wlam}@se.cuhk.edu.hk haiyunjiangnlp@gmail.com
{jcykcai,shumingshi}@tencent.com

Abstract
Most existing prompting methods suffer from the issues of generalizability and
consistency, as they often rely on instance-specific solutions that may not be applicable to other instances and lack task-level consistency across the selected few-shot
examples. To address these limitations, we propose a comprehensive framework,
StrategyLLM, allowing LLMs to perform inductive reasoning, deriving general
strategies from specific task instances, and deductive reasoning, applying these
general strategies to particular task examples, for constructing generalizable and
consistent few-shot prompts. It employs four LLM-based agents: strategy generator, executor, optimizer, and evaluator, working together to generate, evaluate,
and select promising strategies for a given task. Experimental results demonstrate that StrategyLLM outperforms the competitive baseline CoT-SC that requires
human-annotated solutions on 13 datasets across 4 challenging tasks without human
involvement, including math reasoning (34.2% → 38.8%), commonsense reasoning
(70.3% → 72.5%), algorithmic reasoning (73.7% → 85.0%), and symbolic reasoning (30.0% → 79.2%). Further analysis reveals that StrategyLLM is applicable to
various LLMs and demonstrates advantages across numerous scenarios.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have facilitated the development of prompting
techniques [26, 43, 20, 8]. In particular, chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting methods [43, 6, 12, 41],
which condition LLMs on a few task examples with step-by-step solutions, guide LLMs to break
down complex reasoning processes into simpler steps. These approaches have markedly improved
performance compared to standard few-shot prompting across a variety of tasks.
Despite their potential, current CoT approaches employing few-shot prompts with instance-specific
solutions may face challenges in terms of generalizability and consistency. Concerning generalizability, the solution can be highly specific to the question in each instance, limiting its applicability
to other instances. For example, as illustrated in the left part of Figure 1, a solution for a particular
system of linear equations with two variables may not provide valuable insights for addressing another
system with three variables. Furthermore, the solutions in different instances within the few-shot
prompt may exhibit a lack of task-level consistency, which complicates the process for LLMs to
∗
This research was partially supported by the Center for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence (CPII) Ltd.
under the Innovation and Technology Commission’s InnoHK scheme.
†
Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
‡
Haiyun Jiang is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

