Foundations of Multivariate Distributional
Reinforcement Learning

Harley Wiltzer
Mila — Québec AI Institute
McGill University
harley.wiltzer@mail.mcgill.ca

Jesse Farebrother
Mila — Québec AI Institute
McGill Unversity
jfarebro@cs.mcgill.ca

Arthur Gretton
Google DeepMind
Gatsby Unit, University College London
gretton@google.com

Mark Rowland
Google DeepMind
markrowland@google.com

Abstract
In reinforcement learning (RL), the consideration of multivariate reward signals
has led to fundamental advancements in multi-objective decision-making, transfer
learning, and representation learning. This work introduces the first oracle-free and
computationally-tractable algorithms for provably convergent multivariate distributional dynamic programming and temporal difference learning. Our convergence
rates match the familiar rates in the scalar reward setting, and additionally provide
new insights into the fidelity of approximate return distribution representations
as a function of the reward dimension. Surprisingly, when the reward dimension
is larger than 1, we show that standard analysis of categorical TD learning fails,
which we resolve with a novel projection onto the space of mass-1 signed measures.
Finally, with the aid of our technical results and simulations, we identify tradeoffs
between distribution representations that influence the performance of multivariate
distributional RL in practice.

1

Introduction

Distributional reinforcement learning [DRL; MSK+ 10, BDM17b, BDR23] focuses on the idea of
learning probability distributions of an agent’s random return, rather than the classical approach
of learning only its mean. This has been highly effective in combination with deep reinforcement
learning [YZL+ 19, BCC+ 20, WBK+ 22], and DRL has found applications in risk-sensitive decision
making [LM22, KEF23], neuroscience [DKNU+ 20], and multi-agent settings [ROH+ 21, SLL21].
In general, research in distributional reinforcement learning has focused on the classical setting
of a scalar reward function. However, prior non-distributional approaches to multi-objective RL
[RVWD13, HRB+ 22] and transfer learning [BDM+ 17a, BHB+ 20] model value functions of multivariate cumulants,1 rather than a scalar reward. Having learnt such a multivariate value function,
it is then possible to perform zero-shot evaluation and policy improvement for any scalar reward
signal contained in the span of the coordinates of the multivariate cumulants, opening up a variety of
applications in transfer learning, and multi-objective and constrained RL.
Multivariate distributional RL combines these two ideas, and aims to learn the full probability
distribution of returns given a multivariate cumulant function. Successfully learning the multivariate
1

Cumulants refer to accumulated quantities in RL (e.g., rewards or multivariate rewards)—not to be confused
with statistical cumulants.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

