Prompt Tuning Strikes Back: Customizing Foundation
Models with Low-Rank Prompt Adaptation

Abhinav Jain
Department of Computer Science
Rice University
aj70@rice.edu

Swarat Chaudhuri
Department of Computer Science
UT Austin
swarat@cs.utexas.edu

Thomas Reps
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin-Madison
reps@cs.wisc.edu

Chris Jermaine
Department of Computer Science
Rice University
cmj4@rice.edu

Abstract
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) has become the standard for customising
Foundation Models (FMs) to user-specific downstream tasks. However, typical
PEFT methods require storing multiple task-specific adapters, creating scalability
issues as these adapters must be housed and run at the FM server. Traditional
prompt tuning offers a potential solution by customising them through task-specific
input prefixes, but it under-performs compared to other PEFT methods like LoRA.
To address this gap, we propose Low-Rank Prompt Adaptation (LoPA), a prompttuning-based approach that performs on par with state-of-the-art PEFT methods
and full fine-tuning while being more parameter-efficient and not requiring a
server-based adapter. LoPA generates soft prompts by balancing between sharing
task-specific information across instances and customization for each instance. It
uses a low-rank decomposition of the soft-prompt component encoded for each
instance to achieve parameter efficiency. We provide a comprehensive evaluation
on multiple natural language understanding and code generation and understanding
tasks across a wide range of foundation models with varying sizes.

1

Introduction

Language models exhibit remarkable few-shot learning capabilities, demonstrating strong performance across tasks, including those unseen during training [2, 32, 23]. Nevertheless, fine-tuning
remains crucial for optimised performance on a given downstream task. However, it becomes increasingly challenging with larger models because updating all parameters is impractical. Parameter
Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) presents a promising solution, adjusting a limited subset of parameters
while leaving the rest unchanged. This approach allows the personalisation of pre-trained Foundation
Models (FMs) to multiple users simultaneously.
In recent years, numerous PEFT approaches have been proposed [11, 12, 16, 17, 18, 30, 36], each
varying in how and what they modify within FMs [10, 9]. These variations can be categorized by
the position in the FMs where modifications are applied, the functions used for modification, and
the methods of integrating the modifications. While effective, these methods require maintaining
multiple adapter-like modules for each user-specific task on the FM server and the need to select and
assemble a subset of these modules every time a batch of user requests is processed for inference
[35] (see Fig. 1).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

