Stepping on the Edge:
Curvature Aware Learning Rate Tuners

Vincent Roulet*
Google DeepMind

Atish Agarwala*
Google DeepMind

Jean-Bastien Grill
Google DeepMind

Grzegorz Swirszcz
Google DeepMind

vroulet@google.com

thetish@google.com

jbgrill@google.com

swirszcz@google.com

Mathieu Blondel
Google DeepMind

Fabian Pedregosa
Google DeepMind

mblondel@google.com

pedregosa@google.com

Abstract
Curvature information – particularly, the largest eigenvalue of the loss Hessian,
known as the sharpness – often forms the basis for learning rate tuners. However,
recent work has shown that the curvature information undergoes complex dynamics
during training, going from a phase of increasing sharpness to eventual stabilization.
We analyze the closed-loop feedback effect between learning rate tuning and
curvature. We find that classical learning rate tuners may yield greater one-step loss
reduction, yet they ultimately underperform in the long term when compared to
constant learning rates in the full batch regime. These models break the stabilization
of the sharpness, which we explain using a simplified model of the joint dynamics
of the learning rate and the curvature. To further investigate these effects, we
introduce a new learning rate tuning method, Curvature Dynamics Aware Tuning
(CDAT), which prioritizes long term curvature stabilization over instantaneous
progress on the objective. In the full batch regime, CDAT shows behavior akin
to prefixed warm-up schedules on deep learning objectives, outperforming tuned
constant learning rates. In the mini batch regime, we observe that stochasticity
introduces confounding effects that explain the previous success of some learning
rate tuners at appropriate batch sizes. Our findings highlight the critical role
of understanding the joint dynamics of the learning rate and curvature, beyond
greedy minimization, to diagnose failures and design effective adaptive learning
rate tuners.

1

Introduction

The learning rate, a.k.a. stepsize, is the main hyperparameter controlling the efficiency and stability
of gradient-based training of deep neural networks. The learning rate is typically adjusted through a
predetermined schedule – often consisting of a warm-up phase, where the learning rate is gradually
increased to a peak, followed by an annealing phase, where it is decreased to zero (Goyal et al., 2017;
Loshchilov and Hutter, 2016). Tuning the shape of the schedule (warm-up time, peak learning rate,
decay scale and shape) is essential for good performance. Despite recent efforts to understand their
effectiveness, the optimal shape of these schedules remains an area of active research (Liu et al.,
2020; Shi et al., 2023). The cost of tuning these schedules has led to interest in automatic selection of
these hyperparameters with learning rate tuners - methods which aim to automatically adjust the
learning rate through training.
*

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

