W INGS: Learning Multimodal LLMs
without Text-only Forgetting

Yi-Kai Zhang1,2,3∗ Shiyin Lu3 Yang Li3 Yanqing Ma3 Qing-Guo Chen3
Zhao Xu3 Weihua Luo3 Kaifu Zhang3 De-Chuan Zhan1,2 Han-Jia Ye1,2†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
2
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
3
Alibaba International Digital Commerce

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs), initiated with a trained LLM, first
align images with text and then fine-tune on multimodal mixed inputs. However,
during the continued training, the MLLM catastrophically forgets the text-only
instructions that the initial LLM masters. In this paper, we present W INGS, a novel
MLLM that excels in both text-only and multimodal instructions. By examining
attention across layers of MLLM, we find that text-only forgetting is related to
the attention shifts from pre-image to post-image text. From that, we construct an
additional Low-Rank Residual Attention (LoRRA) block that acts as the “modality
learner” to expand the learnable space and compensate for the attention shift. The
complementary learners, like “wings” on either side, are connected in parallel
to each layer’s attention block. The LoRRA mirrors the structure of attention
but utilizes low-rank connections to ensure efficiency. Initially, image and text
inputs are aligned with visual learners operating alongside the main attention,
balancing focus on visual elements. Later, textual learners are integrated with
token-wise routing, blending the outputs of both modality learners collaboratively.
Our experimental results demonstrate that W INGS outperforms equally-scaled
MLLMs in both text-only and visual question-answering tasks. W INGS with
compensation of learners addresses text-only forgetting during visual modality
expansion in general MLLMs.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [34, 54, 93, 115] are making significant strides toward Artificial
General Intelligence (AGI) systems. Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), as a visual
expansion of LLMs, have demonstrated astonishing performance in vision-related captioning [14,
16, 68], understanding [7, 33, 122], and reasoning [117, 127, 133]. Common MLLMs build upon
powerful pre-trained LLMs that take mixed textual and visual tokens as inputs. The visual ones are
acquired using an image encoder and a projector. We describe instructions processed by the LLM
without images as text-only instructions. In comparison, multimodal instructions incorporate visual
feature tokens into text-only sequences. Modality fusing at the token level provides a flexible and
effective pipeline for training MLLMs to comprehend visual information [77, 80, 81]. However,
training on multimodal instructions seems to impair the pre-existing profound knowledge, especially
making MLLM forget how to respond to text-only instructions like the initial LLM [86, 90]. MLLM
experiences a drastic performance decline on text-only evaluation. We term it as the text-only
forgetting of MLLM.
∗
†

Work done during the internship at Alibaba International Digital Commerce.
Corresponding author, email: yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

