Neural Persistence Dynamics

Sebastian Zeng†/‡ , Florian Graf† , Martin Uray†/‡ , Stefan Huber‡ , Roland Kwitt†
†
University of Salzburg, Austria
‡
Josef Ressel Centre for Intelligent and Secure Industrial Automation,
University of Applied Sciences, Salzburg, Austria
{sebastian.zeng, florian.graf, roland.kwitt}@plus.ac.at,
{martin.uray, stefan.huber}@fh-salzburg.ac.at

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning the dynamics in the topology of time-evolving
point clouds, the prevalent spatiotemporal model for systems exhibiting collective
behavior, such as swarms of insects and birds or particles in physics. In such
systems, patterns emerge from (local) interactions among self-propelled entities.
While several well-understood governing equations for motion and interaction exist,
they are notoriously difficult to fit to data, as most prior work requires knowledge
about individual motion trajectories, i.e., a requirement that is challenging to satisfy
with an increasing number of entities. To evade such confounding factors, we
investigate collective behavior from a topological perspective, but instead of summarizing entire observation sequences (as done previously), we propose learning
a latent dynamical model from topological features per time point. The latter is
then used to formulate a downstream regression task to predict the parametrization
of some a priori specified governing equation. We implement this idea based on a
latent ODE learned from vectorized (static) persistence diagrams and show that a
combination of recent stability results for persistent homology justifies this modeling choice. Various (ablation) experiments not only demonstrate the relevance
of each model component but provide compelling empirical evidence that our
proposed model – Neural Persistence Dynamics – substantially outperforms the
state-of-the-art across a diverse set of parameter regression tasks.

1

Introduction

Understanding emerging behavioral patterns of a collective through the interaction of individual
entities is key to elucidate many phenomena in nature on a macroscopic and microscopic scale.
Prominent examples are coherently moving flocks of birds, the swarming behavior of insects and fish
or the development of cancerous cells, all understood as 2D/3D point clouds that evolve over time.
Importantly, several widely-accepted governing equations for collective behavior exist [18, 40, 56]
which, when appropriately parameterized, can reproduce different incarnations of typically observed
patterns. Even more importantly, these equations are tied to physically interpretable parameters and
can provide detailed insights into the intrinsic mechanisms that control various behavioral regimes.
However, while it is fairly straightforward to simulate collective behavior from governing equations
(see [21]), the inverse problem, i.e., identifying the model parameters from the data, turns out to be
inherently difficult. Confounding factors include the often large number of observed entities and the
difficulty of reliably identifying individual trajectories across point clouds at possibly non-equidistant
observation times.
However, as several works [4, 23, 52] have recently demonstrated, it may not be necessary to rely on
individual trajectories for parameter identification. In fact, collective behavior is characterized by
global patterns that emerge from local interactions, and we observe the emergence of these patterns
through changes to the “shape” of point clouds over time. For instance, birds may form a flock, split
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

