Online Adaptation of Language Models with a
Memory of Amortized Contexts

Jihoon Tack1 , Jaehyung Kim2 , Eric Mitchell3 , Jinwoo Shin1 ,
Yee Whye Teh4 , Jonathan Richard Schwarz5
1
KAIST 2 Yonsei University 3 Stanford University
4
University of Oxford 5 Harvard University & Thomson Reuters
jihoontack@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Due to the rapid generation and dissemination of information, large language
models (LLMs) quickly run out of date despite enormous development costs. To
address the crucial need to keep models updated, online learning has emerged as
a critical tool when utilizing LLMs for real-world applications. However, given
the ever-expanding corpus of unseen documents and the large parameter space
of modern LLMs, efficient adaptation is essential. To address these challenges,
we propose Memory of Amortized Contexts (MAC), an efficient and effective
online adaptation framework for LLMs with strong knowledge retention. We
propose a feature extraction and memory-augmentation approach to compress
and extract information from new documents into compact modulations stored in
a memory bank. When answering questions, our model attends to and extracts
relevant knowledge from this memory bank. To learn informative modulations in an
efficient manner, we utilize amortization-based meta-learning, which substitutes an
otherwise required optimization process with a single forward pass of the encoder.
Subsequently, we learn to choose from and aggregate selected documents into a
single modulation by conditioning on the question, allowing us to adapt a frozen
language model during test time without requiring further gradient updates. Our
experiment demonstrates the superiority of MAC in multiple aspects, including
online adaptation performance, time, and memory efficiency. In addition, we
show how MAC can be combined with and improve the performance of popular
alternatives such as retrieval augmented generations (RAGs). Code is available at:
https://github.com/jihoontack/MAC.

1

Introduction

Language models (LMs) [7, 79] have significantly accelerated progress in natural language processing
(NLP) and thus become a core technology in various real-world applications, such as coding assistants
[10], search engines [90], and personal AI assistants [16]. However, LMs are typically static artifacts,
and as the world changes, the knowledge encoded in their parameters becomes outdated. This
becomes especially problematic for large language models (LLMs), as multiple applications (e.g.,
Chatbots [34, 55]) require the model to be up-to-date, yet retraining LLMs with new documents from
scratch requires high computational demands [31].
To tackle this issue, multiple studies suggested online and continual learning frameworks for LMs, i.e.,
adapting the LM on a stream of new documents. One line of work proposes to use retrieval-augmented
models by saving the stream of documents and selecting the most relevant document based on the
input [9, 33]. However, even large models often fail to update their learned knowledge when the
retrieved document consists of counterfactual information [48, 44, 75] and it may not be suited for
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

