Group and Shuffle: Efficient Structured Orthogonal
Parametrization
Mikhail Gorbunov
HSE University
gorbunovmikh73@gmail.com

Nikolay Yudin
HSE University

Vera Soboleva
AIRI,
HSE University

Alexey Naumov
HSE University,
Steklov Mathematical Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences

Aibek Alanov
AIRI,
HSE University
Maxim Rakhuba
HSE University

Abstract
The increasing size of neural networks has led to a growing demand for methods of
efficient fine-tuning. Recently, an orthogonal fine-tuning paradigm was introduced
that uses orthogonal matrices for adapting the weights of a pretrained model. In
this paper, we introduce a new class of structured matrices, which unifies and
generalizes structured classes from previous works. We examine properties of
this class and build a structured orthogonal parametrization upon it. We then use
this parametrization to modify the orthogonal fine-tuning framework, improving
parameter and computational efficiency. We empirically validate our method
on different domains, including adapting of text-to-image diffusion models and
downstream task fine-tuning in language modeling. Additionally, we adapt our
construction for orthogonal convolutions and conduct experiments with 1-Lipschitz
neural networks.

1

Introduction

Orthogonal transforms have proven useful in different deep learning tasks. For example, they were
shown to stabilize CNNs [Li et al., 2019, Singla and Feizi, 2021] or used in RNNs to combat the
problem of exploding/vanishing gradients [Arjovsky et al., 2016]. Recent works OFT (Orthogonal
Fine-Tuning) and BOFT (Butterfly Orthogonal Fine-Tuning) [Qiu et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2024b] use
learnable orthogonal matrices for parameter-efficient fine-tuning of neural networks, which prevents
training instabilities and overfitting that alternative methods like LoRA [Hu et al., 2022] suffer from.
Nevertheless, parametrization of orthogonal matrices is a challenging task, and the existing methods
typically lack in either computational efficiency or expressiveness. Classical methods like Cayley
parametrization and matrix exponential map cannot operate under low parameter budget, while
Givens rotations and Householder reflections requires computing products of several matrices, which
makes their use less efficient in deep learning tasks. Alternative approach in OFT method uses blockdiagonal matrix structure in an attempt to be more computationally efficient and use less trainable
parameters. Unfortunately, this simple structure can be too restrictive. Thus, arises the problem of
constructing dense orthogonal matrix while still being parameter-efficient. While attempting to tackle
this task, BOFT method uses a variation of butterfly matrices, parametrizing orthogonal matrices as a
product of several matrices with different sparsity patterns, enforcing orthogonality on each of them.
This parametrization is able to construct dense matrices while still being parameter-efficient. However
it requires to compute a product of multiple matrices (typically up to 6) which can be computationally
expensive. In this paper, we aim to overcome these issues and build dense orthogonal matrices in a
more efficient way.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

