Source Code Foundation Models are Transferable
Binary Analysis Knowledge Bases

Zian Su1∗ Xiangzhe Xu1 Ziyang Huang2 Kaiyuan Zhang1 Xiangyu Zhang1
1
Purdue university 2 Johns Hopkins University
{su284,xu1415,zhan4057}@purdue.edu, zhuang86@jhu.edu
xyzhang@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
Human-Oriented Binary Reverse Engineering (HOBRE) lies at the intersection
of binary and source code, aiming to lift binary code to human-readable content
relevant to source code, thereby bridging the binary-source semantic gap. Recent
advancements in uni-modal code model pre-training, particularly in generative
Source Code Foundation Models (SCFMs) and binary understanding models,
have laid the groundwork for transfer learning applicable to HOBRE. However,
existing approaches for HOBRE rely heavily on uni-modal models like SCFMs for
supervised fine-tuning or general LLMs for prompting, resulting in sub-optimal
performance. Inspired by recent progress in large multi-modal models, we propose
that it is possible to harness the strengths of uni-modal code models from both
sides to bridge the semantic gap effectively. In this paper, we introduce a novel
probe-and-recover framework that incorporates a binary-source encoder-decoder
model and black-box LLMs for binary analysis. Our approach leverages the
pre-trained knowledge within SCFMs to synthesize relevant, symbol-rich code
fragments as context. This additional context enables black-box LLMs to enhance
recovery accuracy. We demonstrate significant improvements in zero-shot binary
summarization and binary function name recovery, with a 10.3% relative gain
in CHRF and a 16.7% relative gain in a GPT4-based metric for summarization,
as well as a 6.7% and 7.4% absolute increase in token-level precision and recall
for name recovery, respectively. These results highlight the effectiveness of our
approach in automating and improving binary code analysis.

1

Introduction

In recent years, we see two trends of uni-modal code model pre-training. On one hand, there is a
remarkable surge in the development of generative Source Code Foundation Models (SCFMs) [12, 65,
55, 20, 43], along with advancements in general Large Language Models (LLMs) [4, 60, 46]. Driven
by a growing interest in automating software development, these powerful models are trained on
billions of tokens from diverse codebases, covering a wide spectrum of programming languages [33].
They possess the capability to complete, infill [19], and refine code [67], as well as generate code
from natural language instructions [44]. On the other hand, there is a stream of research focusing on
binary understanding models [61, 58], which target learning nuanced code semantics with structures
of low-level code, which is critical for software security. Both fields are evolving through continuous
pre-training on expansive datasets of uni-modal data, setting new benchmarks in both effectiveness
and complexity.
Human-Oriented Binary Reverse Engineering (HOBRE), which involves automatically lifting binary to human understandable contents [14, 69], typically source-code related, occupies a unique
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

