bit2bit: 1-bit quanta video reconstruction by
self-supervised photon location prediction

Yehe Liu1,2 Alexander Krull3,∗ Hector Basevi3 Aleš Leonardis3 Michael Jenkins1,2,∗
1
Case Western Reserve University 2 OpsiClear LLC 3 University of Birmingham
{yehe, mwj5}@case.edu {a.f.f.krull, h.r.a.basevi, a.leonardis}@bham.ac.uk Joint supervision∗

Abstract
Quanta image sensors, such as single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD) arrays,
are an emerging sensor technology, producing 1-bit arrays representing photon
detection events over exposures as short as a few nanoseconds. In practice, raw
data are post-processed using heavy spatiotemporal binning to create more useful
and interpretable images at the cost of degrading spatiotemporal resolution. In
this work, we propose bit2bit, a new method for reconstructing high-quality image
stacks at the original spatiotemporal resolution from sparse binary quanta image
data. Inspired by recent work on Poisson denoising, we developed an algorithm that
creates a dense image sequence from sparse binary photon data by predicting the
photon arrival location probability distribution. However, due to the binary nature
of the data, we show that the assumption of a Poisson distribution is inadequate.
Instead, we model the process with a Bernoulli lattice process from the truncated
Poisson. This leads to the proposal of a novel self-supervised solution based
on a masked loss function. We evaluate our method using both simulated and
real data. On simulated data from a conventional video, we achieve 34.35 mean
PSNR with extremely photon-sparse binary input (<0.06 photons per pixel per
frame). We also present a novel dataset containing a wide range of real SPAD
high-speed videos under various challenging imaging conditions. The scenes cover
strong/weak ambient light, strong motion, ultra-fast events, etc., which will be
made available to the community, on which we demonstrate the promise of our
approach. Both reconstruction quality and throughput substantially surpass the
state-of-the-art methods (e.g., Quanta Burst Photography (QBP)). Our approach
significantly enhances the visualization and usability of the data, enabling the
application of existing analysis techniques.

1

Introduction

Quanta image sensor (QIS) (e.g., SPAD arrays [1, 2]) offer unique advantages over other image
sensors for capturing fast temporal dynamics in low-light settings, as they can detect individual
photons within nanoseconds exposures [3]. This allows for the measurement of ultra-fast phenomena,
such as fluorescence lifetime [4], time-of-flight [5], and other time-resolved processes [6]. Quanta
image data is different from traditional digital images. The QIS raw data often consists of sparse
detection events described in 1-bit arrays (Fig. 1). In each frame, pixels only indicate the presence
or absence of a photon without intensity information [7]. This makes the data non-interpretable or
usable as traditional images. A common approach to make effective use of the binary data is to bin
the image in the time domain[8]. While this can provide clear images (Fig. 1c), it comes at the cost
of losing the valuable high-temporal-resolution information offered by QIS. In this paper, we present
a novel self-supervised approach that directly denoises binary photon detection events from a QIS,
reconstructing a clean video at the original temporal resolution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

