Predictive Attractor Models
Ramy Mounir
Sudeep Sarkar
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa
{ramy, sarkar}@usf.edu

Abstract
Sequential memory, the ability to form and accurately recall a sequence of events or
stimuli in the correct order, is a fundamental prerequisite for biological and artificial
intelligence as it underpins numerous cognitive functions (e.g., language comprehension, planning, episodic memory formation, etc.) However, existing methods
of sequential memory suffer from catastrophic forgetting, limited capacity, slow
iterative learning procedures, low-order Markov memory, and, most importantly,
the inability to represent and generate multiple valid future possibilities stemming
from the same context. Inspired by biologically plausible neuroscience theories of
cognition, we propose Predictive Attractor Models (PAM), a novel sequence memory architecture with desirable generative properties. PAM is a streaming model
that learns a sequence in an online, continuous manner by observing each input only
once. Additionally, we find that PAM avoids catastrophic forgetting by uniquely
representing past context through lateral inhibition in cortical minicolumns, which
prevents new memories from overwriting previously learned knowledge. PAM
generates future predictions by sampling from a union set of predicted possibilities;
this generative ability is realized through an attractor model trained alongside the
predictor. We show that PAM is trained with local computations through Hebbian
plasticity rules in a biologically plausible framework. Other desirable traits (e.g.,
noise tolerance, CPU-based learning, capacity scaling) are discussed throughout
the paper. Our findings suggest that PAM represents a significant step forward
in the pursuit of biologically plausible and computationally efficient sequential
memory models, with broad implications for cognitive science and artificial intelligence research. Illustration videos and code are available on our project page:
https://ramymounir.com/publications/pam.

1

Introduction

Modeling the temporal associations between consecutive inputs in a sequence (i.e., sequential
memory) enables biological agents to perform various cognitive functions, such as episodic memory
formation [53, 64, 15], complex action planning [22] and translating between languages [3]. For
example, playing a musical instrument requires remembering the sequence of notes in a piece of
music; similarly, playing a game of chess requires simulating, planning, and executing a sequence of
moves in a specific order. While the ability to form such memories of static, unrelated events has
been extensively studied [56, 55, 63, 69, 66], the ability of biologically-plausible artificial networks
to learn and recall temporally-dependent patterns has not been sufficiently explored in literature [62].
The task of sequential memory is considered challenging for models operating under biological
constraints (i.e., local synaptic computations) for many reasons, including catastrophic forgetting,
ambiguous context representations, multiple future possibilities, etc.
In addition to the biological constraint, we impose the following set of desirable characteristics as
learning constraints on sequence memory models.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

