ET-Flow: Equivariant Flow-Matching for Molecular
Conformer Generation
Majdi Hassan∗1

Nikhil Shenoy∗2,4

Hannes Stärk3

Jungyoon Lee∗1
Stephan Thaler4

Dominique Beaini1,4
1

Mila & Université de Montréal
University of British-Columbia
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
4
Valence Labs
2

Abstract
Predicting low-energy molecular conformations given a molecular graph is an
important but challenging task in computational drug discovery. Existing stateof-the-art approaches either resort to large scale transformer-based models that
diffuse over conformer fields, or use computationally expensive methods to generate initial structures and diffuse over torsion angles. In this work, we introduce
Equivariant Transformer Flow (ET-Flow). We showcase that a well-designed
flow matching approach with equivariance and harmonic prior alleviates the need
for complex internal geometry calculations and large architectures, contrary to
the prevailing methods in the field. Our approach results in a straightforward
and scalable method that directly operates on all-atom coordinates with minimal
assumptions. With the advantages of equivariance and flow matching, ET-Flow
significantly increases the precision and physical validity of the generated conformers, while being a lighter model and faster at inference. Code is available
https://github.com/shenoynikhil/ETFlow.

1

Introduction

Generating low-energy 3D representations of molecules, called conformers, from the molecular graph
is a fundamental task in computational chemistry as the 3D structure of a molecule is responsible for
several biological, chemical and physical properties (Guimarães et al., 2012; Schütt et al., 2018, 2021;
Gasteiger et al., 2020; Axelrod and Gomez-Bombarelli, 2023). Conventional approaches to molecular
conformer generation consist of stochastic and systematic methods. While stochastic methods such
as Molecular Dynamics (MD) accurately generate conformations, they can be slow, cost-intensive,
and have low sample diversity (Shim and MacKerell Jr, 2011; Ballard et al., 2015; De Vivo et al.,
2016; Hawkins, 2017; Pracht et al., 2020). Systematic (rule-based) methods (Hawkins et al., 2010;
Bolton et al., 2011; Li et al., 2007; Miteva et al., 2010; Cole et al., 2018; Lagorce et al., 2009) that
rely on torsional profiles and knowledge base of fragments are much faster but become less accurate
∗

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: {majdi.hassan,jungyoon.lee}@umontreal.ca and nikhil@valencelabs.com
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

