DAT: Improving Adversarial Robustness via
Generative Amplitude Mix-up in Frequency Domain

Fengpeng Li1
Kemou Li1
Haiwei Wu2
Jinyu Tian3
Jiantao Zhou1∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, University of Macau
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
3
Faculty of Innovation Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology

Abstract
To protect deep neural networks (DNNs) from adversarial attacks, adversarial
training (AT) is developed by incorporating adversarial examples (AEs) into model
training. Recent studies show that adversarial attacks disproportionately impact the
patterns within the phase of the sample’s frequency spectrum—typically containing
crucial semantic information—more than those in the amplitude, resulting in the
model’s erroneous categorization of AEs. We find that, by mixing the amplitude
of training samples’ frequency spectrum with those of distractor images for AT,
the model can be guided to focus on phase patterns unaffected by adversarial
perturbations. As a result, the model’s robustness can be improved. Unfortunately,
it is still challenging to select appropriate distractor images, which should mix
the amplitude without affecting the phase patterns. To this end, in this paper, we
propose an optimized Adversarial Amplitude Generator (AAG) to achieve a better
tradeoff between improving the model’s robustness and retaining phase patterns.
Based on this generator, together with an efficient AE production procedure, we
design a new Dual Adversarial Training (DAT) strategy. Experiments on various
datasets show that our proposed DAT leads to significantly improved robustness
against diverse adversarial attacks. The source code is available at https://
github.com/Feng-peng-Li/DAT.

1

Introduction

DNNs have been successfully applied to various tasks [21, 32, 25]. However, recent studies reveal
that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples (AEs), created by applying subtle yet deceptive
adversarial perturbations to benign samples [40, 51]. Such vulnerabilities have sparked considerable
interests, leading to the development of numerous adversarial attacks designed to deceive DNNs
[40, 19, 39, 13, 20, 5, 6]. Furthermore, serious concerns about the trustworthiness of artificial
intelligence have been raised, due to these fundamental vulnerabilities [47, 37]. To mitigate these
threats, adversarial training (AT) has been developed to enhance model robustness by incorporating
AEs into training through a min-max strategy [40, 61, 38]. Based on the typical method, PGD-AT
[40], a variety of AT strategies have been devised [38, 29, 37] (see Appendix B for related works).
For image signals transformed into the frequency domain using, e.g. the discrete Fourier transform
(DFT), several AT works [59, 52, 53, 43] explore the adversarial attacks’ behavior on sample’s
frequency spectrum. Frequency spectra consist of amplitude and phase; the amplitude typically
captures stylistic information, whereas the phase encompasses richer semantics [7]. Recent studies
[58, 63] find, as shown in Figure 1, that adversarial attacks often severely eliminate some semantics
in the phase, making it difficult for models to extract features for correctly predicting AEs, while the
* Corresponding author: Jiantao Zhou (jtzhou@um.edu.mo).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

