Revisiting Self-Supervised Heterogeneous Graph
Learning from Spectral Clustering Perspective

Yujie Mo1,2

Zhihe Lu2 Runpeng Yu2 Xiaofeng Zhu1∗ Xinchao Wang2∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
National University of Singapore

Abstract
Self-supervised heterogeneous graph learning (SHGL) has shown promising potential in diverse scenarios. However, while existing SHGL methods share a similar
essential with clustering approaches, they encounter two significant limitations: (i)
noise in graph structures is often introduced during the message-passing process
to weaken node representations, and (ii) cluster-level information may be inadequately captured and leveraged, diminishing the performance in downstream tasks.
In this paper, we address these limitations by theoretically revisiting SHGL from
the spectral clustering perspective and introducing a novel framework enhanced by
rank and dual consistency constraints. Specifically, our framework incorporates
a rank-constrained spectral clustering method that refines the affinity matrix to
exclude noise effectively. Additionally, we integrate node-level and cluster-level
consistency constraints that concurrently capture invariant and clustering information to facilitate learning in downstream tasks. We theoretically demonstrate that
the learned representations are divided into distinct partitions based on the number
of classes and exhibit enhanced generalization ability across tasks. Experimental
results affirm the superiority of our method, showcasing remarkable improvements
in several downstream tasks compared to existing methods.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised heterogeneous graph learning (SHGL) aims to effectively process diverse types of
nodes and edges in the heterogeneous graph, producing low-dimensional representations without the
need for human annotations [72, 71, 25]. Thanks to its remarkable capabilities, SHGL has attracted
significant interest and has been utilized in a broad array of applications, including recommendation
systems [44, 12], social network analysis [45, 9], and molecule design [68, 59].
Existing SHGL methods can be broadly classified into two groups, i.e., meta-path-based methods and
adaptive-graph-based methods. Meta-path-based methods typically utilize pre-defined meta-paths to
explore relationships among nodes that may share the same label in the heterogeneous graph [18, 74].
However, building meta-paths requires extensive prior knowledge and incurs additional computation
costs [69]. To address these drawbacks, adaptive-graph-based methods dynamically assign significant
weights to node pairs likely to share the same label, using the adaptive graph structure rather than
traditional meta-paths [30]. Both groups of SHGL methods facilitate message-passing among nodes
within the same class, either through meta-path-based graphs or adaptive graph structures. As a
result, this process minimizes intra-class differences and promotes a clustered pattern in the learned
representations, aligning these methods closely with conventional clustering techniques.
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

