Cal-DPO: Calibrated Direct Preference
Optimization for Language Model Alignment

Teng Xiao1 , Yige Yuan2 , Huaisheng Zhu1 , Mingxiao Li3 , Vasant G Honavar1
1
Artificial Intelligence Research Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 Tencent AI Lab
{tengxiao,hvz5312,vhonavar}@psu.edu
yuanyige923@gmail.com, mingxiaoli@tencent.com

Abstract
We study the problem of aligning large language models (LLMs) with human
preference data. Contrastive preference optimization has shown promising results
in aligning LLMs with available preference data by optimizing the implicit reward
associated with the policy. However, the contrastive objective focuses mainly on
the relative values of implicit rewards associated with two responses while ignoring
their actual values, resulting in suboptimal alignment with human preferences.
To address this limitation, we propose calibrated direct preference optimization
(Cal-DPO ), a simple yet effective algorithm. We show that substantial improvement in alignment with the given preferences can be achieved simply by calibrating
the implicit reward to ensure that the learned implicit rewards are comparable in
scale to the ground-truth rewards. We demonstrate the theoretical advantages of
Cal-DPO over existing approaches. The results of our experiments on a variety
of standard benchmarks show that Cal-DPO remarkably improves off-the-shelf
methods. Code is available at https://github.com/tengxiao1/Cal-DPO.

1

Introduction

Aligning the behavior of large language models (LLMs) with human preferences is crucial for
ensuring that the responses of a pretrained LLM are aligned with human or societal values and
preferences [1, 2, 3]. In recent years, reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)[2, 4] has
become a standard approach for fine-tuning language models based on human preferences. RLHF
involves first fitting a reward signal from human preference data and then using reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms such as PPO[5] to optimize language models to generate responses with high reward.
While RLHF shows impressive capabilities on diverse tasks ranging from programming to creative
writing, its training process is unstable and complex [6, 7]. This potentially worsens the sample
complexity and compromises efficient convergence. To address these issues, offline contrastive
preference learning methods, which include DPO [7], IPO [8], and SLiC [9], have been proposed to
replace RLHF with supervised learning on the preference data. These methods eliminate the need for
explicit reward modeling by directly using the likelihood of the policy to define an implicit reward
fitted to the preference data, and achieve notable efficiency and competitive performance [10].
While various contrastive preference learning methods employ different pairwise ranking losses,
they share a common underlying motivation: Maximize the expected relative difference between
the implicit rewards associated with the chosen and rejected responses. Because the ranking loss
is invariant to various score transformations (e.g., subtracting a constant), these methods tend to
ignore the absolute values of the rewards. Hence, while these methods learn to preserve the relative
ordering between the likelihoods of the chosen and the rejected responses, they may reduce the
likelihood of the chosen response. Figure 1 illustrates this behavior and its implications. In the case
of DPO, a representative method of the contrastive methods, the likelihood of the chosen response
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

