ReactZyme: A Benchmark for
Enzyme-Reaction Prediction

Chenqing Hua1,3∗
Liang Hong 2
1

Bozitao Zhong2∗

Sitao Luan1,3

Guy Wolf 3,4
Doina Precup 1,3,5
Shuangjia Zheng2†
2
3
4
5
McGill; SJTU; Mila; UdeM; DeepMind

Abstract
Enzymes, with their specific catalyzed reactions, are necessary for all aspects of life,
enabling diverse biological processes and adaptations. Predicting enzyme functions
is essential for understanding biological pathways, guiding drug development,
enhancing bioproduct yields, and facilitating evolutionary studies. Addressing the
inherent complexities, we introduce a new approach to annotating enzymes based
on their catalyzed reactions. This method provides detailed insights into specific
reactions and is adaptable to newly discovered reactions, diverging from traditional
classifications by protein family or expert-derived reaction classes. We employ
machine learning algorithms to analyze enzyme reaction datasets, delivering a
much more refined view on the functionality of enzymes. Our evaluation leverages
the largest enzyme-reaction dataset to date, derived from the SwissProt and Rhea
databases with entries up to January 8, 2024. We frame the enzyme-reaction
prediction as a retrieval problem, aiming to rank enzymes by their catalytic ability
for specific reactions. With our model, we can recruit proteins for novel reactions
and predict reactions in novel proteins, facilitating enzyme discovery and function
annotation (https://github.com/WillHua127/ReactZyme).

1

Introduction

Enzymes, as catalysts of biological systems, are the workhorses of various biological functions
[35, 52, 13] (Fig. 1a). They accelerate and regulate nearly all chemical processes and metabolic
pathways in organisms, from simple bacteria to complex mammals [53, 18]. The ability to understand
and manipulate enzyme functions is fundamental to numerous scientific and industrial fields, including
biosynthesis, where enzymes help to produce complex organic molecules [16, 42], and synthetic
biology, where they are engineered to create novel biological pathways [19, 34, 24]. Furthermore,
they can break down pollutants, thus playing a significant role in bio-remediation efforts [57, 75].
In the realm of protein evolution, examining enzyme functions across the tree of life enhances our
understanding of the evolutionary processes that sculpt metabolic networks and enable organisms to
adapt to their environments [31, 20, 11, 54]. As such, gaining insights into enzyme function is not
merely an academic pursuit in life sciences but a necessity for practical applications in medicine,
agriculture, and environmental management.
The current methodologies for enzyme annotation primarily rely on established databases and
classifications such as KEGG Orthology (KO), Enzyme Commission (EC) numbers, and Gene
Ontology (GO) annotations, each with its specific focus and methodology [65] (Fig. 1b). For instance,
the EC system categorizes enzymes based on the chemical reactions they catalyze, providing a
hierarchical numerical classification [4]. KO links gene products to their functional orthologs across
different species [48], whereas GO offers a broader ontology for describing the roles of genes and
proteins in any organism [12].
∗
†

Co-authorship
Correspondence to: chenqing.hua@mail.mcgill.ca; shuangjia.zheng@sjtu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

