Disentangled Representation Learning in
Non-Markovian Causal Systems

Adam Li∗ and Yushu Pan∗ and Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Lab
Columbia University
{adam.li, yushupan, eb}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Considering various data modalities, such as images, videos, and text, humans
perform causal reasoning using high-level causal variables, as opposed to operating
at the low, pixel level from which the data comes. In practice, most causal reasoning
methods assume that the data is described as granular as the underlying causal
generative factors, which is often violated in various AI tasks. This mismatch
translates into a lack of guarantees in various tasks such as generative modeling,
decision-making, fairness, and generalizability, to cite a few. In this paper, we
acknowledge this issue and study the problem of causal disentangled representation
learning from a combination of data gathered from various heterogeneous domains
and assumptions in the form of a latent causal graph. To the best of our knowledge,
the proposed work is the first to consider i) non-Markovian causal settings, where
there may be unobserved confounding, ii) arbitrary distributions that arise from
multiple domains, and iii) a relaxed version of disentanglement. Specifically, we
introduce graphical criteria that allow for disentanglement under various conditions.
Building on these results, we develop an algorithm that returns a causal disentanglement map, highlighting which latent variables can be disentangled given the
combination of data and assumptions. The theory is corroborated by experiments.

1

Introduction

Causality is fundamental throughout various aspects of human cognition, including understanding,
planning, decision-making. The ability to perform causal reasoning is considered one of the hallmarks
of human intelligence [1–3]. In the context of AI, the capability of reasoning with cause-and-effect
relationships plays a critical role in challenges of explainability, fairness, decision-making, robustness,
and generalizability. One key assumption of most methods currently available in the causal literature
is that the set of (endogenous) variables is at the right level of granularity. However, this is not the
case in many AI applications, where various modalities, such as images, and text, come into play [4].
For example, images of a park scene capture objects as causal variables, not the pixels themselves.
AI must disentangle these latent causal variables to represent the true relationships in the image.
Faithfully representing this latent structure impacts downstream AI tasks like image generation and
few-shot learning.
In machine learning, the representation learning literature is concerned with finding useful representations from data [5]. One important line of work traces back to linear ICA (independent component
analysis) [6], where one attempts to disentangle latent variables assuming a linear mixing function.
The literature has also considered settings where the mixing function is nonlinear [7, 8]. It has been
understood that nonlinear-ICA is, in general, not identifiable (ID) given only observational data [9].
*

These authors contributed equally to this work, and the author names are listed in alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

