No Train, all Gain: Self-Supervised Gradients Improve
Deep Frozen Representations

Walter Simoncini1,∗
1

Spyros Gidaris2

Andrei Bursuc2

Yuki M. Asano1

QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam; 2 valeo.ai, Paris, France

Abstract
This paper introduces FUNGI, Features from UNsupervised GradIents, a method
to enhance the features of transformer encoders by leveraging self-supervised
gradients. Our method is simple: given any pretrained model, we first compute
gradients from various self-supervised objectives for each input. These gradients
are projected to a lower dimension and then concatenated with the model’s output
embedding. The resulting features are evaluated on k-nearest neighbor classification
over 11 datasets from vision, 5 from natural language processing, and 2 from audio.
Across backbones spanning various sizes and pretraining strategies, FUNGI features
provide consistent performance improvements over the embeddings. We also show
that using FUNGI features can benefit linear classification, clustering and image
retrieval, and that they significantly improve the retrieval-based in-context scene
understanding abilities of pretrained models, for example improving upon DINO
by +17% for semantic segmentation – without any training. Code is available at
https://github.com/WalterSimoncini/fungivision.

1

Introduction

The k-nearest neighbor algorithm (kNN) (Fix, 1985) is a fundamental non-parametric machine
learning tool, and can be scaled to datasets with billion of examples thanks to advances in quantization
(Jegou et al., 2010; Guo et al., 2020) and efficient GPU implementations (Johnson et al., 2019). This
simple and versatile algorithm has shown potential in multiple applications well before deep neural
networks became relevant (Efros & Leung, 1999; Hays & Efros, 2008; Torralba et al., 2008). Its
recent applications include fast and robust image classification with Vision Transformers (Caron et al.,
2021; Chen & He, 2021), unlabeled data selection (Yalniz et al., 2019), relevant text-retrieval (Lewis
et al., 2020), and visual in-context learning (Balazevic et al., 2024), where a context of data samples
with their annotations (e.g., a semantic segmentation map) are used to make dense predictions.
Devising powerful and expressive features for recognition and image understanding has a long history
in computer vision. Feature engineering strategies range from simple local features (Lowe, 2004;
Dalal & Triggs, 2005; Van De Sande et al., 2009) extracting gradient, boundary or color information,
to various mid-level (Boureau et al., 2010) or global pooling (Oliva & Torralba, 2001; Sivic &
Zisserman, 2003; Jégou et al., 2010) techniques. It is also possible to couple off-the-shelf pretrained
backbones as feature extractors with such pooling strategies (Gong et al., 2014; Kulkarni et al., 2015;
Gidaris et al., 2020) to improve performances. While these approaches demonstrate the utility of
using a neural network’s learned embedding space, they still require specific expertise and tuning for
each backbone and task with only limited guidance from the data itself.
∗

Work partially done as an intern at valeo.ai. Datasets were solely downloaded and evaluated by the University
of Amsterdam. walter@ashita.nl

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

