Efficient Multi-task LLM Quantization and Serving
for Multiple LoRA Adapters

Yifei Xia
Peking University
yifeixia@stu.pku.edu.cn

Fangcheng Fu
Peking University
ccchengff@pku.edu.cn

Jiawei Jiang
Wuhan University
jiawei.jiang@whu.edu.cn

Wentao Zhang
Peking University
wentao.zhang@pku.edu.cn

Bin Cui
Peking University
bin.cui@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
With the remarkable achievements of large language models (LLMs), the demand
for fine-tuning and deploying LLMs in various downstream tasks has garnered
widespread interest. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques represented by
LoRA and model quantization techniques represented by GPTQ and AWQ are of
paramount significance. However, although these techniques have been widely
adopted in single-task scenarios, research is scarce in multi-task scenarios. To
be specific, we find that mainstream quantization methods would prevent the
base LLM from being shared among tasks, so current LLM serving systems are
infeasible to integrate LLM quantization with multiple LoRA adapters to achieve
memory-efficient multi-task serving. Moreover, existing LLM serving systems lack
support for dynamic task addition and overlook the workload differences among
tasks, leading to inefficiencies in multi-task scenarios.
This work proposes LoRA-Inlaid, an efficient multi-task LLM serving system. On
the one hand, LoRA-Inlaid designs a flexible and efficient multi-task quantization
algorithm (MLGPTQ) that facilitates the sharing of a single quantized model for
multiple LoRA adapters, which significantly reduces the memory consumption for
model deployment. Meanwhile, it supports adding LoRA adapters for new tasks
on the fly, without sacrificing the stability of online services. On the other hand,
LoRA-Inlaid develops a novel multi-task scheduling algorithm guided by output
length prediction and grouping among different tasks, which effectively shrinks the
memory consumption and avoids frequent switching of LoRA adapters. Empirical
results verify that LoRA-Inlaid outperforms existing state-of-the-art LLM serving
systems by up to 1.58× in terms of throughput, 1.76× in terms of average latency,
2× in terms of job completion time, and 10× in terms of SLO Attainment, while
maintaining the same level of model quality.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive effectiveness in various domains [26,
30, 31, 39], and the demand of deploying LLMs in downstream tasks continues to grow [4, 10,
Yifei Xia, Fangcheng Fu, and Bin Cui are with the School of Computer Science and Key Lab of High
Confidence Software Technologies (MOE), Peking University. Bin Cui is also with the Institute of Computational
Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao). Wentao Zhang is with the Center for Machine Learning Research,
Peking University. Jiawei Jiang is with the School of Computer Science, Wuhan University.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

