Graph neural networks and non-commuting operators

Mauricio Velasco
Departamento de Informática
Universidad Católica del Uruguay
Montevideo, Uruguay
mauricio.velasco@ucu.edu.uy

Kaiying O’Hare
Departament of Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, Maryland
kohare3@jh.edu

Bernardo Rychtenberg
Departamento de Informática
Universidad Católica del Uruguay
Montevideo, Uruguay
bernardo.rychtenberg@ucu.edu.uy

Soledad Villar
Departament of Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, Maryland
svillar3@jhu.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) provide state-of-the-art results in a wide variety of
tasks which typically involve predicting features at the vertices of a graph. They are
built from layers of graph convolutions which serve as a powerful inductive bias
for describing the flow of information among the vertices. Often, more than one
data modality is available. This work considers a setting in which several graphs
have the same vertex set and a common vertex-level learning task. This generalizes
standard GNN models to GNNs with several graph operators that do not commute.
We may call this model graph-tuple neural networks (GtNN).
In this work, we develop the mathematical theory to address the stability and
transferability of GtNNs using properties of non-commuting non-expansive operators. We develop a limit theory of graphon-tuple neural networks and use it
to prove a universal transferability theorem that guarantees that all graph-tuple
neural networks are transferable on convergent graph-tuple sequences. In particular,
there is no non-transferable energy under the convergence we consider here. Our
theoretical results extend well-known transferability theorems for GNNs to the
case of several simultaneous graphs (GtNNs) and provide a strict improvement on
what is currently known even in the GNN case.
We illustrate our theoretical results with simple experiments on synthetic and realworld data. To this end, we derive a training procedure that provably enforces the
stability of the resulting model.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [45, 3, 24, 16] are a widely-used and versatile machine learning tool
to process different kinds of data from numerous applications, including chemistry [15], molecular
geometry [48], combinatorial optimization [21, 36], among many other. Such networks act on
functions on the vertices of a graph (also called signals or vertex features) and use the structure of the
graph as a powerful inductive bias to describe the natural flow of information among vertices. One
of the most common graph neural networks are based on graph convolutions [14], which generalize
the notion of message passing. The typical architecture has building blocks which are polynomial
functions of the adjacency matrix (or more generally of the shift operator) of a graph composed with
componentwise non-linearities. Therefore, such networks implement the idea that the values of a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

