Online Control with Adversarial Disturbance for
Continuous-time Linear Systems

Jingwei Li
IIIS, Tsinghua University
Shanghai Qizhi Institute
ljw22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Jing Dong
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
jingdong@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Can Chang
IIIS, Tsinghua University
cc22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Baoxiang Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
bxiangwang@cuhk.edu.cn

Jingzhao Zhang
IIIS, Tsinghua University
Shanghai Qi zhi Institute
jingzhaoz@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We study online control for continuous-time linear systems with finite sampling
rates, where the objective is to design an online procedure that learns under nonstochastic noise and performs comparably to a fixed optimal linear controller. We
present a novel two-level online algorithm, by integrating a higher-level learning
strategy and a lower-level feedback control strategy. This method offers a practical
and robust solution for online control, which achieves sublinear regret. Our work
provides the first nonasymptotic results for controlling continuous-time linear
systems with finite number of interactions with the system. Moreover, we examine
how to train an agent in domain randomization environments from a non-stochastic
control perspective. By applying our method to the SAC (Soft Actor-Critic)
algorithm, we achieved improved results in multiple reinforcement learning tasks
within domain randomization environments. Our work provides new insights into
non-asymptotic analyses of controlling continuous-time systems. Furthermore,
our work brings practical intuition into controller learning under non-stochastic
environments.

1

Introduction

A major challenge in robotics is to deploy simulated controllers into real-world. This process,
known as sim-to-real transfer, can be difficult due to misspecified dynamics, unanticipated real-world
perturbations, and non-stationary environments. Various strategies have been proposed to address
these issues, including domain randomization, meta-learning, and domain adaptation [20, 10, 21].
Although they have shown great effectiveness in experimental results, training agents within these
setups poses a significant challenge. To accommodate different environments, the strategies developed
by agents tend to be overly conservative [26, 4] or lead to suboptimal outcomes [43, 27].
In this work, we provide an analysis of the sim-to-real transfer problem from an online control
perspective. Online control focuses on iteratively updating the controller after deployment (i.e.,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

