Exact Gradients for Stochastic Spiking Neural
Networks Driven by Rough Signals

Christian Holberg
Department of Mathematics
University of Copenhagen
c.holberg@math.ku.dk

Cristopher Salvi
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
c.salvi@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a mathematically rigorous framework based on rough path theory
to model stochastic spiking neural networks (SSNNs) as stochastic differential
equations with event discontinuities (Event SDEs) and driven by càdlàg rough
paths. Our formalism is general enough to allow for potential jumps to be present
both in the solution trajectories as well as in the driving noise. We then identify a
set of sufficient conditions ensuring the existence of pathwise gradients of solution
trajectories and event times with respect to the network’s parameters and show
how these gradients satisfy a recursive relation. Furthermore, we introduce a
general-purpose loss function defined by means of a new class of signature kernels
indexed on càdlàg rough paths and use it to train SSNNs as generative models.
We provide an end-to-end autodifferentiable solver for Event SDEs and make its
implementation available as part of the diffrax library. Our framework is, to
our knowledge, the first enabling gradient-based training of SSNNs with noise
affecting both the spike timing and the network’s dynamics.

1

Introduction

Stochastic differential equations exhibiting event discontinuities (Event SDEs) and driven by noise
processes with jumps are an important modelling tool in many areas of science. One of the most
notable examples of such systems is that of stochastic spiking neural networks (SSNNs). Several
models for neuronal dynamics have been proposed in the computational neuroscience literature with
the stochastic leaky integrate-and-fire (SLIF) model being among the most popular choices [19, 56].
In its simplest form, given some continuous input current it on [0, T ], the dynamics of a single SLIF
neuron consist of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process describing the membrane potential as well as a
threshold for spike triggering and a resetting mechanism [33]. In particular, between spikes, the
dynamics of the membrane potential vt is given by the following SDE
dvt = µ (it − vt ) dt + σdBt ,

(1)

where µ > 0 is a parameter and Bt is a standard Brownian motion. The neuron spikes whenever the
membrane potential v hits the threshold ψ > 0 upon which v is reset to 0. Alternatively, one can
model the spike times as a Poisson process with intensity λ : R → R+ depending on the membrane
potential vt . A common choice is λ(v) = exp((v − ψ)/β) [50, 26, 27, 24].
A notorious issue for calibrating Event SDEs such as SSNNs is that the implicitly defined event
discontinuities, e.g., the spikes, make it difficult to define derivatives of the solution trajectories and
of the event times with respect to the network’s parameters using classical calculus rules. This issue
is exacerbated when the dynamics are stochastic in which case the usual argument relying on the
implicit function theorem, used for instance in [6, 25], is no longer valid.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

