Symmetric Linear Bandits with Hidden Symmetry

The Anh Ta
CSIRO’s Data61
Marsfield, NSW, Australia
theanh.ta@csiro.au

Nam Phuong Tran
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
Coventry, United Kingdom
nam.p.tran@warwick.ac.uk
Debmalya Mandal
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
Coventry, United Kingdom
debmalya.mandal@warwick.ac.uk

Long Tran-Thanh
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
Coventry, United Kingdom
long.tran-thanh@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
High-dimensional linear bandits with low-dimensional structure have received
considerable attention in recent studies due to their practical significance. The most
common structure in the literature is sparsity. However, it may not be available
in practice. Symmetry, where the reward is invariant under certain groups of
transformations on the set of arms, is another important inductive bias in the highdimensional case that covers many standard structures, including sparsity. In this
work, we study high-dimensional symmetric linear bandits where the symmetry is
hidden from the learner, and the correct symmetry needs to be learned in an online
setting. We examine the structure of a collection of hidden symmetry and provide
a method based on model selection within the collection of low-dimensional
2/3
subspaces. Our algorithm achieves a regret bound of O(d0 T 2/3 log(d)), where d
is the ambient dimension which is potentially very large, and d0 is the dimension
of the true low-dimensional subspace such that d0 ≪ d. With an extra
passumption
on well-separated models, we can further improve the regret to O(d0 T log(d)).

1

Introduction

Stochastic bandit is a sequential decision-making problem in which a player, who aims to maximize
her reward, selects an action at each step and receives a stochastic reward, drawn from an initially
unknown distribution of the selected arm, in response. Linear stochastic bandit (LSB) [1] is an
important variant in which the expected value of the reward is a linear function of the action. It is one
of the most studied bandit variants and has many practical applications [27].
Actions in LSB are specified as feature vectors in Rd for very large feature dimension d, with
performance i.e. the resulting regret scaling with d. Many works have addressed this curse of
dimensionality by leveraging different low-dimensional structures as inductive biases for the learner.
For example, sparsity, which assumes that the reward is a sparse linear function, has been used
extensively in LSB to design bandit algorithms with better performance [2, 36, 23]. However, when
the reward function lacks the structure for sparsity (which may occur in many real-world situations), a
question arises: Are there different structures in the features of LSB that we can exploit to overcome
the curse of dimensionality and design bandit algorithms with better performance?
In this paper, we study the inductive bias induced by symmetry structures in LSB, which is a more
general model inductive bias than sparsity, and can facilitate efficient and effective learning [9].
Symmetry describes how, under certain transformations of the input of the problem, the outcome
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

