Tree of Attacks:
Jailbreaking Black-Box LLMs Automatically

Anay Mehrotra
Yale University
Robust Intelligence @ Cisco
Paul Kassianik
Robust Intelligence @ Cisco

Manolis Zampetakis
Yale University

Blaine Nelson
Robust Intelligence @ Cisco

Yaron Singer
Robust Intelligence @ Cisco

Hyrum Anderson
Robust Intelligence @ Cisco

Amin Karbasi
Robust Intelligence @ Cisco

Abstract
While Large Language Models (LLMs) display versatile functionality, they continue to generate harmful, biased, and toxic content, as demonstrated by the prevalence of human-designed jailbreaks. In this work, we present Tree of Attacks with
Pruning (TAP), an automated method for generating jailbreaks that only requires
black-box access to the target LLM. TAP utilizes an attacker LLM to iteratively
refine candidate (attack) prompts until one of the refined prompts jailbreaks the
target. In addition, before sending prompts to the target, TAP assesses them and
prunes the ones unlikely to result in jailbreaks, reducing the number of queries
sent to the target LLM. In empirical evaluations, we observe that TAP generates
prompts that jailbreak state-of-the-art LLMs (including GPT4-Turbo and GPT4o)
for more than 80% of the prompts. This significantly improves upon the previous
state-of-the-art black-box methods for generating jailbreaks while using a smaller
number of queries than them. Furthermore, TAP is also capable of jailbreaking
LLMs protected by state-of-the-art guardrails, e.g., LlamaGuard.

1

Introduction

The proliferation of LLMs has revolutionized natural language processing and generation [9, 50, 37],
enabling novel software paradigms [30]. However, the widespread use of LLMs also raises concerns
regarding their risks [7, 8, 31, 63, 16], biases [43, 1, 7, 22, 8], and susceptibility to adversarial
manipulation [3, 10, 52, 35]. In response to these challenges, researchers and developers have
explored various approaches to mitigate undesirable outcomes [14, 62, 23, 56, 18, 37]. Including
encoding appropriate behavior during training via reinforcement learning with human feedback
(RLHF), creating instructions (or system prompts) to guide the LLM during inference, and building
additional guardrails that block undesired outputs. Broadly, all of this is called the alignment of
LLMs [25, 51].
Understanding the power and limitations of alignment methods is crucial for building LLMs that
can be safely used in a wide range of applications. One way to understand the limitations of these
methods is to explore their susceptibility to jailbreaking attacks; which are attempts to bypass the
target LLM’s safety filters and circumvent its alignment [52].
More concretely, given a request for undesirable information (e.g., “How to build a bomb?”), the
goal of a jailbreaking method is to output a prompt that makes the target LLM provide the requested
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

