LLaMo: Large Language Model-based
Molecular Graph Assistant

Jinyoung Park Minseong Bae Dohwan Ko Hyunwoo J. Kim∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{lpmn678, bms2002, ikodoh, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable generalization and
instruction-following capabilities with instruction tuning. The advancements in
LLMs and instruction tuning have led to the development of Large Vision-Language
Models (LVLMs). However, the competency of the LLMs and instruction tuning
have been less explored in the molecular domain. Thus, we propose LLaMo:
Large Language Model-based Molecular graph assistant, which is an end-toend trained large molecular graph language model. To bridge the discrepancy
between the language and graph modalities, we present the multi-level graph
projector that transforms graph representations into graph tokens by abstracting
the output representations of each GNN layer and motif representations with the
cross-attention mechanism. We also introduce machine-generated molecular graph
instruction data to instruction-tune the large molecular graph-language model for
general-purpose molecule and language understanding. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate that LLaMo shows the best performance on diverse tasks, such as
molecular description generation, property prediction, and IUPAC name prediction.
The code of LLaMo is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/LLaMo.

1

Introduction

In recent years, molecular machine learning [1, 2, 3, 4] has received significant attention, addressing
diverse tasks in the chemical domain. The predominant approach for molecular tasks is graph machine
learning [5, 6, 7] that leverages the molecular graph structure, which is a natural and expressive
representation of molecules. Although graph-based methods have successfully represented molecules,
they have limited interpretability and incompatibility to solve multi-modal molecular tasks dealing
with pairs of texts and molecules. To address these issues, recent works [4, 8] train both a language
model and a graph encoder with cross-modal contrastive learning. However, the models trained with
cross-modal contrastive learning are insufficient to perform open-ended molecule-to-text generation
tasks [3], which are more applicable to practical use.
Large Language Models (LLMs) [2, 9, 10, 11] have shown impressive progress and accomplished
human-like open-ended text generation with the power of billions of parameters. To leverage the
instruction-following capability of LLMs, many works employ instruction-tuning approaches [12, 13,
14] for general-purpose language models. Motivated by the development of LLMs and instruction
tuning, Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have recently been explored and achieved success
on image comprehension and image-to-text generation tasks [10, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18]. Despite the
success of LLM-based approaches on natural language processing and machine vision domains,
the research on the integration of language models and molecular graphs has been less studied
due to the lack of consideration of the architecture design of Large Molecular Graph-Language
Models (LMGLMs) and the molecular graph instruction data.
∗

corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

