Private Algorithms for Stochastic Saddle Points and
Variational Inequalities: Beyond Euclidean Geometry

Raef Bassily
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Translational Data Analytics Institute (TDAI)
The Ohio State University
bassily.1@osu.edu

Cristóbal Guzmán
Inst. for Mathematical and Comput. Eng.
Fac. de Matemáticas and Esc. de Ingeniería
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
crguzmanp@uc.cl

Michael Menart
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University ∗
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
Vector Institute
menart.2@osu.edu

Abstract
In this work, we conduct a systematic study of stochastic saddle point problems
(SSP) and stochastic variational inequalities (SVI) under the constraint of (ϵ, δ)differential privacy (DP) in both Euclidean and non-Euclidean setups. We first
consider Lipschitz convex-concave SSPs in the ℓp /ℓq setup, p, q ∈ [1, 2]. That is,
we consider the case where the primal problem has an ℓp -setup (i.e., the primal
parameter is constrained to an ℓp bounded domain and the loss is ℓp -Lipschitz with
respect to the primal parameter)
and the dual problem has an ℓq setup. Here, we
√ 
obtain a bound of Õ √1n + nϵd on the strong SP-gap, where n is the number of
samples and d is the dimension. This rate is nearly optimal for any p, q ∈ [1, 2].
Without additional assumptions, such as smoothness or linearity requirements,
prior work under DP has only obtained this rate when p = q = 2 (i.e., only in the
Euclidean setup). Further, existing algorithms have each only been shown to work
for specific settings of p and q and under certain assumptions on the loss and the
feasible set, whereas we provide a general algorithm for DP SSPs whenever p, q ∈
[1, 2]. Our result is obtained via a novel analysis of the recursive regularization
algorithm. In particular, we develop new tools for analyzing generalization, which
may be of independent interest. Next, we turn our attention towards SVIs with
a monotone, bounded and Lipschitz operator and consider ℓp -setups, p ∈ [1, 2].
Here, we provide
the first analysis which obtains a bound on the strong VI-gap
√ 
1
d
√
of Õ n + nϵ . For p − 1 = Ω(1), this rate is near optimal due to existing
lower bounds. To obtain this result, we develop a modified version of recursive
regularization. Our analysis builds on the techniques we develop for SSPs as well
as employing additional novel components which handle difficulties arising from
adapting the recursive regularization framework to SVIs.

∗

This work was done while M. Menart was at The Ohio State University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

