Unveiling the Tapestry of Consistency in
Large Vision-Language Models

Yuan Zhang1,2 , Fei Xiao2 , Tao Huang3 , Chun-Kai Fan1 , Hongyuan Dong2 ,
Jiawen Li2 , Jiacong Wang2,4 , Kuan Cheng1 , Shanghang Zhang1∗, Haoyuan Guo2∗
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University † 2 ByteDance Inc
3
The University of Sydney 4 School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
https://github.com/foundation-multimodal-models/ConBench

Abstract
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) have recently achieved rapid progress,
exhibiting great perception and reasoning abilities concerning visual information.
However, when faced with prompts in different sizes of solution spaces, LVLMs
fail to always give consistent answers regarding the same knowledge point. This
inconsistency of answers between different solution spaces is prevalent in LVLMs
and erodes trust. To this end, we provide a multi-modal benchmark ConBench,
to intuitively analyze how LVLMs perform when the solution space of a prompt
revolves around a knowledge point. Based on the ConBench tool, we are the
first to reveal the tapestry and get the following findings: (1) In the discriminate
realm, the larger the solution space of the prompt, the lower the accuracy of the
answers. (2) Establish the relationship between the discriminative and generative
realms: the accuracy of the discriminative question type exhibits a strong positive
correlation with its Consistency with the caption. (3) Compared to open-source
models, closed-source models exhibit a pronounced bias advantage in terms of
Consistency. Eventually, we ameliorate the consistency of LVLMs by trigger-based
diagnostic refinement, indirectly improving the performance of their caption. We
hope this paper will accelerate the research community in better evaluating their
models and encourage future advancements in the consistency domain.

1

Introduction

Recently, benefiting from notable advancements in large language models (LLMs) [1; 25; 2], the
realm of large vision-language models (LVLMs) has undergone a revolutionary transformation.
These novel LVLMs [18; 24; 3; 8; 15; 13] try to combine visual signals with textual semantics
and spark cognitive brilliance across modalities. Although LVLMs can generate high-quality responses to task prompts, we discover that for correctly answered cases, simply modifying the
prompt will result LVLMs in providing contradictory responses. In Figure 1 (a.2), LLaVA-7B
[18] properly describes the picture as “It is a man wearing a dinosaur costume.”, but
when prompted “Is the dinosaur played by humans? Please answer yes or no.”, it responds with “No, they are dinosaurs”. The above phenomenon of Inconsistency is widely
observed across mainstream LVLMs, and a preliminary study was conducted only on LLMs [14]. In
practice, in contrast to the fixed patterns of questions, designed in existing multimodal benchmarks,
the users tend to pose questions in arbitrary ways. Therefore, it is necessary to ensure the LVLMs in
predicting correct and consistent answers, even when faced with various formats of queries.
∗
†

Correspondence to: Shanghang Zhang and Haoyuan Guo.
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

