Learning to grok: Emergence of in-context learning
and skill composition in modular arithmetic tasks

Tianyu He a, †

Darshil Doshi a

Aritra Das a

{tianyuh, ddoshi, aritrad}@umd.edu

Andrey Gromov b, a
gromovand@meta.com

Abstract
Large language models can solve tasks that were not present in the training set.
This capability is believed to be due to in-context learning and skill composition.
In this work, we study the emergence of in-context learning and skill composition
in a collection of modular arithmetic tasks. Specifically, we consider a finite
collection of linear modular functions z = a x + b y mod p labeled by the vector
(a, b) ∈ Z2p . We use some of these tasks for pre-training and the rest for out-ofdistribution testing. We empirically show that a GPT-style transformer exhibits a
transition from in-distribution to out-of-distribution generalization as the number
of pre-training tasks increases. We find that the smallest model capable of outof-distribution generalization requires two transformer blocks, while for deeper
models, the out-of-distribution generalization phase is transient, necessitating early
stopping. Finally, we perform an interpretability study of the pre-trained models,
revealing highly structured representations in both attention heads and MLPs; and
discuss the learned algorithms. Notably, we find an algorithmic shift in deeper
models, as we go from few to many in-context examples.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) can perform simple tasks absent from their training data. This ability
is usually achieved via in-context learning [5]. More importantly, LLMs can perform an even larger
variety of very complex tasks upon appropriate prompting or fine-tuning. The latter ability to perform
complex tasks is usually attributed to the following mechanism. First, LLMs learn a large variety of
simple tasks and, then, how to compose those skills to form very complex skills [3]. Furthermore,
LLMs also exhibit “emergent capabilities” – a sudden emergence of a new complex skill as a function
of scale (either model size, compute or data) [29, 9]. It is plausible that these sudden performance
improvements are due to one or both of these mechanisms. For example, LLMs show grokking
on algorithmic tasks [24], which results from the model learning very structured representations
[18, 11, 20]. Once these representations emerge, the model abruptly learns how to perform the task.
In this work, we set out to examine skill composition both empirically and mechanistically. Inspired
by the prior work that investigated emergence of in-context learning on linear regression tasks [1, 25],
we introduce a finite collection of discrete modular arithmetic tasks [24] generalized to the in-context
learning setting. Each task corresponds to learning a linear function z = a x + b y mod p over Zp
from the examples provided in context of the autoregressive model(AM). In the bi-variate case there
are p2 such functions labeled by the vector (a, b). The main objective of this algorithmic dataset is to
probe how AM utilizes the tasks it has learnt during training to solve the new tasks.
a

Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park
Meta AI
†
Corresponding author
* Source Code: https://github.com/ablghtianyi/ICL_Modular_Arithmetic
b

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

