Fair Secretaries with Unfair Predictions
Eric Balkanski
Columbia University
eb3224@columbia.edu

Will Ma
Columbia University
wm2428@gsb.columbia.edu

Andreas Maggiori
Columbia University
am6292@columbia.edu

Abstract
Algorithms with predictions is a recent framework for decision-making under uncertainty that leverages the power of machine-learned predictions without making
any assumption about their quality. The goal in this framework is for algorithms to
achieve an improved performance when the predictions are accurate while maintaining acceptable guarantees when the predictions are erroneous. A serious concern
with algorithms that use predictions is that these predictions can be biased and,
as a result, cause the algorithm to make decisions that are deemed unfair. We
show that this concern manifests itself in the classical secretary problem in the
learning-augmented setting—the state-of-the-art algorithm can have zero probability of accepting the best candidate, which we deem unfair, despite promising to
accept a candidate whose expected value is at least max{Ω(1), 1 − O(ε)} times
the optimal value, where ε is the prediction error. We show how to preserve this
promise while also guaranteeing to accept the best candidate with probability Ω(1).
Our algorithm and analysis are based on a new “pegging” idea that diverges from
existing works and simplifies/unifies some of their results. Finally, we extend to the
k-secretary problem and complement our theoretical analysis with experiments.

1

Introduction

As machine learning algorithms are increasingly used in socially impactful decision-making applications, the fairness of those algorithms has become a primary concern. Many algorithms deployed in
recent years have been shown to be explicitly unfair or reflect bias that is present in training data.
Applications where automated decision-making algorithms have been used and fairness is of central
importance include loan/credit-risk evaluation [52, 40, 50], hiring [11, 17], recidivism evaluation
[53, 1, 24, 15, 19], childhood welfare systems [16], job recommendations [44], price discrimination
[18], resource allocation [51], and others [34, 33, 35, 8, 49]. A lot of work in recent years has been
devoted to formally defining different notions of fairness [47, 38, 29, 26, 20, 42, 41], designing
algorithms that satisfy these different definitions [37, 36, 12, 13, 55], and investigating trade-offs
between fairness and other optimization objectives [9, 10].
While most fairness work concentrates on classification problems where the instance is known
offline, we explore the problem of making fair decisions when the input is revealed in an online
manner. Although fairness in online algorithms is an interesting line of research per se, fairness
considerations have become increasingly important due to the recent interest in incorporating (possibly
biased) machine learning predictions into the design of classical online algorithms. This framework,
usually referred to as learning-augmented algorithms or algorithms with predictions, was first
formalized in [48]. In contrast to classical online algorithms problems where it is assumed that no
information is known about the future, learning-augmented online algorithms are given as input,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

