Solving Minimum-Cost Reach Avoid using
Reinforcement Learning

Oswin So*
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIT
oswinso@mit.edu

Cheng Ge*
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIT
gec_mike@mit.edu

Chuchu Fan
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIT
chuchu@mit.edu

Abstract
Current reinforcement-learning methods are unable to directly learn policies that
solve the minimum cost reach-avoid problem to minimize cumulative costs subject
to the constraints of reaching the goal and avoiding unsafe states, as the structure
of this new optimization problem is incompatible with current methods. Instead, a
surrogate problem is solved where all objectives are combined with a weighted
sum. However, this surrogate objective results in suboptimal policies that do not
directly minimize the cumulative cost. In this work, we propose RC-PPO, a
reinforcement-learning-based method for solving the minimum-cost reach-avoid
problem by using connections to Hamilton-Jacobi reachability. Empirical results
demonstrate that RC-PPO learns policies with comparable goal-reaching rates to
while achieving up to 57% lower cumulative costs compared to existing methods
on a suite of minimum-cost reach-avoid benchmarks on the Mujoco simulator. The
project page can be found at https://oswinso.xyz/rcppo/.

1

Introduction

Many real-world tasks can be framed as a constrained optimization problem where reaching a goal at
the terminal state and ensuring safety (i.e., reach-avoid) is desired while minimizing some cumulative
cost as an objective function, which we term the minimum-cost reach-avoid problem.
The cumulative cost, which differentiates this from the traditional reach-avoid problem, can be used
to model desirable aspects of a task such as minimizing energy consumption, maximizing smoothness,
or any other pseudo-energy function, and allows for choosing the most desirable policy among many
policies that can satisfy the reach-avoid requirements. For example, energy-efficient autonomous
driving [1, 2] can be seen as a task where the vehicle must reach a destination, follow traffic rules,
and minimize fuel consumption. Minimizing fuel use is also a major concern for low-thrust or
energy-limited systems such as spacecraft [3] and quadrotors [4]. Quadrotors often have to choose
limited battery life to meet the payload capacity. Hence, minimizing their energy consumption, which
can be done by taking advantage of wind patterns, is crucial for keeping them airborne to complete
more tasks. Other use-cases important for climate change include plasma fusion (reach a desired
current, minimize the total risk of plasma disruption) [5] and voltage control (reach a desired voltage
level, minimize the load shedding amount) [6].
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

