On the Surprising Effectiveness of Attention Transfer
for Vision Transformers
Alexander C. Li∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Yuandong Tian
FAIR

Deepak Pathak
Carnegie Mellon University

Beidi Chen
Carnegie Mellon University
Xinlei Chen
FAIR

Abstract
Conventional wisdom suggests that pre-training Vision Transformers (ViT) improves downstream performance by learning useful representations. Is this actually
true? We investigate this question and find that the features and representations
learned during pre-training are not essential. Surprisingly, using only the attention
patterns from pre-training (i.e., guiding how information flows between tokens) is
sufficient for models to learn high quality features from scratch and achieve comparable downstream performance. We show this by introducing a simple method
called attention transfer, where only the attention patterns from a pre-trained teacher
ViT are transferred to a student, either by copying or distilling the attention maps.
Since attention transfer lets the student learn its own features, ensembling it with
a fine-tuned teacher also further improves accuracy on ImageNet. We systematically study various aspects of our findings on the sufficiency of attention maps,
including distribution shift settings where they underperform fine-tuning. We hope
our exploration provides a better understanding of what pre-training accomplishes
and leads to a useful alternative to the standard practice of fine-tuning. Code to
reproduce our results is at https://github.com/alexlioralexli/attention-transfer.

1

Introduction

Pre-training has emerged as a dominant paradigm in machine learning and has significantly improved
performance on a variety of tasks [27, 11, 2, 22]. In computer vision in particular, self-supervised
representation learning methods [21, 6, 4, 22] and weakly supervised methods [40, 45] have enabled
learning from large amounts of images. It is widely accepted that these methods work because they
teach models useful features that are relevant for downstream tasks. But is this story actually true?
Perhaps there is another capability learned during pre-training that is sufficient to explain its benefits.
In this paper, we present an alternative explanation: pre-training teaches the model how information
should be routed between tokens. We specifically focus on Vision Transformers (ViT) [12], not only
because they are the most popular architecture for scaling, but also because Transformers explicitly
decouple this information flow. Inter-token communication is solely fulfilled by attention, while the
remaining bulk of computation are intra-token operations that are applied to each token independently.
In contrast, other architectures such as ConvNets [33, 20] simultaneously expand the receptive fields
and extract the features, making it difficult to isolate the effect of information flow. We hypothesize
that the features computed by the intra-token operations are not essential to explain the benefits of
pre-training, and that the pre-trained attention maps are typically sufficient for downstream tasks.
We test our hypothesis by introducing a new set of methods called attention transfer. Concretely,
we treat a pre-trained ViT as the teacher and train a student model for downstream tasks while
∗

Work done during an internship at FAIR.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

