Generating a Diversity of Challenging Programming
Puzzles with Autotelic Generative Models
Julien Pourcel,
Inria

Cédric Colas
MIT, Inria

Pierre-Yves Oudeyer
Inria

Gaia Molinaro
University of California, Berkeley
Laetitia Teodorescu
Inria

Abstract
The ability to invent novel and interesting problems is a remarkable feature of
human intelligence that drives innovation, art, and science. We propose a method
that aims to automate this process by harnessing the power of state-of-the-art
generative models to produce a diversity of challenging yet solvable problems,
here in the context of Python programming puzzles. Inspired by the intrinsically
motivated literature, Autotelic CodE Search (ACES) jointly optimizes for the
diversity and difficulty of generated problems. We represent problems in a space of
LLM-generated semantic descriptors describing the programming skills required
to solve them (e.g. string manipulation, dynamic programming, etc.) and measure
their difficulty empirically as a linearly decreasing function of the success rate of
Llama-3-70B, a state-of-the-art LLM problem solver. ACES iteratively prompts
a large language model to generate difficult problems achieving a diversity of
target semantic descriptors (goal-directed exploration) using previously generated
problems as in-context examples. ACES generates problems that are more diverse
and more challenging than problems produced by baseline methods and three
times more challenging than problems found in existing Python programming
benchmarks on average across 11 state-of-the-art code LLMs.

1

Introduction

Humans are not only talented problem solvers, they are first of all remarkable problem generators —
generating endless streams of new problems for themselves and others Chu and Schulz [2020],
Molinaro and Collins [2023]. We set build problems for others to learn, set challenges to ourselves,
[Burton and Hiron, 2008], aggregate problems to train and test AI models [Hendrycks et al., 2020,
Chen et al., 2021], and come up with new problems that drive innovation in art and science [Gromov,
2018, Chu et al., 2024]. This intrinsic drive to generate problems for oneself — the autotelic property —
has further been argued to drive the capacity for adaptation and open-ended learning in both human
[Chu and Schulz, 2020] and machines [Schmidhuber, 2013, Herrmann et al., 2022, Colas et al., 2022].
Automating this problem-generation process would have numerous positive applications: for instance,
designing exercises tailored to optimize the learning experience of every human or machine learner
(automatic curriculum learning Portelas et al. [2020]); or facilitating the generation of evaluation
protocols (human tests, machine learning benchmarks). It would provide the necessary curriculum
for open-ended learning machines [Colas et al., 2022] and may be a key component of automated
scientific discovery [Grizou et al., 2020, Etcheverry, 2023].
We propose to leverage machine learning — a set of tools usually targeted at solving problems — to
automate the generation of a diverse set of interesting problems, here in the domain of Python
programming puzzles. Programming puzzles indeed represent an open-ended space of problems to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

