GaussianMarker: Uncertainty-Aware Copyright
Protection of 3D Gaussian Splatting

Xiufeng Huang1,2 , Ruiqi Li1 , Yiu-ming Cheung1 , Ka Chun Cheung2 ,
Simon See2 , Renjie Wan1∗
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
NVIDIA AI Technology Center
xiufenghuang@life.hkbu.edu.hk, {csrqli, ymc}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
{chcheung, ssee}@nvidia.com, renjiewan@hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become a crucial method for acquiring 3D
assets. To protect the copyright of these assets, digital watermarking techniques
can be applied to embed ownership information discreetly within 3DGS models. However, existing watermarking methods for meshes, point clouds, and
implicit radiance fields cannot be directly applied to 3DGS models, as 3DGS
models use explicit 3D Gaussians with distinct structures and do not rely on neural
networks. Naively embedding the watermark on a pre-trained 3DGS can cause
obvious distortion in rendered images. In our work, we propose an uncertaintybased method that constrains the perturbation of model parameters to achieve
invisible watermarking for 3DGS. At the message decoding stage, the copyright
messages can be reliably extracted from both 3D Gaussians and 2D rendered images even under various forms of 3D and 2D distortions. We conduct extensive
experiments on the Blender, LLFF, and MipNeRF-360 datasets to validate the
effectiveness of our proposed method, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance
on both message decoding accuracy and view synthesis quality. Project page:
https://kevinhuangxf.github.io/GaussianMarker.

1

Introduction

3DGS [1] has introduced a new category of 3D assets that can be readily created and extensively
distributed online [2]. However, the ownership of these created 3D assets can be vulnerable if
malicious users distribute and manipulate the 3DGS without authorization. How can we effectively
protect the ownership of those created 3DGS models?
3DGS represents the scene via 3D Gaussian parameters, which can be standardized into point cloud
formats. Such formats can be easily shared and show strong compatibility with the mainstream
3D assets processing pipeline [3]. However, unauthorized users can exploit this convenience to
distribute 3DGS models and maliciously alter the 3D Gaussian parameters. These unauthorized
3DGS models can then be easily used to produce 2D images. Since ownership of 3DGS models can
be compromised through unauthorized manipulations of 3D Gaussian parameters and 2D images, an
effective ownership solution should enable owners to assert their rights over both the 3D Gaussian
parameters and the corresponding 2D images.
Similar to copyright protection for digital assets such as videos and images, protecting copyright for
3DGS models can be achieved via digital watermarking. Aligned with the established principles in
digital watermarking [4, 5], effective copyright protection methods for 3DGS models should satisfy
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

