DAGER: Exact Gradient Inversion for Large
Language Models

Ivo Petrov∗1 , Dimitar I. Dimitrov∗1,2 , Maximilian Baader2 ,
Mark Niklas Müller2,3 , Martin Vechev1,2
1
2
3
INSAIT, Sofia University "St. Kliment Ohridski"
ETH Zurich
LogicStar.ai
{ivo.petrov, dimitar.iliev.dimitrov}@insait.ai 1
{mbaader, mark.mueller, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch 2

Abstract
Federated learning works by aggregating locally computed gradients from multiple
clients, thus enabling collaborative training without sharing private client data.
However, prior work has shown that the data can actually be recovered by the
server using so-called gradient inversion attacks. While these attacks perform
well when applied on images, they are limited in the text domain and only permit
approximate reconstruction of small batches and short input sequences. In this
work, we propose DAGER, the first algorithm to recover whole batches of input text
exactly. DAGER leverages the low-rank structure of self-attention layer gradients
and the discrete nature of token embeddings to efficiently check if a given token
sequence is part of the client data. We use this check to exactly recover full batches
in the honest-but-curious setting without any prior on the data for both encoderand decoder-based architectures using exhaustive heuristic search and a greedy
approach, respectively. We provide an efficient GPU implementation of DAGER
and show experimentally that it recovers full batches of size up to 128 on large
language models (LLMs), beating prior attacks in speed (20x at same batch size),
scalability (10x larger batches), and reconstruction quality (ROUGE-1/2 > 0.99).

1

Introduction

While large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional potential across a wide range of
tasks, training them requires large amounts of data. However, this data is sensitive in many cases,
leading to privacy concerns when sharing it with third parties for model training. Federated learning
(FL) has emerged as a promising solution to addressing this issue by allowing multiple parties to
collaboratively train a model by sharing only gradients computed on their private data with the server
instead of the data itself. In particular, FL has been used to finetune LLMs while protecting private
data [1, 2, 3] in privacy-critical domains, such as law [4] and medicine [5].
Gradient Inversion Attacks Unfortunately, recent work has shown that this private data can be
recovered from the shared gradients using so-called gradient inversion attacks, raising concerns about
the privacy guarantees of federated learning [6]. While most prior work on gradient inversion attacks
has focused on image data [7, 8, 9], first works have demonstrated that text can also be recovered
[6, 10, 11]. However, as these approaches are optimization-based, the discrete nature of text data poses
a major challenge by inducing much harder optimization problems and limiting them to approximate
recovery of small batch sizes and short sequences. Therefore, applying existing attacks methods on
modern LLMs would be computationally infeasible or yield subpar reconstructions.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

