Adversarially Robust Multi-task Representation
Learning

Austin Watkins
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
awatki29@jhu.edu

Thanh Nguyen-Tang
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
nguyent@cs.jhu.edu

Enayat Ullah
Meta∗
enayat@meta.com

Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
We study adversarially robust transfer learning, wherein, given labeled data on
multiple (source) tasks, the goal is to train a model with small robust error on a
previously unseen (target) task. In particular, we consider a multi-task representation learning (MTRL) setting, i.e., we assume that the source and target tasks
admit a simple (linear) predictor on top of a shared representation (e.g., the final hidden layer of a deep neural network). In this general setting, we provide
rates on the excess adversarial (transfer) risk for Lipschitz losses and smooth nonnegative losses. These rates show that learning a representation using adversarial
training on diverse tasks helps protect against inference-time attacks in data-scarce
environments. Additionally, we provide novel rates for the single-task setting.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, we typically have a scarcity of data for the intended task. Consider,
for example, settings where the learner’s environment is evolving rapidly or where access to highquality labeled data is expensive or infeasible due to a lack of expertise or computational limitations.
These problems are typically studied under the framework of transfer learning [6, 22, 23, 40, 19].
Such approaches aim to leverage plentiful labeled data from the source domain to learn models that
can handle distribution shifts and work well on the target domain despite having a small labeled
dataset for the target task.
As transfer learning methods have proven successful in various applications [16, 18, 27], there is a
growing effort to utilize these approaches in high-risk environments like healthcare, medicine, transportation, and finance. Any vulnerability of these systems provides malicious agents with tempting
targets. Consequently, the users of these ML systems may find their health and financial well-being
potentially jeopardized. Additionally, institutions that deploy these systems risk public relations
crises and lawsuits. A particular concern is attacks that happen after a model is deployed. Such
attacks are called “inference-time attacks” where, for example, a malicious agent attacks a large language model (LLM) chatbot, a self-driving car, or a fraud-detection system. Much of the literature
focuses on inference-time attacks that add small perturbations to the model’s input. Prior work has
demonstrated that this can cause ML models to act unpredictably [8, 35].
∗

Work done while the author was at the Johns Hopkins University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

