Theoretical Analysis of Weak-to-Strong Generalization

Hunter Lang
MIT CSAIL

David Sontag
MIT CSAIL

Aravindan Vijayaraghavan
Northwestern University

Abstract
Strong student models can learn from weaker teachers: when trained on the predictions of a weaker model, a strong pretrained student can learn to correct the
weak model’s errors and generalize to examples where the teacher is not confident,
even when these examples are excluded from training. This enables learning from
cheap, incomplete, and possibly incorrect label information, such as coarse logical
rules or the generations of a language model. We show that existing weak supervision theory fails to account for both of these effects, which we call pseudolabel
correction and coverage expansion, respectively. We give a new bound based
on expansion properties of the data distribution and student hypothesis class that
directly accounts for pseudolabel correction and coverage expansion. Our bounds
capture the intuition that weak-to-strong generalization occurs when the strong
model is unable to fit the mistakes of the weak teacher without incurring additional
error. We show that these expansion properties can be checked from finite data and
give empirical evidence that they hold in practice.

1

Introduction

Weakly-supervised learning allows practitioners to train models with possibly-incorrect, easy-toobtain pseudolabels instead of accurate and expensive ground-truth labels. For example, suppose the
goal is to classify documents based on whether they have positive or negative sentiment. Instead of
employing humans to label examples xi with positive/negative sentiment labels yi , weak supervision
enables models to learn from simple rules, such as: if ‘incredible’ ∈ xi , sentiment =
positive. Called programmatic weak supervision, a wealth of literature has shown how to aggregate
rules, often called “labeling functions”, into individual pseudolabels that can be used to train a model
[e.g., 51, 49, 63, 21]. In typical pipelines, this consists of fine-tuning a pre-trained neural network
[71]. This method has met with a huge amount of empirical success in natural language processing
[51, 43, 28, 36, 70] computer vision [74, 62], and verticals such as healthcare [25, 26, 20, 67].
Another emerging trend in weak supervision is to use the zero-shot or few-shot outputs of a large
language model (LLM) as pseudolabels for training another language model—the student model
often outperforms its noisy “teacher”, and this technique even works when the teacher is a less
powerful model than the student, distinguishing it from classical knowledge distillation [65, 17, 18,
35, 2, 24, 33, 66, 39, 10]. Good data selection can be critical, and several approaches carefully choose
a “confident” subset of the pseudolabels [e.g. 35, 18, 39, 66]. The increasing prevalence of LLM use
in crowdwork [64] highlights the importance of better understanding this learning method.
In both cases, the pseudolabels ỹ are given by the pseudolabeler or teacher model, which is some
function of the input example x. The pseudolabeler may make errors (ỹ(x) ̸= y(x)), and it may
not cover every point—there are some points where the teacher abstains from providing a weak label.
In the examples above, these are points not covered by the rules and points where the teacher LLM is
not confident, respectively. A priori, it seems that a powerful enough classifier should exactly fit the
pseudolabeler on the covered data and have trivial performance on the uncovered data. However, this
is not what happens in practice—the empirical success of weak supervision is due to two surprising,
related phenomena that together comprise weak-to-strong generalization: (a) Pseudolabel correction:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

