Learning Bregman Divergences with Application to
Robustness
Markus Püschel
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
pueschel@inf.ethz.ch

Mohamed-Hicham Leghettas
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
mleghettas@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We propose a novel and general method to learn Bregman divergences from raw
high-dimensional data that measure similarity between images in pixel space. As a
prototypical application, we learn divergences that consider real-world corruptions
of images (e.g., blur) as close to the original and noisy perturbations as far, even
if in Lp -distance the opposite holds. We also show that the learned Bregman
divergence excels on datasets of human perceptual similarity judgment, suggesting
its utility in a range of applications. We then define adversarial attacks by replacing
the projected gradient descent (PGD) with the mirror descent associated with
the learned Bregman divergence, and use them to improve the state-of-the-art
in robustness through adversarial training for common image corruptions. In
particular, for the contrast corruption that was found problematic in prior work we
achieve an accuracy that exceeds the Lp - and the LPIPS-based adversarially trained
neural networks by a margin of 27.16% on the CIFAR-10-C corruption data set.

1

Introduction

The need to measure the semantic distance between images is a recurring requirement in various
computer vision tasks, including image retrieval [55, 53, 2], near-duplicate detection [82], face
recognition [64], and zero-shot learning [60]. This has led to a significant body of research in the
field of metric learning [75, 7], which focuses on developing automated methods for learning such
distances. The most successful approaches to assessing similarity between images involve encoding
them into a compact latent space and computing the Lp -distance between the resulting latent features.
Image encoders are typically residual neural networks or vision transformers that are pre-trained in a
supervised [78], weakly-supervised [36], or self-supervised [31] fashion. The latent space is usually
assumed Euclidean and hence the L2 -norm is the common choice, although some non-Euclidean
geometries have been considered [23].
Image similarity measures are also crucial in the field of robust machine learning. Since models are
known to be sensitive to small input perturbations [9, 68, 56], a robustness study requires a measure
for the difference between clean and perturbed inputs. A common choice is the Lp -norm computed
in the pixel space. It lacks semantic meaning but adversarial training (AT) for robustness using these
norms (via adversarial training [52] and its many follow-up variants, e.g., [69, 80, 12, 72, 14, 61, 37])
has been found to also improve the robustness to distribution shifts associated with common, realistic
image corruptions like blur or contrast changes [20, 33]. Conversely, corruption robustness evaluation
is shown more reliable than adversarial robustness evaluations when distinguishing successful
adversarial defense methods from ones that merely cause vanishing gradients [25].
Both metric learning and corruption robustness approaches obtain similarity measures by calculating
standard norms in latent spaces. In this work, we take a different route by learning Bregman
divergences directly in the pixel space. This way, we benefit from a strong mathematical underpinning
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

