Stress-Testing Long-Context Language Models
with Lifelong ICL and Task Haystack

Xiaoyue Xu∗
Tsinghua University
xiaoyue.xu.me@gmail.com

Qinyuan Ye∗
University of Southern California
qinyuany@usc.edu

Xiang Ren
University of Southern California
xiangren@usc.edu

Abstract
We introduce Lifelong ICL, a problem setting that challenges long-context language models (LMs) to learn a sequence of language tasks through in-context
learning (ICL). We further introduce Task Haystack, an evaluation suite dedicated
to assessing and diagnosing how long-context LMs utilizes contexts in Lifelong
ICL. When given a task instruction and test inputs, long-context LMs are expected
to leverage the relevant demonstrations in the Lifelong ICL prompt, avoid distraction and interference from other tasks, and achieve test accuracies that are not
significantly worse than those of the Single-task ICL baseline.
Task Haystack draws inspiration from the widely-adopted “needle-in-a-haystack”
(NIAH) evaluation, but presents distinct new challenges. It requires models (1) to
utilize the contexts at a deeper level, rather than resorting to simple copying and
pasting; (2) to navigate through long streams of evolving topics and tasks, proxying
the complexities and dynamism of contexts in real-world scenarios. Additionally,
Task Haystack inherits the controllability of NIAH, providing model developers
with tools and visualizations to identify model vulnerabilities effectively.
We benchmark 14 long-context LMs using Task Haystack, finding that frontier
models like GPT-4o still struggle with the setting, failing on 15% of cases on
average. Most open-weight models further lack behind by a large margin, with
failure rates reaching up to 61%. In our controlled analysis, we identify factors
such as distraction and recency bias as contributors to these failure cases. Further,
performance declines when task instructions are paraphrased at test time or when
ICL demonstrations are repeated excessively, raising concerns about the robustness, instruction understanding, and true context utilization of long-context LMs.
We release our code and data to encourage future research that investigates and
addresses these limitations.1

1

Introduction

Recent advances in model architecture [Han et al., 2024, Su et al., 2024], hardware-aware optimization
[Dao et al., 2022, Liu et al., 2024b], training procedure [Tworkowski et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2024a],
and data engineering [Fu et al., 2024, An et al., 2024] have enabled large language models (LLMs)
to handle extended contexts, reaching up to 32 thousand tokens or even millions [Gemini Team,
2024, Anthropic, 2024]. These advancements have opened up new opportunities and potential use
∗
1

Equal Contribution.
§ INK-USC/Lifelong-ICL Ñ https://inklab.usc.edu/lifelong-icl

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

