Provable Posterior Sampling with Denoising Oracles
via Tilted Transport

Joan Bruna
New York University & Flatiron Institute
bruna@cims.nyu.edu

Jiequn Han
Flatiron Institute
jhan@simonsfoundation.org

Abstract
Score-based diffusion models have significantly advanced high-dimensional data
generation across various domains, by learning a denoising oracle (or score) from
datasets. From a Bayesian perspective, they offer a realistic modeling of data priors
and facilitate solving inverse problems through posterior sampling. Although many
heuristic methods have been developed recently for this purpose, they lack the
quantitative guarantees needed in many scientific applications. This work addresses
the topic from two perspectives. We first present a hardness result indicating that
a generic method leveraging the prior denoising oracle for posterior sampling
becomes infeasible as soon as the measurement operator is mildly ill-conditioned.
We next develop the tilted transport technique, which leverages the quadratic
structure of the log-likelihood in linear inverse problems in combination with
the prior denoising oracle to exactly transform the original posterior sampling
problem into a new one that is provably easier to sample from. We quantify the
conditions under which the boosted posterior is strongly log-concave, highlighting
how task difficulty depends on the condition number of the measurement matrix
and the signal-to-noise ratio. The resulting general scheme is shown to match
the best-known sampling methods for Ising models, and is further validated on
high-dimensional Gaussian mixture models.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems consist in reconstructing a signal of interest from noisy measurements. As such, they
are a central object of study across many scientific domains, including signal processing, imaging,
astrophysics or computational biology. In the common settings where the measurement information
is limited, a reliable solution for these problems usually depends on prior knowledge of the data.
One popular approach is to choose a regularizer that utilizes data properties such as smoothness or
sparseness, and then solve a regularized optimization problem to obtain a point estimate of the original
data. However, this approach often struggles with selecting an appropriate regularizer and might
be unstable in the presence of large measurement noise. A more robust approach takes a statistical
formulation and seeks to sample the posterior distribution of data based on Bayes’s theorem, which
allows for uncertainty quantification in the reconstructed data by leveraging a model for the prior data
distribution.
While accurate models for high-dimensional distributions are notoriously complex to estimate, the
resurgence of deep neural networks has provided unprecedented capabilities for modeling complex
data distributions in certain high-dimensional regimes. Specifically, score-based diffusion models
[55, 33, 58] have achieved remarkable empirical success in generating high-dimensional data across
various domains, including images, video, text, and audio. These models implicitly parameterize
data distributions through an iterative denoising process that builds up data from noise. Furthermore,
there is a growing literature developing theoretical foundations of score-based diffusion models
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

