Learning to Reason Iteratively and Parallelly for
Complex Visual Reasoning Scenarios

Shantanu Jaiswal1,2 Debaditya Roy2 Basura Fernando2,3 Cheston Tan2,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 IHPC, A*STAR Singapore
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR Singapore
Correspondence to: sjaiswa3@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Complex visual reasoning and question answering (VQA) is a challenging task
that requires compositional multi-step processing and higher-level reasoning capabilities beyond the immediate recognition and localization of objects and events.
Here, we introduce a fully neural Iterative and Parallel Reasoning Mechanism
(IPRM) that combines two distinct forms of computation – iterative and parallel –
to better address complex VQA scenarios. Specifically, IPRM’s “iterative" computation facilitates compositional step-by-step reasoning for scenarios wherein
individual operations need to be computed, stored, and recalled dynamically (e.g.
when computing the query “determine the color of pen to the left of the child in
red t-shirt sitting at the white table”). Meanwhile, its “parallel” computation
allows for the simultaneous exploration of different reasoning paths and benefits
more robust and efficient execution of operations that are mutually independent
(e.g. when counting individual colors for the query: “determine the maximum
occurring color amongst all t-shirts”). We design IPRM as a lightweight and
fully-differentiable neural module that can be conveniently applied to both transformer and non-transformer vision-language backbones. It notably outperforms
prior task-specific methods and transformer-based attention modules across various
image and video VQA benchmarks testing distinct complex reasoning capabilities
such as compositional spatiotemporal reasoning (AGQA), situational reasoning
(STAR), multi-hop reasoning generalization (CLEVR-Humans) and causal event
linking (CLEVRER-Humans). Further, IPRM’s internal computations can be
visualized across reasoning steps, aiding interpretability and diagnosis of its errors. Source code at: https://github.com/shantanuj/IPRM_Iterative_
and_Parallel_Reasoning_Mechanism

1

Introduction

Visual reasoning and question answering (VQA) at its core requires a model to identify relevant
visual operations, execute those operations, and then combine their results to make an inference.
Complex visual reasoning scenarios (depicted in fig. 1) are particularly challenging in this regard.
They require models to reason compositionally over a large number of reasoning steps and to engage
in a variety of higher-level reasoning operations such as causal linking, logical reasoning, and
spatiotemporal processing that extend beyond core perception capabilities. In this context, two
powerful computational priors exist – iterative and parallel. While each has its own limitations,
when combined, they can complement each other and effectively address the challenges of complex
VQA tasks. Specifically, iterative computation, wherein individual operations are identified and
composed in a step-by-step manner, is a beneficial prior for multi-step reasoning scenarios explored
by past VQA works [28, 25, 18]. However, pure iterative computation can exhibit limitations in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

