Classification Done Right for Vision-Language
Pre-Training

Zilong Huang

Qinghao Ye Bingyi Kang Jiashi Feng
ByteDance Research
Code & Models: x-cls/superclass

Haoqi Fan

Abstract
We introduce SuperClass, a super simple classification method for vision-language
pre-training on image-text data. Unlike its contrastive counterpart CLIP [57] who
contrast with a text encoder, SuperClass directly utilizes tokenized raw text as
supervised classification labels, without the need for additional text filtering or
selection. Due to the absence of the text encoding as contrastive target, SuperClass
does not require a text encoder and does not need to maintain a large batch size
as CLIP [57] does. SuperClass demonstrated superior performance on various
downstream tasks, including classic computer vision benchmarks and vision language downstream tasks. We further explored the scaling behavior of SuperClass
on model size, training length, or data size, and reported encouraging results and
comparisons to CLIP .

1

Introduction

Pretraining methodologies [35, 57, 51, 60] that directly harness web-scale image-text dataset have
transformed the field of computer vision in recent years. Among them, contrastive language image
pretraining (CLIP) [57] has gained escalading popularity and become predominant due to the following reasons. First, it serves as the industry-standard pre-trained model that facilitates zero-shot visual
recognition [50, 52] and finetuning on downstream tasks [19, 17]. Second, proper scaling behaviors [12] are observed such that CLIP can consistently benefit from larger models and bigger data to
some extent. Third, it offers strong cross-modal abilities as it is inherently designed to understand and
connect information across text and images. Therefore, CLIP-style models are the default choices
for most modern Visual Language Models [47, 2, 1], which connect a vision backbone with a deep
language model [69, 13].
Despite its success, CLIP necessitates very large batch sizes for training—typically over 64,000—to
achieve optimal performance, along with substantial computational resources for text encoding. This
high computational demand limits accessibility for researchers with limited resources and engineering
expertise. In our work, we aim to address the heavy computational burden by replacing contrastive
methodology with a simpler classification approach, eliminates the need for large contrastive batch
sizes, and text encoders.
In this work, we revisit the classification method for pretraining on large-scale text-image pairs. Some
previous works [54, 31, 39, 27, 51] attempt to tackle this by employing bag-of-words classification
in a weak supervised learning manner. However, most of these studies have been conducted on
a small scale, and there is no evidence demonstrating their scalability in terms of data and model
size. In contrast, our method demonstrates the performance of SuperClass on a scale comparable
to CLIP [57], achieving favorable model performance with 13 billion seen samples on 1 billion
unique text-image pairs. Some other concurrent efforts [31] have also attempted to replace contrastive
learning with classification. However, they rely heavily on preprocessing the text modality, using
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

