Learning to Balance Altruism and Self-interest Based
on Empathy in Mixed-Motive Games

Fanqi Kong2,1
1

Yizhe Huang2,1

Song-Chun Zhu1,2,3

Siyuan Qi1

Xue Feng B1

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
kfq20@stu.pku.edu.cn, fengxue@bigai.ai

Abstract
Real-world multi-agent scenarios often involve mixed motives, demanding altruistic agents capable of self-protection against potential exploitation. However,
existing approaches often struggle to achieve both objectives. In this paper, based
on that empathic responses are modulated by inferred social relationships between
agents, we propose LASE (Learning to balance Altruism and Self-interest based on
Empathy), a distributed multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm that fosters
altruistic cooperation through gifting while avoiding exploitation by other agents
in mixed-motive games. LASE allocates a portion of its rewards to co-players as
gifts, with this allocation adapting dynamically based on the social relationship
— a metric evaluating the friendliness of co-players estimated by counterfactual
reasoning. In particular, social relationship measures each co-player by comparing the estimated Q-function of current joint action to a counterfactual baseline
which marginalizes the co-player’s action, with its action distribution inferred by a
perspective-taking module. Comprehensive experiments are performed in spatially
and temporally extended mixed-motive games, demonstrating LASE’s ability to
promote group collaboration without compromising fairness and its capacity to
adapt policies to various types of interactive co-players.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has exhibited impressive performance in numerous
collaborative tasks and zero-sum games such as MPE, StarCraft, and Google Research Football
[19, 25, 38]. These environments involve a predefined competitive or cooperative relationship
between agents. Besides, mixed-motive games are prevalent, in which the relationships between
agents are non-deterministic and dynamic. That is, agents could cooperate with some co-players
and simultaneously compete with someone else. Furthermore, along with interactions, friends may
turn into foes, and vice versa. In such games, to maximize self-interest, agents need to cooperate
altruistically in some relationships while keep self-interested to avoid being exploited in some
others. Consequently, in mixed-motive environments, the ability to balance altruism and self-interest
according to social relationships is crucial for agent performance.
The commonly used CTDE (Centralized Training and Decentralized Execution) methods [31, 29]
in MARL focus on global optimization goals and necessitate individual information sharing with
centralized controllers, which is impractical for self-interest agents in mixed-motive games. On
the other hand, simply training self-interest agents in a decentralized way may converge to local
B

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

