DeeR-VLA: Dynamic Inference of Multimodal
Large Language Models for Efficient Robot Execution

Yang Yue∗ 1

Yulin Wang∗ 1
Shiji Song1

Bingyi Kang2
Jiashi Feng2

Yizeng Han1 Shenzhi Wang1
Gao Huang† 1

1
2
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
ByteDance
{le-y22, wang-yl19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated remarkable
comprehension and reasoning capabilities with complex language and visual data.
These advances have spurred the vision of establishing a generalist robotic MLLM
proficient in understanding complex human instructions and accomplishing various
embodied tasks. However, developing MLLMs for real-world robots is challenging
due to the typically limited computation and memory capacities available on robotic
platforms. In contrast, the inference of MLLMs involves storing billions of parameters and performing tremendous computation, imposing significant hardware
demands. In our paper, we seek to address this challenge by leveraging an intriguing observation: relatively easier situations make up the bulk of the procedure of
controlling robots to fulfill diverse tasks, and they generally require far smaller models to obtain the correct robotic actions. Motivated by this observation, we propose
a Dynamic Early-Exit Framework for Robotic Vision-Language-Action Model
(DeeR-VLA, or simply DeeR) that automatically adjusts the size of the activated
MLLM based on each situation at hand. The approach leverages a multi-exit architecture in MLLMs, which allows the model to terminate processing once a proper
size of the model has been activated for a specific situation, thus avoiding further
redundant computation. Additionally, we develop novel algorithms that establish
early-termination criteria for DeeR, conditioned on predefined demands such as average computational cost (i.e., power consumption), as well as peak computational
consumption (i.e., latency) and GPU memory usage. These enhancements ensure
that DeeR operates efficiently under varying resource constraints while maintaining
competitive performance. Moreover, we design a tailored training method for
integrating temporal information on top of such multi-exit architectures to predict actions reasonably. On the CALVIN robot manipulation benchmark, DeeR
demonstrates significant reductions in computational costs of LLM by 5.2-6.5x
and GPU memory of LLM by 2-6x without compromising performance. Code and
checkpoints are available at https://github.com/yueyang130/DeeR-VLA.

1

Introduction

The recent astonishing progress in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) has unveiled their
remarkable potential of extracting, aligning, and integrating the representations from complicated
language and visual data [1, 2, 3, 4]. These advances have spurred the vision of a generalist robot, i.e.,
an embodied agent equipped with vision-language comprehension and problem-solving capabilities,
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

