Bridge-IF: Learning Inverse Protein Folding with
Markov Bridges

Yiheng Zhu1 , Jialu Wu2 , Qiuyi Li3 , Jiahuan Yan1 , Mingze Yin4 , Wei Wu5 ,
Mingyang Li3 , Jieping Ye3 , Zheng Wang3∗, Jian Wu1,4,6∗
1
College of Computer Science & Technology and Liangzhu Laboratory, Zhejiang University
2
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University
3
Alibaba Cloud Computing
4
School of Public Health, Zhejiang University
5
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
6
The Second Affiliated Hospital Zhejiang University School of Medicine
{zhuyiheng2020, jialuwu, jyansir, yinmingze, wujian2000}@zju.edu.cn
{liqiuyi.lqy, sangheng.lmy, yejieping.ye, wz388779}@alibaba-inc.com
urara@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Inverse protein folding is a fundamental task in computational protein design,
which aims to design protein sequences that fold into the desired backbone structures. While the development of machine learning algorithms for this task has
seen significant success, the prevailing approaches, which predominantly employ
a discriminative formulation, frequently encounter the error accumulation issue
and often fail to capture the extensive variety of plausible sequences. To fill these
gaps, we propose Bridge-IF, a generative diffusion bridge model for inverse folding,
which is designed to learn the probabilistic dependency between the distributions of
backbone structures and protein sequences. Specifically, we harness an expressive
structure encoder to propose a discrete, informative prior derived from structures,
and establish a Markov bridge to connect this prior with native sequences. During
the inference stage, Bridge-IF progressively refines the prior sequence, culminating
in a more plausible design. Moreover, we introduce a reparameterization perspective on Markov bridge models, from which we derive a simplified loss function
that facilitates more effective training. We also modulate protein language models
(PLMs) with structural conditions to precisely approximate the Markov bridge
process, thereby significantly enhancing generation performance while maintaining
parameter-efficient training. Extensive experiments on well-established benchmarks demonstrate that Bridge-IF predominantly surpasses existing baselines in
sequence recovery and excels in the design of plausible proteins with high foldability. The code is available at https://github.com/violet-sto/Bridge-IF.

1

Introduction

Proteins are 3D folded linear chains of amino acids that execute the myriad of biological processes
fundamental to life, such as catalysing metabolic reactions, mediating immune responses, and
responding to stimuli [23]. Designing protein sequences that fold into desired 3D structures, known as
inverse protein folding, is a crucial task with great potential for applications in protein engineering [29,
66, 5]. Beyond long-established physics-based methods like Rosetta [2], the considerable promise
of leveraging geometric deep learning for protein structure modeling has given rise to an ongoing
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

