Learning diverse causally emergent representations
from time series data
David McSharry∗
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
dm2223@ic.ac.uk

Christos Kaplanis∗
Google DeepMind
kaplanis@google.com

Fernando E. Rosas
Sussex AI, University of Sussex
f.rosas@sussex.ac.uk

Pedro A.M. Mediano
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
p.mediano@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Cognitive processes usually take place at a macroscopic scale in systems characterised by emergent properties that make the whole ‘more than the sum of its parts.’
While recent proposals have provided quantitative, information-theoretic metrics
to detect emergence in time series data, it is often highly non-trivial to identify the
relevant macroscopic variables a priori. In this paper we leverage recent advances
in representation learning and differentiable information estimators to put forward
a data-driven method to find variables with emergent properties. The proposed
method successfully detects variables that exhibit emergent behaviour and recovers
the ground-truth emergence values in a synthetic dataset. Furthermore, we show
the method can be extended to learn multiple independent features, extracting a
diverse set of emergent quantities. We finally show that a modified method scales
to real experimental data from several brain activity datasets, paving the ground for
future analyses uncovering the emergent structure of cognitive representations in
biological and artificial intelligence systems.

1

Introduction

Cognitive processes usually take place in systems made of multiple interacting parts, e.g. neurons
composing the nervous system of an organism. Importantly, cognitive processes themselves don’t
seem to take place at a ‘microscopic’ level of individual units, but at ‘macroscopic’ levels involving
assemblies of several coordinated units [28]. Hence, when trying to unveil the inner workings of a
— natural or artificial — cognitive system, it is crucial to be able to identify relevant macroscopic
variables that best characterise the corresponding cognitive processes.
The identification of macroscopic variables has traditionally been driven by intuition and expert
knowledge. For example, the investigation of collective behaviour in statistical physics is based
on macroscopic variables known as ‘order parameters,’ which are typically identified heuristically
and then used to describe phase transitions and other phenomena of interest [49]. Unfortunately,
identifying relevant macroscopic variables is often more an art than a science, being heavily dependent
on prior knowledge and expectations. Having automated procedures to identify relevant macroscopic
variables of cognitive systems would open important avenues for investigating the inner workings of
different cognitive architectures.
A promising approach to identify empirically useful macroscopic variables is provided by unsupervised representation learning [38, 22, 52]. For example, information maximisation has proven to be
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

