Is O(log N) practical?
Near-Equivalence Between Delay Robustness and
Bounded Regret in Bandits and RL

Enoch H. Kang∗
Foster School of Business
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

P. R. Kumar
Electrical & Computer Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843

Abstract
Interactive decision making, encompassing bandits, contextual bandits, and reinforcement learning, has recently been of interest to theoretical studies of experimentation design and recommender system algorithm research. One recent finding
in this area is that the well-known Graves-Lai constant being zero is a necessary
and sufficient condition for achieving bounded (or constant) regret in interactive
decision-making. As this condition may be a strong requirement for many applications, the practical usefulness of pursuing bounded regret has been questioned.
In this paper, we show that the condition of the Graves-Lai constant being zero
is also necessary for a consistent algorithm to achieve delay model robustness
when reward delays are unknown (i.e., when feedback is anonymous). Here, model
robustness is measured in terms of ϵ-robustness, one of the most widely used and
one of the least adversarial robustness concepts in the robust statistics literature.
In particular, we show that ϵ-robustness cannot be achieved for a consistent (i.e.,
uniformly sub-polynomial regret) algorithm, however small the nonzero ϵ value is,
when the Grave-Lai constant is not zero. While this is a strongly negative result, we
also provide a positive result for linear rewards models (contextual linear bandits,
reinforcement learning with linear MDP) that the Grave-Lai constant being zero
is also sufficient for achieving bounded regret without any knowledge of delay
models, i.e., the best of both the efficiency world and the delay robustness world.

1

Introduction

We consider the cost of addressing stochastic and anonymous delayed rewards in Decision-Making
with Structured Observations (DMSO) [1, 2], which generalizes interactive decision-making problems,
such as structured bandits, contextual bandits, and reinforcement learning2 . In many real-life
applications of interactive decision-making problems, stochastic and unknown delays in reward make
it challenging to attribute the sequence of observed outcomes to previous decisions. In medical
treatments, for example, a doctor cannot easily be sure whether a medical outcome is due to the effect
of current treatment or due to some other previously taken treatment’s delayed effect. This type of
reward delay in decisions is called an ‘unknown reward delay’ [3] or ‘delayed anonymous feedback’
[4, 5]3 . Under this setting, the decision maker never observes the period information for which each
∗

ehwkang@uw.edu
One can refer to Appendix A (or [2, 1] for a more comprehensive, detailed description) to see how bandit,
contextual bandit, and episodic reinforcement learning problems can be described as DMSO problems.
3
Most previous studies focus on delayed, anonymous, and aggregated (DAAF) feedback, where only the
observe sum of the rewards arriving at each episode is observed. Here, we consider impossibility results for
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

