Autoregressive Image Diffusion: Generation of Image
Sequence and Application in MRI

Guanxiong Luo
University Medical Center Göttingen
guanxiong.luo@med.uni-goettingen.de

Shoujin Huang
Shenzhen Technology University

Martin Uecker
Graz University of Technology
uecker@tugraz.at

Abstract
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely used non-invasive imaging modality.
However, a persistent challenge lies in balancing image quality with imaging speed.
This trade-off is primarily constrained by k-space measurements, which traverse
specific trajectories in the spatial Fourier domain (k-space). These measurements
are often undersampled to shorten acquisition times, resulting in image artifacts and
compromised quality. Generative models learn image distributions and can be used
to reconstruct high-quality images from undersampled k-space data. In this work,
we present the autoregressive image diffusion (AID) model for image sequences
and use it to sample the posterior for accelerated MRI reconstruction. The algorithm
incorporates both undersampled k-space and pre-existing information. Models
trained with fastMRI dataset are evaluated comprehensively. The results show that
the AID model can robustly generate sequentially coherent image sequences. In
MRI applications, the AID can outperform the standard diffusion model and reduce
hallucinations, due to the learned inter-image dependencies. The project code is
available at https://github.com/mrirecon/aid.

1

Introduction

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive imaging modality widely used in clinical
practice to visualize soft tissue. Despite its utility, a persistent challenge in MRI is the trade-off
between image quality and imaging speed. The trade-off is influenced by the k-space (spatial Fourier
domain) measurements, which traverse spatial frequency data points along given sampling trajectories.
To reduce acquisition time, the k-space measurements are often undersampled, resulting in image
artifacts and reduced image quality.
In recent years, deep learning-based methods have emerged to improve image reconstruction in MRI.
These methods are formulated as an inverse problem building upon compressed sensing techniques
[1, 2] and benefit from the learned prior information instead of hand-crafted priors [3–5]. Another
successful approach involves learning an image prior parameterized by a generative neural network
[6, 7], which is then used as the learned and decoupled regularization on the image. Generative
priors offer flexibility in handling changes in the forward model and perform well in reconstructing
high-quality images from undersampled data.
Diffusion models [8–10], a class of generative models, have gained attention in recent years and
are making an impact in many fields, including MRI reconstruction [11, 12]. These models learn
to reverse a diffusion process that transforms random noise into structured images, producing high38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

