Cascade of phase transitions in the training of
Energy-based models

Dimitrios Bachtis1

Giulio Biroli1

Aurélien Decelle2,3

Beatriz Seoane2,3
1

Laboratoire de Physique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS,
Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université Paris Cité, F-75005 Paris, France.
2
Departamento de Física Teórica I, Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
3
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, INRIA Tau team, LISN, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the feature encoding process in a prototypical energybased generative model, the Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM). We start with
an analytical investigation using simplified architectures and data structures, and
end with numerical analysis of real trainings on real datasets. Our study tracks the
evolution of the model’s weight matrix through its singular value decomposition,
revealing a series of phase transitions associated to a progressive learning of the
principal modes of the empirical probability distribution. The model first learns
the center of mass of the modes and then progressively resolve all modes through
a cascade of phase transitions. We first describe this process analytically in a
controlled setup that allows us to study analytically the training dynamics. We then
validate our theoretical results by training the Binary-Binary RBM on real datasets.
By using datasets of increasing dimension, we show that learning indeed leads
to sharp phase transitions in the high-dimensional limit. Moreover, we propose
and test a mean-field finite-size scaling hypothesis. This shows that the first phase
transition is in the same universality class of the one we studied analytically,
and which is reminiscent of the mean-field paramagnetic-to-ferromagnetic phase
transition.

1

Introduction

In recent years, we have witnessed impressive improvements of unsupervised models capable of
generating more and more convincing artificial samples [1, 2, 3]. Although energy-based models [4]
and variational approaches [5] have been in use for decades, the emergence of generative adversarial
networks [6], followed by diffusion models [7], has significantly improved the quality of outputs.
Generative models are designed to learn the empirical distribution of datasets in a high-dimensional
space, where the dataset is represented as a Dirac-delta pointwise distribution. While different types
of difficulties are encounter when training these models, there is a general lack of understanding of
how the learning mechanism is driven by the considered dataset. This article explores the dynamics
of learning in neural networks, focusing on pattern formation. Understanding how this process
shapes the learned probability distribution is complex. Previous studies [8, 9] on the Restricted
Boltzmann Machine (RBM) [10] showed that the singular vectors of the weight matrix initially
evolve to align with the principal directions of the dataset, with similar results in a 3-layer Deep
Boltzmann Machine [11]. Additionally, an analysis using data from the 1D Ising model explained
weight formation in an RBM with a single hidden node as a reaction-diffusion process [12]. The
main contribution of this work is to demonstrate that the RBM undergoes a series of second-order
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

