First-Explore, then Exploit: Meta-Learning to Solve
Hard Exploration-Exploitation Trade-Offs

Ben Norman1,2
btnorman@cs.ubc.ca
1

Jeff Clune1,2,3
jclune@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
2
Vector Institute
3
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Standard reinforcement learning (RL) agents never intelligently explore like a
human (i.e. taking into account complex domain priors and adapting quickly based
on previous exploration). Across episodes, RL agents struggle to perform even
simple exploration strategies, for example systematic search that avoids exploring
the same location multiple times. This poor exploration limits performance on
challenging domains. Meta-RL is a potential solution, as unlike standard RL,
meta-RL can learn to explore, and potentially learn highly complex strategies far
beyond those of standard RL, strategies such as experimenting in early episodes to
learn new skills, or conducting experiments to learn about the current environment.
Traditional meta-RL focuses on the problem of learning to optimally balance exploration and exploitation to maximize the cumulative reward of the episode sequence
(e.g., aiming to maximize the total wins in a tournament – while also improving
as a player). We identify a new challenge with state-of-the-art cumulative-reward
meta-RL methods. When optimal behavior requires exploration that sacrifices
immediate reward to enable higher subsequent reward, existing state-of-the-art
cumulative-reward meta-RL methods become stuck on the local optimum of failing
to explore. Our method, First-Explore, overcomes this limitation by learning two
policies: one to solely explore, and one to solely exploit. When exploring requires
forgoing early-episode reward, First-Explore significantly outperforms existing
cumulative meta-RL methods. By identifying and solving the previously unrecognized problem of forgoing reward in early episodes, First-Explore represents
a significant step towards developing meta-RL algorithms capable of human-like
exploration on a broader range of domains.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [1] can perform challenging tasks, such as plasma control [2], molecule
design [3], game playing [4], and robotic control [5]. However, RL is sample inefficient (taking
thousands of episodes to learn tasks humans master in a few tries) [6], limiting its application. MetaRL [7–12] circumvents this issue by enabling an agent to adapt to new environments based solely
on prior experience (i.e., remembering what occurred in previous episodes and using that to inform
subsequent behavior). By replacing slow weight-based RL updates with memory-based meta-RL
adaption, human-like sample efficiency [12] can be achieved.
This paper focuses on cumulative-reward meta-RL, which aims to optimize performance across
a sequence of episodes, τ1 , . . . , τn (e.g., games in a tournament). The objective is to maximize
the total reward accumulated over all episodes (e.g., the number of games won), expressed as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

