On the cohesion and separability of average-link for
hierarchical agglomerative clustering

Eduardo S. Laber
Departmento de Informática, PUC-RIO
laber@inf.puc-rio.br

Miguel Batista
Departmento de Informática, PUC-RIO
miguel260503@gmail.com

Abstract
Average-link is widely recognized as one of the most popular and effective methods for building hierarchical agglomerative clustering. The available theoretical
analyses show that this method has a much better approximation than other popular
heuristics, as single-linkage and complete-linkage, regarding variants of Dasgupta’s
cost function [STOC 2016]. However, these analyses do not separate average-link
from a random hierarchy and they are not appealing for metric spaces since every
hierarchical clustering has a 1/2 approximation with regard to the variant of Dasgupta’s function that is employed for dissimilarity measures [Moseley and Yang
2020]. In this paper, we present a comprehensive study of the performance of
average-link in metric spaces, regarding several natural criteria that capture
separability and cohesion, and are more interpretable than Dasgupta’s cost function and its variants. We also present experimental results with real datasets that,
together with our theoretical analyses, suggest that average-link is a better choice
than other related methods when both cohesion and separability are important
goals.

1

Introduction

Clustering is the task of partitioning a set of objects/points so that similar ones are grouped together
while dissimilar ones are put in different groups. Clustering methods are widely used for exploratory
analysis and for reducing the computational resources required to handle large datasets.
Hierarchical clustering is an important class of clustering methods. Given a set of X of n points, a
hierarchical clustering is a sequence of clusterings (C n , C n−1 , . . . , C 1 ), where C n is a clustering with
n unitary clusters, each of them corresponding to a point in X , and the clustering C i , with i < n, is
obtained from C i+1 by replacing two of its clusters with their union Ai . A hierarchical clustering
induces a strictly binary tree with n leaves, where each leaf corresponds to a point in X and the ith
internal node, with i < n, is associated with the cluster Ai ; the points in Ai correspond to the leaves
of the subtree rooted in Ai . Hierarchical clustering methods are often taught in data science/ML
courses, are implemented in many machine learning libraries, such as scipy, and have applications
in different fields as evolution studies via phylogenetic trees [Eisen et al., 1998], finance [Tumminello
et al., 2010] and detection of closely related entities [Kobren et al., 2017, Monath et al., 2021].
Average-link is widely considered one of the most effective hierarchical clustering algorithms. It
belongs to the class of agglomerative methods, that is, methods that start with a set of n clusters,
corresponding to the n input points, and iteratively use a linkage rule to merge two clusters. Due to
its relevance, we can find some recent works dedicated to improving average-link’ efficiency and
scalability [Yu et al., 2021, Dhulipala et al., 2021, 2022, 2023] as well as recent theoretical work that
try to understand its success in practice [Cohen-Addad et al., 2019, Charikar et al., 2019a, Moseley
and Wang, 2023, Charikar et al., 2019b].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

