Unveiling the Bias Impact on Symmetric Moral
Consistency of Large Language Models
Warning:

this paper contains offensive and controversial content.

Ziyi Zhou1 , Xinwei Guo1 , Jiashi Gao1 , Xiangyu Zhao2 , Shiyao Zhang1 ,
Xin Yao3 , Xuetao Wei1 ∗
1
Southern University of Science and Technology
2
City University of Hong Kong 3 Lingnan University
{12011904,guoxw2023,12131101}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, xinyao@ln.edu.hk,
xy.zhao@cityu.edu.hk, {zhangsy,weixt}@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities, surpassing human experts in various benchmark tests and playing a vital role in various
industry sectors. Despite their effectiveness, a notable drawback of LLMs is their
inconsistent moral behavior, which raises ethical concerns. This work delves into
symmetric moral consistency in large language models and demonstrates that modern LLMs lack sufficient consistency ability in moral scenarios. Our extensive
investigation of twelve popular LLMs reveals that their assessed consistency scores
are influenced by position bias and selection bias rather than their intrinsic abilities.
We propose a new framework tSMC, which gauges the effects of these biases and
effectively mitigates the bias impact based on the Kullback–Leibler divergence
to pinpoint LLMs’ mitigated Symmetric Moral Consistency. We find that the
ability of LLMs to maintain consistency varies across different moral scenarios.
Specifically, LLMs show more consistency in scenarios with clear moral answers
compared to those where no choice is morally perfect. The average consistency
score of 12 LLMs ranges from 60.7% in high-ambiguity moral scenarios to 84.8%
in low-ambiguity moral scenarios.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are gaining popularity in society due to their exceptional ability to
perform various downstream tasks efficiently and effectively. Some models have surpassed human
experts in benchmark tests [1, 2]. Despite their impressive performance, previous research has raised
concerns about their responses in moral scenarios [3, 4], such as moral dilemmas [5] where two
or more conflicting moral imperatives but none of which overrides the other. Research has shown
potential risks with LLMs when supporting unethical or harmful behavior, which may lead users to
engage in harmful actions they would not have otherwise taken [6, 7]. Additionally, researchers have
expressed concerns about the potential confusion and uncertainty that LLMs could cause [8], which
could hurt users’ trust. Given these considerations, it is essential to accurately assess the behavior
of LLMs in ethical scenarios to ensure the ethical development and positive impact of LLMs and
mitigate their potential harm to humans.
Symmetric consistency, a type of logical consistency [9], implies that for a model M and options x and
y of a problem, M (x, y) = M (y, x), ensuring invariance to input text swaps. This characteristic is
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

