Propensity Score Alignment of
Unpaired Multimodal Data

Johnny Xi∗
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
johnny.xi@stat.ubc.ca

Jana Osea
Valence Labs
Montreal, Canada
jana@valencelabs.com

Zuheng (David) Xu ∗
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
zuheng.xu@stat.ubc.ca

Jason Hartford
Valence Labs
London, UK
jason@valencelabs.com

Abstract
Multimodal representation learning techniques typically require paired samples to
learn shared representations, but collecting paired samples can be challenging in
fields like biology, where measurement devices often destroy the samples. This
paper presents an approach to address the challenge of aligning unpaired samples
across disparate modalities in multimodal representation learning. We draw an
analogy between potential outcomes in causal inference and potential views in
multimodal observations, allowing us to leverage Rubin’s framework to estimate
a common space for matching samples. Our approach assumes experimentally
perturbed samples by treatments, and uses this to estimate a propensity score
from each modality. We show that the propensity score encapsulates all shared
information between a latent state and treatment, and can be used to define a
distance between samples. We experiment with two alignment techniques that
leverage this distance—shared nearest neighbours (SNN) and optimal transport
(OT) matching—and find that OT matching results in significant improvements
over state-of-the-art alignment approaches in on synthetic multi-modal tasks, in
real-world data from NeurIPS Multimodal Single-Cell Integration Challenge, and
on a single cell microscopy to expression prediction task.

1

Introduction

Large-scale multimodal representation learning techniques such as CLIP [Radford et al., 2021] have
lead to remarkable improvements in zero-shot classification performance and have enabled the recent
success in conditional generative models. However, the effectiveness of multimodal methods hinges
on the availability of paired samples—such as images and their associated captions—across data
modalities. This reliance on paired samples is most obvious in the InfoNCE loss [Gutmann and
Hyvärinen, 2010, van den Oord et al., 2018] used in CLIP [Radford et al., 2021] which explicitly
learns representations to maximize the true matching between images and their captions.
While paired image captioning data is abundant on the internet, paired multimodal data is often
challenging to collect in scientific experiments. For instance, unpaired data are the norm in biology
for technical reasons: RNA sequencing, protein expression assays, and the collection of microscopy
∗

Work done during an internship at Valence Labs

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

