Pedestrian-Centric 3D Pre-collision Pose and Shape
Estimation from Dashcam Perspective

Meijun Wang1 , Yu Meng1∗, Zhongwei Qiu2 , Chao Zheng1 , Yan Xu1 , Xiaorui Peng1 , Jian Gao3
1
University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
Alibaba DAMO Academy
3
Northwest University
drwmj@xs.ustb.edu.cn, myu@ustb.edu.cn, qiuzhongwei.qzw@alibaba-inc.com
{miniflash, b20160225, pxrw}@xs.ustb.edu.cn, gaojian1@stumail.nwu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pedestrian pre-collision pose is one of the key factors to determine the degree
of pedestrian-vehicle injury in collision. Human pose estimation algorithm is
an effective method to estimate pedestrian emergency pose from accident video.
However, the pose estimation model trained by the existing daily human pose
datasets has poor robustness under specific poses such as pedestrian pre-collision
pose, and it is difficult to obtain human pose datasets in the wild scenes, especially
lacking scarce data such as pedestrian pre-collision pose in traffic scenes. In this
paper, we collect pedestrian-vehicle collision pose from the dashcam perspective of
dashcam and construct the first Pedestrian-Vehicle Collision Pose dataset (PVCP)
in a semi-automatic way, including 40k+ accident frames and 20K+ pedestrian
pre-collision pose annotation (2D, 3D, Mesh). Further, we construct a Pedestrian
Pre-collision Pose Estimation Network (PPSENet) to estimate the collision pose
and shape sequence of pedestrians from pedestrian-vehicle accident videos. The
PPSENet first estimates the 2D pose from the image (Image to Pose, ITP) and
then lifts the 2D pose to 3D mesh (Pose to Mesh, PTM). Due to the small size of
the dataset, we introduce a pre-training model that learns the human pose prior
on a large number of pose datasets, and use iterative regression to estimate the
pre-collision pose and shape of pedestrians. Further, we classify the pre-collision
pose sequence and introduce pose class loss, which achieves the best accuracy
compared with the existing relevant state-of-the-art methods. Code and data are
available for research at https://github.com/wmj142326/PVCP.

1

Introduction

Pedestrian pre-collision pose refers to the emergency actions pedestrians take when facing potential
hazards before collision accidents, affecting both the severity of pedestrian injuries and subsequent
injury assessments (1). Using collision simulation software to reconstruct pedestrian-vehicle accidents
is a popular and effective method for analyzing pedestrian injuries (2; 3; 4; 5). However, the current
input for initial pose still relies on predefined gait sequence templates (6; 2; 3; 4; 5) or manual
measurement of pose angles from accident images, the former cannot represent the posture of
pedestrians in real accidents, and the latter is inefficient. Computer vision-based pedestrian pose
estimation methods can directly estimate pose information such as joint positions or limb angles from
images in real-time (7; 8; 9; 10; 11; 12; 13). Existing pose estimation methods are trained and applied
on multiple datasets for various scenarios, adapting to different downstream tasks. However, unlike
common poses, pedestrian pre-collision poses in traffic scenes are specific, with differences in spatial∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

