Controlling Continuous Relaxation for
Combinatorial Optimization

Yuma Ichikawa
Fujitsu Limited, Kanagawa, Japan
Department of Basic Science, University of Tokyo

Abstract
Unsupervised learning (UL)-based solvers for combinatorial optimization (CO)
train a neural network that generates a soft solution by directly optimizing the
CO objective using a continuous relaxation strategy. These solvers offer several
advantages over traditional methods and other learning-based methods, particularly for large-scale CO problems. However, UL-based solvers face two practical
issues: (I) an optimization issue, where UL-based solvers are easily trapped at
local optima, and (II) a rounding issue, where UL-based solvers require artificial
post-learning rounding from the continuous space back to the original discrete
space, undermining the robustness of the results. This study proposes a Continuous
Relaxation Annealing1 (CRA) strategy, an effective rounding-free learning method
for UL-based solvers. CRA introduces a penalty term that dynamically shifts
from prioritizing continuous solutions, effectively smoothing the non-convexity
of the objective function, to enforcing discreteness, eliminating artificial rounding.
Experimental results demonstrate that CRA significantly enhances the performance
of UL-based solvers, outperforming existing UL-based solvers and greedy algorithms in complex CO problems. Additionally, CRA effectively eliminates artificial
rounding and accelerates the learning process.

1

Introduction

The objective of combinatorial optimization (CO) problems is to find the optimal solution from a
discrete space, and these problems are fundamental in many real-world applications [Papadimitriou
and Steiglitz, 1998]. Most CO problems are NP-hard or NP-complete; making it challenging to solve
large-scale problems within feasible computational time. Traditional methods frequently depend
on heuristics to find approximate solutions, but they require considerable insights into the specific
problems. Alternatively, CO problems can be formulated as integer linear programming (ILP) and
solved using ILP solvers. However, ILP solvers lacks scalability for large-scaled problems.
Recently, several studies have used machine learning methods to handle CO problems by learning
heuristics. Most of these studies focus on supervised learning (SL)-based solvers [Hudson et al., 2021,
Joshi et al., 2019, Gasse et al., 2019, Selsam et al., 2018, Khalil et al., 2016], which require optimal
solutions to CO problems as supervision during training. However, obtaining optimal solutions is
challenging in practice, and SL-based solvers often fail to generalize well [Yehuda et al., 2020].
Reinforcement learning (RL)-based solvers [Yao et al., 2019, Chen and Tian, 2019, Yolcu and
Póczos, 2019, Nazari et al., 2018, Khalil et al., 2017, Bello et al., 2016] avoid the need for optimal
solutions but often suffer from notoriously unstable training due to poor gradient estimation and
hard explorations [Mnih et al., 2015, Tang et al., 2017, Espeholt et al., 2018]. Unsupervised learning
(UL)-based solvers [Schuetz et al., 2022a, Karalias and Loukas, 2020, Amizadeh et al., 2018] have
1

The code is available at https://github.com/Yuma-Ichikawa/CRA4CO.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

