Principled Bayesian Optimisation
in Collaboration with Human Experts

Wenjie Xu∗ ,1,2 , Masaki Adachi∗,3,4 , Colin N. Jones1 , Michael A. Osborne3 ,
1

Automatic Control Laboratory, EPFL 2 Urban Energy Systems Laboratory, Empa
3
Machine Learning Research Group, University of Oxford
4
Toyota Motor Corporation
{wenjie.xu, colin.jones}@epfl.ch, {masaki, mosb}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian optimisation for real-world problems is often performed interactively
with human experts, and integrating their domain knowledge is key to accelerate the
optimisation process. We consider a setup where experts provide advice on the next
query point through binary accept/reject recommendations (labels). Experts’ labels
are often costly, requiring efficient use of their efforts, and can at the same time be
unreliable, requiring careful adjustment of the degree to which any expert is trusted.
We introduce the first principled approach that provides two key guarantees. (1)
Handover guarantee: similar to a no-regret property, we establish a sublinear bound
on the cumulative number of experts’ binary labels. Initially, multiple labels per
query are needed, but the number of expert labels required asymptotically converges
to zero, saving both expert effort and computation time. (2) No-harm guarantee
with data-driven trust level adjustment: our adaptive trust level ensures that the
convergence rate will not be worse than the one without using advice, even if the
advice from experts is adversarial. Unlike existing methods that employ a userdefined function that hand-tunes the trust level adjustment, our approach enables
data-driven adjustments. Real-world applications empirically demonstrate that
our method not only outperforms existing baselines, but also maintains robustness
despite varying labelling accuracy, in tasks of battery design with human experts.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimisation (BO) [60, 65, 33] is a successful approach to black-box optimisation that has
been applied across a wide array of applications. BO is often praised for ‘taking the human out of
the loop’ [80] by automating laborious optimisation processes, such as hyperparameter optimisation
[29, 103] and neural architecture search [74, 99], thus relieving human users from these tasks.
Nonetheless, a growing trend involves the opposite direction, which brings humans back into the loop
and leverages human expertise as an adviser to the optimiser [7]. This human-in-the-loop approach
is particularly relevant to scientific and explorative tasks, such as materials discovery [24, 2] and
product design [48, 44, 7]. Experts have accumulated domain knowledge and should be helpful in
accelerating the optimisation process, yet their experience and knowledge are often qualitative—they
can struggle to express their knowledge in a functional form or to pinpoint the best candidates as
an absolute quantity [47]. At the forefront of science, experts are also in the middle of trial and
error; demanding well-defined and error-free inputs can limit the applicable range of BO. As such,
a human-AI collaborative setting in BO has emerged, driven by practical demands, and has been
gaining popularity in the literature [11, 43, 39, 50, 24, 7, 70, 12, 42].
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

