AverNet: All-in-one Video Restoration for
Time-varying Unknown Degradations

Haiyu Zhao1 , Lei Tian2 , Xinyan Xiao2 , Peng Hu1 , Yuanbiao Gou1∗, Xi Peng1,3∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China.
2
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China.
3
State Key Laboratory of Hydraulics and
Mountain River Engineering, Sichuan University, China.
{haiyuzhao.gm, penghu.ml, gouyuanbiao, pengx.gm}@gmail.com
{tianlei09, xiaoxinyan}@baidu.com

Abstract
Traditional video restoration approaches were designed to recover clean videos
from a specific type of degradation, making them ineffective in handling multiple
unknown types of degradation. To address this issue, several studies have been
conducted and have shown promising results. However, these studies overlook
that the degradations in video usually change over time, dubbed time-varying
unknown degradations (TUD). To tackle such a less-touched challenge, we propose
an innovative method, termed as All-in-one VidEo Restoration Network (AverNet), which comprises two core modules, i.e., Prompt-Guided Alignment (PGA)
module and Prompt-Conditioned Enhancement (PCE) module. Specifically, PGA
addresses the issue of pixel shifts caused by time-varying degradations by learning
and utilizing prompts to align video frames at the pixel level. To handle multiple unknown degradations, PCE recasts it into a conditional restoration problem
by implicitly establishing a conditional map between degradations and ground
truths. Thanks to the collaboration between PGA and PCE modules, AverNet
empirically demonstrates its effectiveness in recovering videos from TUD. Extensive experiments are carried out on two synthesized datasets featuring seven
types of degradations with random corruption levels. The code is available at
https://github.com/XLearning-SCU/2024-NeurIPS-AverNet.

1

Introduction

Video restoration aims to recover a high-quality video from a low-quality one that is corrupted by
degradations such as noise, blur, and compression artifacts. Over the past few years, numerous
studies [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] have been conducted, yielding promising performance in video restoration.
However, these methods typically require prior knowledge of the specific type of degradation to design
and train effective models, such as denoising, dehazing, and deblurring models [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
In practice, obtaining such prior knowledge in advance is challenging, especially when the data is
affected by multiple unknown types of degradation.
In the field of image restoration, efforts [13, 14, 15] have been made to restore images affected by
multiple unknown types of degradation using a unified model, which is known as all-in-one image
restoration (AIR) [16]. However, it is hard to achieve encouraging performance by simply applying
existing AIR methods to videos due to the neglect of temporal information, which leads to inferior
performance, as verified in our experiments. To favor all-in-one video restoration (AVR), a few
∗

Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

