Are Graph Neural Networks Optimal Approximation
Algorithms?

Morris Yau
MIT CSAIL
morrisy@mit.edu

Nikolaos Karalias
MIT CSAIL
stalence@mit.edu

Jessica Xu
Independent researcher formerly at MIT
jessica.peng.xu@gmail.com

Eric Lu
Harvard University
ericlu01@g.harvard.edu
Stefanie Jegelka
TUM∗ and MIT†
stefje@mit.edu

Abstract
In this work we design graph neural network architectures that capture optimal
approximation algorithms for a large class of combinatorial optimization problems, using powerful algorithmic tools from semidefinite programming (SDP).
Concretely, we prove that polynomial-sized message-passing GNN’s can learn the
most powerful polynomial time algorithms for Max Constraint Satisfaction Problems assuming the Unique Games Conjecture. We leverage this result to construct
efficient graph neural network architectures, OptGNN, that obtain high-quality
approximate solutions on landmark combinatorial optimization problems such
as Max-Cut, Min-Vertex-Cover, and Max-3-SAT. Our approach achieves strong
empirical results across a wide range of real-world and synthetic datasets against
solvers and neural baselines. Finally, we take advantage of OptGNN’s ability to
capture convex relaxations to design an algorithm for producing bounds on the
optimal solution from the learned embeddings of OptGNN.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial Optimization (CO) is the class of problems that optimize functions subject to constraints over discrete search spaces. They are often NP-hard to solve and to approximate, owing to
their typically exponential search spaces over nonconvex domains. Nevertheless, their important
applications in science and engineering (Gardiner et al., 2000; Zaki et al., 1997; Smith et al., 2004;
Du et al., 2017) has engendered a long history of study rooted in the following simple insight. In
practice, CO instances are endowed with domain-specific structure that can be exploited by specialized algorithms (Hespe et al., 2020; Walteros & Buchanan, 2019; Ganesh & Vardi, 2020). In this
context, neural networks are natural candidates for learning and then exploiting patterns in the data
distribution over CO instances.
The emerging field at the intersection of machine learning (ML) and combinatorial optimization (CO)
has led to novel algorithms with promising empirical results for several CO problems. However,
similar to classical approaches to CO, ML pipelines have to manage a tradeoff between efficiency
and optimality. Indeed, prominent works in this line of research forego optimality and focus on
parametrizing heuristics (Li et al., 2018; Khalil et al., 2017; Yolcu & Póczos, 2019; Chen & Tian,
2019) or by employing specialized models (Zhang et al., 2023; Nazari et al., 2018; Toenshoff et al.,
2019; Xu et al., 2021; Min et al., 2022) and task-specific loss functions (Amizadeh et al., 2018;
∗
†

CIT, MCML, MDSI
EECS and CSAIL

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

