VHELM: A Holistic Evaluation of Vision Language
Models
Tony Lee1∗ Haoqin Tu2∗ Chi Heem Wong1,3∗ Wenhao Zheng4 Yiyang Zhou4
Yifan Mai1 Josselin Somerville Roberts1 Michihiro Yasunaga1 Huaxiu Yao4
Cihang Xie2 Percy Liang1
1
2
Stanford University
University of California, Santa Cruz 3 Hitachi America, Ltd.
4
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill ⋆ Equal contribution

Abstract
Current benchmarks for assessing vision-language models (VLMs) often focus on
their perception or problem-solving capabilities and neglect other critical aspects
such as fairness, multilinguality, or toxicity. Furthermore, they differ in their
evaluation procedures and the scope of the evaluation, making it difficult to compare
models. To address these issues, we extend the HELM framework to VLMs to
present the Holistic Evaluation of Vision Language Models (VHELM). VHELM
aggregates various datasets to cover one or more of the 9 aspects: visual perception,
knowledge, reasoning, bias, fairness, multilinguality, robustness, toxicity, and
safety. In doing so, we produce a comprehensive, multi-dimensional view of the
capabilities of the VLMs across these important factors. In addition, we standardize
the standard inference parameters, methods of prompting, and evaluation metrics
to enable fair comparisons across models. Our framework is designed to be
lightweight and automatic so that evaluation runs are cheap and fast. Our initial
run evaluates 22 VLMs on 21 existing datasets to provide a holistic snapshot
of the models. We uncover new key findings, such as the fact that efficiencyfocused models (e.g., Claude 3 Haiku or Gemini 1.5 Flash) perform significantly
worse than their full models (e.g., Claude 3 Opus or Gemini 1.5 Pro) on the
bias benchmark but not when evaluated on the other aspects. For transparency,
we release the raw model generations and complete results on our website at
https://crfm.stanford.edu/helm/vhelm/v2.0.1. VHELM is intended to
be a living benchmark, and we hope to continue adding new datasets and models
over time.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) — models that take both text and images as a prompt and produce
text as output—have seen rapid growth and deployment in the past year. They are used in visual
question answering [35], text-driven image creation and alteration [26], image captioning [7], and
robotics [49]. Despite their prevalence, much remains unknown regarding their capabilities, limitations, and risks, particularly in the areas of contextual understanding, bias [10], ethics [40], and
safety [28].
Current benchmarks for VLMs assess the models only on a limited number of factors, often related
to their perception or problem-solving capabilities. Other factors, such as the ability to generate
contextually relevant and unbiased content, their performance across diverse linguistic and cultural
contexts, or their environmental impact, are less frequently studied. We refer readers to Table A1
for a comparison of the factors that the benchmarks assess. Aggregating multiple studies to create a
comprehensive picture of the VLMs is not straightforward. Firstly, each benchmark tests a limited,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

