Verified Code Transpilation with LLMs

Sahil Bhatia1

Niranjan Hasabnis2∗ Sanjit A. Seshia1 Alvin Cheung1
1
UC Berkeley 2 Code Metal
{sahilbhatia, jieq, sseshia, akcheung}@berkeley.edu
niranjan@codemetal.ai
Jie Qiu

Abstract
Domain-specific languages (DSLs) are integral to various software workflows.
Such languages offer domain-specific optimizations and abstractions that improve
code readability and maintainability. However, leveraging these languages requires
developers to rewrite existing code using the specific DSL’s API. While large
language models (LLMs) have shown some success in automatic code transpilation,
none of them provide any functional correctness guarantees on the transpiled
code. Another approach for automating this task is verified lifting, which relies
on program synthesis to find programs in the target language that are functionally
equivalent to the source language program. While several verified lifting tools have
been developed for various application domains, they are specialized for specific
source-target languages or require significant expertise in domain knowledge to
make the search efficient. In this paper, leveraging recent advances in LLMs, we
propose an LLM-based approach (LLML IFT) to building verified lifting tools. We
use the LLM’s capabilities to reason about programs to translate a given program
into its corresponding equivalent in the target language. Additionally, we use LLMs
to generate proofs for functional equivalence. We develop lifting-based compilers
for four different DSLs targeting different application domains. Our approach not
only outperforms previous symbolic-based tools in both the number of benchmarks
transpiled and transpilation time, but also requires significantly less effort to build.

1

Introduction

Domain-specific languages (DSLs) have gained popularity due to their ability to provide optimizations
and abstractions that improve code readability and performance in specific domains. Examples of
recent DSLs include Spark (distributed computing), NumPy (array processing), TACO (tensor
processing), and P4 (network packet processing). With new DSLs emerging for diverse application
domains and programming languages, developers often face the task of manually rewriting existing
code to incorporate these languages into their existing workflows. This manual rewriting process can
be tedious, may introduce bugs into the code, and may fail to preserve the semantics of the starting
code. This problem of transforming and compiling code from one programming language to another
is called transpilation. The question we address in this paper is: can large language models (LLMs)
correctly and automatically perform code transpilation?
A particularly useful form of code transpilation, termed lifting, involves translating code in a somewhat
lower-level, general-purpose language to equivalent code in a DSL. Lifting allows developers to port
code to DSLs from which efficient code can be generated for special-purpose hardware, such as
GPUs, machine learning accelerators, or network processors. Therefore, significant effort has been
dedicated to developing tools aimed at automating the task of lifting. Rule-based approaches rely
on traditional pattern-matching techniques [1]; however, describing these rules can be a complex,
∗

Work was done while at Intel Labs.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

