Neural Concept Binder

Wolfgang Stammer1,2,∗

Antonia Wüst1,∗
David Steinmann1,2,∗
1,2,3,4
Kristian Kersting
1
Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt; 2 Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI);
3
German Research Center for AI (DFKI); 4 Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
The challenge in object-based visual reasoning lies in generating concept representations that are both descriptive and distinct. Achieving this in an unsupervised
manner requires human users to understand the model’s learned concepts and,
if necessary, revise incorrect ones. To address this challenge, we introduce the
Neural Concept Binder (NCB), a novel framework for deriving both discrete and
continuous concept representations, which we refer to as “concept-slot encodings”.
NCB employs two types of binding: “soft binding”, which leverages the recent
SysBinder mechanism to obtain object-factor encodings, and subsequent “hard
binding”, achieved through hierarchical clustering and retrieval-based inference.
This enables obtaining expressive, discrete representations from unlabeled images.
Moreover, the structured nature of NCB’s concept representations allows for intuitive inspection and the straightforward integration of external knowledge, such as
human input or insights from other AI models like GPT-4. Additionally, we demonstrate that incorporating the hard binding mechanism preserves model performance
while enabling seamless integration into both neural and symbolic modules for
complex reasoning tasks. We validate the effectiveness of NCB through evaluations
on our newly introduced CLEVR-Sudoku dataset. Code and data at: project page.

1

Introduction

An essential aspect of visual reasoning is obtaining a proper conceptual understanding of the world by
learning visual concepts and processing these into a suitable representation (cf. Fig. 1). The majority
of current machine learning (ML) approaches that focus on visual concept-based processing utilize
forms of supervised [34, 68, 32, 84], weakly-supervised [41, 69, 49, 63, 8, 82] or text-guided [29]
learning of concepts. These approaches all require some form of additional (prior) knowledge about
the relevant domain. An attractive alternative, though much more challenging, is to learn concepts
in an unsupervised fashion. This comes with several challenges: (i) learning an expressive concept
representation without concept supervision is intrinsically difficult [40], and (ii) there is no guarantee
that learned concepts align with general domain knowledge [36, 85, 9] and (iii) can therefore be
utilized for complex downstream tasks. Moreover, (iv) to trust that the learned concept representations
are reliable for high stakes scenarios [15], it is necessary to make the model’s concept representations
human-inspectable and -revisable [68, 69, 31] (cf. Fig. 1 (left)).
These challenges raise questions about the nature of the unsupervised learned concept representations.
Continuous encodings [60, 59, 77, 79] are easier to learn and more expressive. However, they are
difficult to interpret and suffer from problems related to poor generalization [81] and information
leakage [47, 50]. On the other hand, discrete encodings [69, 79, 26, 4] are hard to learn [44, 72, 9],
but are easier to understand and thus align, e.g., to a task at hand.
∗

These authors share equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Wolfgang Stammer <wolfgang.stammer@cs.tu-darmstadt.de>.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

