Optimal Algorithms for Augmented Testing of Discrete
Distributions
Maryam Aliakbarpour
Rice University
Houston, TX
maryama@rice.edu

Piotr Indyk
MIT
Cambridge, MA
indyk@mit.edu

Ronitt Rubinfeld
MIT
Cambridge, MA
ronitt@csail.mit.edu

Sandeep Silwal
UW-Madison
Madison, WI
silwal@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of hypothesis testing for discrete distributions. In the
standard model, where we have sample access to an underlying distribution p,
extensive research has established optimal bounds for uniformity testing, identity
testing (goodness of fit), and closeness testing (equivalence or two-sample testing).
We explore these problems in a setting where a predicted data distribution, possibly
derived from historical data or predictive machine learning models, is available.
We demonstrate that such a predictor can indeed reduce the number of samples
required for all three property testing tasks. The reduction in sample complexity
depends directly on the predictor’s quality, measured by its total variation distance
from p. A key advantage of our algorithms is their adaptability to the precision of
the prediction. Specifically, our algorithms can self-adjust their sample complexity
based on the accuracy of the available prediction, operating without any prior
knowledge of the estimation’s accuracy (i.e. they are consistent). Additionally, we
never use more samples than the standard approaches require, even if the predictions
provide no meaningful information (i.e. they are also robust). We provide lower
bounds to indicate that the improvements in sample complexity achieved by our
algorithms are information-theoretically optimal. Furthermore, experimental results
show that the performance of our algorithms on real data significantly exceeds our
worst-case guarantees for sample complexity, demonstrating the practicality of our
approach.

1

Introduction

Property testing of distributions is a fundamental task that lies at the heart of many scientific endeavors:
Given sample access to an underlying unknown distribution p, the goal is to infer whether p has a
certain property or it is ϵ-far from any distribution that has the property (in some reasonable notion of
distance, such as total variation distance) with as few samples as possible. Over the past century [66],
this problem has been extensively explored in statistics, machine learning, and theoretical computer
science. Indeed, distribution testing (also called hypothesis testing) is now a major pillar of modern
learning theory and algorithmic statistics, with applications in learning mixtures of distributions
such as Gaussians, Poisson Binomial Distributions and robust learning [40, 45, 36, 75, 34, 45].
The framework has also been extensively studied under privacy [56, 14, 27, 18, 26, 3, 72, 50] and
low-memory constraints [8].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

