Universal Exact Compression of Differentially Private
Mechanisms
Yanxiao Liu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
yanxiaoliu@link.cuhk.edu.hk
Ayfer Özgür
Stanford University
aozgur@stanford.edu

Wei-Ning Chen
Stanford University
wnchen@stanford.edu

Cheuk Ting Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
ctli@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
To reduce the communication cost of differential privacy mechanisms, we introduce a novel construction, called Poisson private representation (PPR), designed
to compress and simulate any local randomizer while ensuring local differential
privacy. Unlike previous simulation-based local differential privacy mechanisms,
PPR exactly preserves the joint distribution of the data and the output of the original
local randomizer. Hence, the PPR-compressed privacy mechanism retains all desirable statistical properties of the original privacy mechanism such as unbiasedness
and Gaussianity. Moreover, PPR achieves a compression size within a logarithmic
gap from the theoretical lower bound. Using the PPR, we give a new order-wise
trade-off between communication, accuracy, central and local differential privacy
for distributed mean estimation. Experiment results on distributed mean estimation show that PPR consistently gives a better trade-off between communication,
accuracy and central differential privacy compared to the coordinate subsampled
Gaussian mechanism, while also providing local differential privacy.

1

Introduction

In modern data science, there is a growing dependence on large amounts of high-quality data, often
generated by edge devices (e.g., photos and videos captured by smartphones, or messages hosted by
social networks). However, this data inherently contains personal information, making it susceptible
to privacy breaches during acquisition, collection, or utilization. For instance, despite the significant
recent advancement in foundational models [9], studies have shown that these models can accidentally
memorize their training data. This poses a risk where malicious users, even with just API access, can
extract substantial portions of sensitive information [14, 15]. In recent years, differential privacy (DP)
[28] has emerged as a powerful framework for safeguarding users’ privacy by ensuring that local data
is properly randomized before leaving users’ devices. Apart from privacy concerns, communicating
local data from edge devices to the central server often becomes a bottleneck in the system pipeline,
especially with high-dimensional data common in many machine learning scenarios. This leads to
the following fundamental question: how can we efficiently communicate privatized data?
Recent works have shown that a wide range of differential privacy mechanisms can be “simulated”
and “compressed” using shared randomness, resulting in a “compressed mechanism” which has
a smaller communication cost compared to the original mechanism, while retaining the (perhaps
slightly weakened) privacy guarantee. This can be done via rejection sampling [31], importance
sampling [71, 78], or dithered quantization [56, 72, 46, 49, 80] with each approach having its own
advantages and disadvantages. For example, importance-sampling-based methods [71, 78] and the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

