Assembly Fuzzy Representation on Hypergraph
for Open-Set 3D Object Retrieval

1

Yang Xu1 , Yifan Feng1 , Jun Zhang2 , Jun-Hai Yong1 , and Yue Gao1∗
BNRist, THUIBCS, KLISS, BLBCI, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
2
Tencent AI Lab
{xuyang9610,evanfeng97}@gmail.com, junejzhang@tencent.com,
{yongjh,gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The lack of object-level labels presents a significant challenge for 3D object retrieval in the open-set environment. However, part-level shapes of objects often
share commonalities across categories but remain underexploited in existing retrieval methods. In this paper, we introduce the Hypergraph-Based Assembly Fuzzy
Representation (HAFR) framework, which navigates the intricacies of open-set 3D
object retrieval through a bottom-up lens of Part Assembly. To tackle the challenge
of assembly isomorphism and unification, we propose the Hypergraph Isomorphism
Convolution (HIConv) for smoothing and adopt the Isomorphic Assembly Embedding (IAE) module to generate assembly embeddings with geometric-semantic
consistency. To address the challenge of open-set category generalization, our
method employs high-order correlations and fuzzy representation to mitigate distribution skew through the Structure Fuzzy Reconstruction (SFR) module, by
constructing a leveraged hypergraph based on local certainty and global uncertainty
correlations. We construct three open-set retrieval datasets for 3D objects with partlevel annotations: OP-SHNP, OP-INTRA, and OP-COSEG. Extensive experiments
and ablation studies on these three benchmarks show our method outperforms
current state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

With the growing accessibility of 3D data, 3D object retrieval (3DOR) has emerged as an important
area of interest in computer vision [19, 12]. The key objective of 3DOR is to establish connections
between query and target samples via model training. Despite significant progress in recent years
enhancing the development of 3DOR, most existing methods are still based on the closed-set assumption, where all categories encountered in the testing phase have been seen during training [6].
However, training sets can not cover all potential categories in real-world applications [32], which
hinders accurate retrieval for unseen categories. Although object-level categories are difficult to
cover, the part-level shapes of objects across object-level categories often share commonalities [17]
among objects, which may provide sufficient semantic information of the object [29, 33]. However,
this part-level method still remains underexploited on assembly-based representation for open-set
retrieval.
3D parts, as essential components in shape representation and analysis, have the capability to represent
potential information for both semantic [30] and geometric [25] level tasks. Recently, there has
been an increasing application of assembly-based methods in the realm of 3D vision [24, 37]. From
a geometric perspective, current methods for 3D part assembly impose strict constraints on the
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

