Slot State Space Models

Jindong Jiang∗
Rutgers University

Fei Deng
Rutgers University

Gautam Singh
Rutgers University

Minseung Lee
KAIST

Sungjin Ahn∗
KAIST

Abstract
Recent State Space Models (SSMs) such as S4, S5, and Mamba have shown remarkable computational benefits in long-range temporal dependency modeling.
However, in many sequence modeling problems, the underlying process is inherently modular and it is of interest to have inductive biases that mimic this modular
structure. In this paper, we introduce SlotSSMs, a novel framework for incorporating independent mechanisms into SSMs to preserve or encourage separation
of information. Unlike conventional SSMs that maintain a monolithic state vector, SlotSSMs maintains the state as a collection of multiple vectors called slots.
Crucially, the state transitions are performed independently per slot with sparse
interactions across slots implemented via the bottleneck of self-attention. In experiments, we evaluate our model in object-centric learning, 3D visual reasoning, and
long-context video understanding tasks, which involve modeling multiple objects
and their long-range temporal dependencies. We find that our proposed design
offers substantial performance gains over existing sequence modeling methods.
Project page is available at https://slotssms.github.io/

1

Introduction

State space models (SSMs) have recently emerged as a promising class of sequence models, achieving
remarkable success in language modeling [27, 58, 24, 50, 9] due to their long-term memory capability
and computational efficiency. Compared to Transformers [4] whose attention mechanisms also
facilitate capturing long-range dependencies, SSMs are more efficient during both training and
inference. Notably, SSMs offer parallel training with sub-quadratic complexity, and recurrent
generation with constant cost per time step. These benefits have motivated the application of SSMs
to sequences of other modalities such as audio [19] and video [10].
Typically, SSMs use a monolithic state vector to summarize all past information. This design can
struggle to model sequences with modular underlying structures, which are common in physical
processes and real-world dynamics. For example, physical objects largely follow independent
dynamics based on their own properties, with strong interactions happening only sparsely (e.g., when
objects come in close contact). A monolithic state vector would excessively entangle the dynamics of
different entities, thereby hurting generalization. It could be beneficial to incorporate inductive biases
for independent mechanisms [20] into the sequence modeling architecture.
Recent progress in object-centric learning [46, 54, 36] has led to several methods for discovering
modular object-centric structures and modeling their dynamics from videos with no or only weak
supervision [39, 13, 57]. Similar to RIMs [20], they build modularity into the RNN architecture
to separately keep track of the dynamics of each object. However, RNNs are prone to vanishing
∗

Correspondence to jindong.jiang@rutgers.edu and sungjin.ahn@kaist.ac.kr.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

