Not so griddy: Internal representations of RNNs path
integrating more than one agent

William T. Redman∗
Intelligent Systems Center
Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory
Santiago Acosta−Mendoza
Dynamical Neuroscience
University of California, Santa Barbara

Francisco Acosta
Department of Physics
University of California, Santa Barbara

Nina Miolane
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of California, Santa Barbara

Abstract
Success in collaborative and competitive environments, where agents must work
with or against each other, requires individuals to encode the position and trajectory
of themselves and others. Decades of neurophysiological experiments have shed
light on how brain regions [e.g., medial entorhinal cortex (MEC), hippocampus]
encode the self’s position and trajectory. However, it has only recently been discovered that MEC and hippocampus are modulated by the positions and trajectories of
others. To understand how encoding spatial information of multiple agents shapes
neural representations, we train a recurrent neural network (RNN) model that captures properties of MEC to path integrate trajectories of two agents simultaneously
navigating the same environment. We find significant differences between these
RNNs and those trained to path integrate only a single agent. At the individual
unit level, RNNs trained to path integrate more than one agent develop weaker
grid responses, stronger border responses, and tuning for the relative position of
the two agents. At the population level, they develop more distributed and robust
representations, with changes in network dynamics and manifold topology. Our
results provide testable predictions and open new directions with which to study
the neural computations supporting spatial navigation.

1

Introduction

When navigating real-world environments, individual agents (e.g., animals) must adjust their trajectories based on the observed trajectories of others [1, 2]. This becomes especially important in
competitive and collaborative settings, where the positions, movement directions, and speeds of others
contain information necessary for goal-based decision making. For example, an agent competing with
others for food must keep track of where “opponent” agents are and where they are headed, in order
to effectively update its strategy. While decades of research has shed fundamental light on the neural
circuitry involved in spatial navigation in the absence of others (“single agent” navigation), little is
known about how the brain enables spatial navigation in the more general “multi-agent” scenario.
A core component of spatial navigation is path integration [3], the ability to update an estimate
of position in an environment from a sequence of movement directions and speeds (Fig. 1A).
Medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) is believed to play a critical role in supporting path integration
via functional classes of neurons [4], such as grid cells [5, 6], border cells [7], and band cells [8].
Recent research has shown that MEC is activated when human subjects observe others navigate
∗

will.redman@jhuapl.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

