Breaking the False Sense of Security in Backdoor
Defense through Re-Activation Attack

Mingli Zhu1 Siyuan Liang2 Baoyuan Wu1∗
1
School of Data Science,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, P.R. China
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore

Abstract
Deep neural networks face persistent challenges in defending against backdoor
attacks, leading to an ongoing battle between attacks and defenses. While existing
backdoor defense strategies have shown promising performance on reducing attack
success rates, can we confidently claim that the backdoor threat has truly been
eliminated from the model? To address it, we re-investigate the characteristics of
the backdoored models after defense (denoted as defense models). Surprisingly, we
find that the original backdoors still exist in defense models derived from existing
post-training defense strategies, and the backdoor existence is measured by a novel
metric called backdoor existence coefficient. It implies that the backdoors just lie
dormant rather than being eliminated. To further verify this finding, we empirically
show that these dormant backdoors can be easily re-activated during inference stage,
by manipulating the original trigger with well-designed tiny perturbation using universal adversarial attack. More practically, we extend our backdoor re-activation to
black-box scenario, where the defense model can only be queried by the adversary
during inference stage, and develop two effective methods, i.e., query-based and
transfer-based backdoor re-activation attacks. The effectiveness of the proposed
methods are verified on both image classification and multimodal contrastive learning (i.e., CLIP) tasks. In conclusion, this work uncovers a critical vulnerability that
has never been explored in existing defense strategies, emphasizing the urgency of
designing more robust and advanced backdoor defense mechanisms in the future.

1

Introduction

The pervasive application of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) across safety-critical domains like facial
recognition and autonomous driving [23, 36] has underlined their significance and profound impact
in industrial and academic spheres. Despite their transformative potential, DNNs are known to be
vulnerable to malicious threats [5, 27], which compromise the integrity and reliability of advanced
systems. One of the representative threats is backdoor attacks [18, 31], where an adversary pre-defines
a "trigger" and embeds it within limited training data such that the backdoored model will misclassify
trigger-containing inputs into specific target categories while appropriately processing benign inputs.
A successful backdoor attack consists of two stages: (1) the embedding of the backdoor within the
model during training; and (2) its subsequent activation during inference stage [62]. To identify [14]
and mitigate the harmful impacts of backdoor attacks, substantial efforts have been made ranging
from dataset segmentation [7, 50], trigger inversion [53, 56], model pruning [64, 71], and fine-tuning
based defenses [30, 67]. While these existing defense mechanisms aim at decreasing the attack
success rates (ASR) [59] of corresponding backdoored models, a fundamental question arises: can
∗

Corresponds to Baoyuan Wu (wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

