DDK: Distilling Domain Knowledge for Efficient
Large Language Models

Jiaheng Liu*†,1 , Chenchen Zhang*2 , Jinyang Guo3 , Yuanxing Zhang2 , Haoran Que1 ,
Ken Deng1 , Zhiqi Bai1 , Jie Liu4 , Ge Zhang5 , Jiakai Wang2 , Yanan Wu1 , Congnan Liu1 ,
Jiamang Wang2 , Lin Qu2 , Wenbo Su1 , Bo Zheng1
1
Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 The University of Sydney,
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 5 University of Waterloo
{ljh411989}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Despite the advanced intelligence abilities of large language models (LLMs) in
various applications, they still face significant computational and storage demands.
Knowledge Distillation (KD) has emerged as an effective strategy to improve the
performance of a smaller LLM (i.e., the student model) by transferring knowledge
from a high-performing LLM (i.e., the teacher model). Prevailing techniques in
LLM distillation typically use a black-box model API to generate high-quality
pretrained and aligned datasets, or utilize white-box distillation by altering the
loss function to better transfer knowledge from the teacher LLM. However, these
methods ignore the knowledge differences between the student and teacher LLMs
across domains. This results in excessive focus on domains with minimal performance gaps and insufficient attention to domains with large gaps, reducing
overall performance. In this paper, we introduce a new LLM distillation framework
called DDK, which dynamically adjusts the composition of the distillation dataset
in a smooth manner according to the domain performance differences between
the teacher and student models, making the distillation process more stable and
effective. Extensive evaluations show that DDK significantly improves the performance of student models, outperforming both continuously pretrained baselines
and existing knowledge distillation methods by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) such as LLaMA [7, 9, 58, 59] have
garnered significant attention due to their strong intelligence. However, these models also impose
considerable computational and storage demands, particularly in practical deployments such as instant
chat, copilot, and query rewriting. Consequently, the development of lightweight yet efficacious
LLMs suitable for real-world applications has become an area of increasing research interest. Several
small-scale LLMs, e.g., Phi [39] and MiniCPM [32], have been designed to facilitate rapid inference
on devices with limited resources. These models are generally trained from scratch using a large
volume of selectively curated high-quality datasets, which could be prohibitive for the broader
research community. Meanwhile, there has been a surge in the exploration of model compression
techniques [40] to reduce the resource footprint of LLMs. Apart from these techniques, knowledge
distillation (KD) emerges as a prominent method for creating effective neural networks, which transfer
knowledge from a high-performing teacher model to a compact student model.
* First two authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding Author: Jiaheng Liu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

