Sparsity-Agnostic Linear Bandits
with Adaptive Adversaries

Tianyuan Jin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
National University of Singapore
Singapore
tianyuan@nus.edu.sg

Kyoungseok Jang
Dipartimento di Informatica
Università degli Studi di Milano
Milano, Italy
ksajks@gmail.com

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Università degli Studi di Milano
Politecnico di Milano
Milano, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

Abstract
We study stochastic linear bandits where, in each round, the learner receives a set
of actions (i.e., feature vectors), from which it chooses an element and obtains a
stochastic reward. The expected reward is a fixed but unknown linear function of
the chosen action. We study sparse regret bounds, that depend on the number S
of non-zero coefficients in the linear reward function. Previous works focused on
the case where S is known, or the action sets satisfy additional assumptions. In
this work, we obtain the first sparse regret bounds that hold when S is unknown
and the action sets are adversarially generated. Our techniques combine online to
confidence set conversions with a novel randomized model selection approach over
a hierarchy of nested confidence sets. When S is known, our analysis recovers
state-of-the-art bounds for adversarial action sets. We also show that a variant of
our approach, using Exp3 to dynamically select the confidence sets, can be used to
improve the empirical performance of stochastic linear bandits while enjoying a
regret bound with optimal dependence on the time horizon.

1

Introduction

K-armed bandits are a basic model of sequential decision-making in which a learner sequentially
chooses which arm to pull in a set of K arms. After each pull, the learner only observes the reward
returned by the chosen arm. After T pulls, the learner must obtain a total reward as close as possible
to the reward obtained by always pulling the overall best arm. Linear bandits extend K-armed bandits
to a setting in which arms belong to a d-dimensional feature space. In each round t of a linear
bandit problem, the learner receives an action set At ⊂ Rd from the environment, chooses an arm
At ∈ At based on the past observations, and then receives a reward Xt . In this work, we consider
the stochastic setting in which rewards are defined by Xt = ⟨θ∗ , At ⟩ + εt , where θ∗ ∈ Rd is a fixed
latent parameter and εt is zero-mean independent noise. In linear bandits, the learner’s goal is to
minimize the difference between the total reward obtained by pulling in each round t the arm a ∈ At
maximizing ⟨θ∗ , a⟩ and the total reward obtained by the learner.
√
In stochastic linear bandits, the regret after T rounds is known to be of order d T up to logarithmic
factors. The linear dependence on the number d of features implies that the learner is better off
by ignoring features corresponding to negligible components of the latent target vector θ∗ . Hence,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

