On the Parameter Identifiability of Partially Observed
Linear Causal Models
Xinshuai Dong1 * Ignavier Ng1 * Biwei Huang2 Yuewen Sun3 Songyao Jin3
Roberto Legaspi4 Peter Spirtes1 Kun Zhang1,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of California San Diego
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 4 KDDI Research

Abstract
Linear causal models are important tools for modeling causal dependencies and yet
in practice, only a subset of the variables can be observed. In this paper, we examine
the parameter identifiability of these models by investigating whether the edge coefficients can be recovered given the causal structure and partially observed data. Our
setting is more general than that of prior research—we allow all variables, including
both observed and latent ones, to be flexibly related, and we consider the coefficients of all edges, whereas most existing works focus only on the edges between
observed variables. Theoretically, we identify three types of indeterminacy for the
parameters in partially observed linear causal models. We then provide graphical
conditions that are sufficient for all parameters to be identifiable and show that some
of them are provably necessary. Methodologically, we propose a novel likelihoodbased parameter estimation method that addresses the variance indeterminacy in a
specific way and can asymptotically recover the underlying parameters up to trivial
indeterminacy. Empirical studies on both synthetic and real-world datasets validate
our identifiability theory and the effectiveness of the proposed method in the finitesample regime. Code: https://github.com/dongxinshuai/scm-identify.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Causal models, which serve as a fundamental tool to capture causal relations among random variables,
have achieved great success in many fields [49, 39, 40, 44]. A fundamental problem in the field is how
and to what extent can we identify the underlying causal model given observational data. When all
variables are observed, the problem has been well studied: the underlying structure can be identified
up to the Markov equivalence class, e.g., by the PC [49] or GES [13] algorithm; when the structure is
given, the causal coefficient (direct causal effect) between two variables can also be identified [8, 39].
However, in real-world systems, the variables of interest may only be partially observed. Thus, considerable efforts have been dedicated to identification of causal models in the presence of latent variables.
One line of research focuses on structure learning given partially observed variables. Notable approaches include FCI and its variants [49, 38, 14, 2], as well as ICA-based [23, 43], tetrad-based [48,
28], high-order moments-based [46, 11, 58, 1, 12], and rank constraint-based [48, 24, 18] methods.
In this paper, we focus on the the identification of parameters of a partially observed model. Specifically, given the causal structure of and observational data from a partially observed causal model, we
are interested in identifying all the parameters, and thus the underlying causal model can be fully
specified. To identify the parameters, a classical way is to project the directed acyclic graph (DAG)
with latent variables to an acyclic directed mixed graph (ADMG) or partially ancestral graph [42],
without explicitly modeling the latent confounders. Based on ADMG, graphical criteria such as halftrek [20], G-criterion [9], and some further developments [51, 29] have been proposed to establish the
parameter identifiability. Another way is to leverage do-calculus, proxy variables, and instrumental
*Equal contribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

