Visual Autoregressive Modeling: Scalable Image
Generation via Next-Scale Prediction
Keyu Tian1,2 ,

Yi Jiang2,† ,

Zehuan Yuan2,∗ ,

Bingyue Peng2 ,

Liwei Wang1,3,∗

1

Center for Data Science, Peking University 2 Bytedance Inc.
3
State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, School of
Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
keyutian@stu.pku.edu.cn, jiangyi.enjoy@bytedance.com,
yuanzehuan@bytedance.com, bingyue.peng@bytedance.com, wanglw@pku.edu.cn

Try and explore our online demo at: https://var.vision
Codes and models: https://github.com/FoundationVision/VAR

Figure 1: Generated samples from Visual AutoRegressive (VAR) transformers trained on ImageNet. We
show 512×512 samples (top), 256×256 samples (middle), and zero-shot image editing results (bottom).

Abstract
We present Visual AutoRegressive modeling (VAR), a new generation paradigm
that redefines the autoregressive learning on images as coarse-to-fine “next-scale
prediction” or “next-resolution prediction”, diverging from the standard raster-scan
“next-token prediction”. This simple, intuitive methodology allows autoregressive
(AR) transformers to learn visual distributions fast and can generalize well: VAR,
for the first time, makes GPT-style AR models surpass diffusion transformers in
image generation. On ImageNet 256×256 benchmark, VAR significantly improve
AR baseline by improving Fréchet inception distance (FID) from 18.65 to 1.73,
inception score (IS) from 80.4 to 350.2, with 20× faster inference speed. It is
also empirically verified that VAR outperforms the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) in
multiple dimensions including image quality, inference speed, data efficiency, and
scalability. Scaling up VAR models exhibits clear power-law scaling laws similar to
those observed in LLMs, with linear correlation coefficients near −0.998 as solid
evidence. VAR further showcases zero-shot generalization ability in downstream
tasks including image in-painting, out-painting, and editing. These results suggest
VAR has initially emulated the two important properties of LLMs: Scaling Laws
and zero-shot generalization. We have released all models and codes to promote
the exploration of AR/VAR models for visual generation and unified learning.
∗

corresponding authors: wanglw@pku.edu.cn, yuanzehuan@bytedance.com; †: project lead

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

