ProTransformer: Robustify Transformers via
Plug-and-Play Paradigm

Zhichao Hou1
1

Weizhi Gao1

Yuchen Shen2

Feiyi Wang3

Xiaorui Liu1 ∗

North Carolina State University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Oak Ridge National Laboratory
{zhou4,wgao23,xliu96}@ncsu.edu yuchens3@cs.cmu.edu fwang2@ornl.gov

Abstract
Transformer-based architectures have dominated various areas of machine learning
in recent years. In this paper, we introduce a novel robust attention mechanism
designed to enhance the resilience of transformer-based architectures. Crucially,
this technique can be integrated into existing transformers as a plug-and-play layer,
improving their robustness without the need for additional training or fine-tuning.
Through comprehensive experiments and ablation studies, we demonstrate that
our ProTransformer significantly enhances the robustness of transformer models
across a variety of prediction tasks, attack mechanisms, backbone architectures,
and data domains. Notably, without further fine-tuning, the ProTransformer consistently improves the performance of vanilla transformers by 19.5%, 28.3%, 16.1%,
and 11.4% for BERT, ALBERT, DistilBERT, and RoBERTa, respectively, under
the classical TextFooler attack. Furthermore, ProTransformer shows promising
resilience in large language models (LLMs) against prompting-based attacks, improving the performance of T5 and LLaMA by 24.8% and 17.8%, respectively, and
enhancing Vicuna by an average of 10.4% against the Jailbreaking attack. Beyond
the language domain, ProTransformer also demonstrates outstanding robustness in
both vision and graph domains. Our code is available at https://github.com/chrishzc/ProTransformer.

1

Introduction

In recent years, attention mechanisms and transformer-based architectures have drawn significant
attention across many domains in machine learning, such as natural language processing (NLP) [1, 2],
computer vision [3, 4], and graph learning [5, 6]. In particular, transformers have demonstrated
superior capabilities to learn and model complex relations in data through powerful and universal
attention mechanisms, and they have dominated many popular NLP tasks such as topic classification,
sentiment analysis, textual entailment, machine translation, dialogue generation, etc [2]. Despite their
success in NLP and beyond, many recent studies have demonstrated that transformers are highly
vulnerable to adversarial attacks such that even small modifications to the input can easily fool the
model [7, 8, 9]. However, most research on transformer architectures focuses on accuracy and
efficiency, largely ignoring their security and robustness [10, 11].
With the increasing popularity of Large Language Models (LLMs) [12, 13], the robustness and
security concerns of transformer architectures become particularly of interest. It has been shown
that malicious attackers can invade the language models through various approaches as shown in
Figure 1. The attacker can modify the input content in text attacks [14] or the prompt template in
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

