Instance-Optimal Private Density Estimation in the
Wasserstein Distance
Vitaly Feldman

Audra McMillan

Satchit Sivakumar∗

Kunal Talwar

Apple

Apple

Boston University

Apple

Abstract
Estimating the density of a distribution from samples is a fundamental problem
in statistics. In many practical settings, the Wasserstein distance is an appropriate
error metric for density estimation. For example, when estimating population densities in a geographic region, a small Wasserstein distance means that the estimate
is able to capture roughly where the population mass is. In this work we study
differentially private density estimation in the Wasserstein distance. We design
and analyze instance-optimal algorithms for this problem that can adapt to easy
instances.
For distributions P over R, we consider a strong notion of instance-optimality:
an algorithm that uniformly achieves the instance-optimal estimation rate is competitive with an algorithm that is told that the distribution is either P or QP for
some distribution QP whose probability density function (pdf) is within a factor
of 2 of the pdf of P . For distributions over R2 , we use a different notion of instance optimality. We say that an algorithm is instance-optimal if it is competitive
with an algorithm that is given a constant-factor multiplicative approximation of
the density of the distribution. We characterize the instance-optimal estimation
rates in both these settings and show that they are uniformly achievable (up to
polylogarithmic factors). Our approach for R2 extends to arbitrary metric spaces
as it goes via hierarchically separated trees. As a special case our results lead to
instance-optimal private learning in TV distance for discrete distributions.

1

Introduction

Distribution estimation is a fundamental problem in statistics. In this work, we focus on the problem
of learning the density of a distribution over a low-dimensional real space. Our motivation for
studying this problem comes from practical problems such as estimating the population density
in a geographical area (defined by bounded two dimensional space, for e.g. [0, ℓ]2 ), learning the
distribution of accuracy of a machine learning model (i.e. a distribution over [0, 1]), estimating the
average temperature across latitude, longitude, and altitude (i.e. a distribution over [0, ℓ]3 ) etc.
In this work, we are interested in the non-parametric version of this question, where we make no
assumptions on the form of the distribution we are learning. This is frequently of interest in practice,
where population densities for example may change over time (become more or less concentrated),
and it is difficult to specify a meaningful parametric class that will simultaneously capture all densities of interest. Given estimation is often done using sensitive data (for e.g. health data), our interest
in this question is in, and consequently all our results are for, the differentially private version of this
question. While we believe our results in the non-private setting are also novel and interesting, we
view the private results as our main contribution.
Any statistical algorithm learning from samples is inexact. The appropriate gauge to measure the
(in)accuracy of a density estimation algorithm depends on how this density estimate is used. In
this work, we focus on the Wasserstein distance between the original distribution and the learnt
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

