FineStyle: Fine-grained Controllable Style
Personalization for Text-to-image Models

Gong Zhang1,2∗ Kihyuk Sohn3† Meera Hahn2
1
2
Georgia Tech
Google DeepMind

Humphrey Shi1 Irfan Essa1,2
3
Meta Reality Labs

…fallen leaves…

…fallen leaves…

… in the forest

…in the forest

…made of woods…

…made of bricks…

…silvery…

…golden…

…clouds…

…moon…

…rainbow color…

…black and white…

A horse…

…with drips...

…red background

…blue background

…on the grass…

…on the bricks…

Figure 1: Demonstration of fine-grained style controllability of FineStyle. Nine image pairs are
generated by personalized text-to-image models, each of which is fine-tuned on a respective, single
style reference image displayed at the corner of the left image of each pair. Fine-grained concepts are
written on top of the images for comparisons, showing the nuanced compositionality encompassing
color, foreground object, background, and textures. Full prompts are available in Appendix A.1. Visit
https://github.com/SHI-Labs/FineStyle for code and more examples.

Abstract
Few-shot fine-tuning of text-to-image (T2I) generation models enables people to
create unique images in their own style using natural languages without requiring
extensive prompt engineering. However, fine-tuning with only a handful, as little
as one, of image-text paired data prevents fine-grained control of style attributes at
generation. In this paper, we present FineStyle, a few-shot fine-tuning method that
allows enhanced controllability for style personalized text-to-image generation. To
overcome the lack of training data for fine-tuning, we propose a novel conceptoriented data scaling that amplifies the number of image-text pair, each of which
focuses on different concepts (e.g., objects) in the style reference image. We also
identify the benefit of parameter-efficient adapter tuning of key and value kernels of
∗
†

Work done during a part-time internship at Google DeepMind.
Work done while at Google Research.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

