Evaluating Large Vision-and-Language Models on
Children’s Mathematical Olympiads

Anoop Cherian1

Kuan-Chuan Peng1 Suhas Lohit1 Joanna Matthiesen2
Kevin Smith3 Joshua B. Tenenbaum3
1
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, MA, 2 Math Kangaroo USA NFP
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambribdge, MA
https://smartdataset.github.io/smart840

Abstract
Recent years have seen a significant progress in the general-purpose problem
solving abilities of large vision and language models (LVLMs), such as ChatGPT,
Gemini, etc.; some of these breakthroughs even seem to enable AI models to
outperform human abilities in varied tasks that demand higher-order cognitive
skills. Are the current large AI models indeed capable of generalized problem
solving as humans do? A systematic analysis of AI capabilities for joint vision and
text reasoning, however, is missing in the current scientific literature. In this paper,
we make an effort towards filling this gap, by evaluating state-of-the-art LVLMs
on their mathematical and algorithmic reasoning abilities using visuo-linguistic
problems from children’s Olympiads. Specifically, we consider problems from
the Mathematical Kangaroo (MK) Olympiad, which is a popular international
competition targeted at children from grades 1-12, that tests children’s deeper
mathematical abilities using puzzles that are appropriately gauged to their age and
skills. Using the puzzles from MK, we created a dataset, dubbed SMART-840,
consisting of 840 problems from years 2020-2024. With our dataset, we analyze
LVLMs power on mathematical reasoning; their responses on our puzzles offer
a direct way to compare against that of children. Our results show that modern
LVLMs do demonstrate increasingly powerful reasoning skills in solving problems
for higher grades, but lack the foundations to correctly answer problems designed
for younger children. Further analysis shows that there is no significant correlation
between the reasoning capabilities of AI models and that of young children, and
their capabilities appear to be based on a different type of reasoning than the
cumulative knowledge that underlies children’s mathematics and logic skills.

1

Introduction
“Mathematics is not about numbers, equations, computations, or algorithms:
it is about understanding.”
William Paul Thurston

Recent multimodal artificial intelligence frameworks incorporating large vision and language models
(LVLMs), such as GPT-4o, DALL-E, Gemini, etc., are seen to demonstrate outstanding reasoning
capabilities [43], seemingly flustering our established measures of machine intelligence [11, 19, 23,
24, 35]. These scaled up Transformer models [41] trained on internet-scale datasets using purportedly
simplistic training losses such as mask predictions, suddenly appear to have emergent abilities
rivaling expert human intellect even on tasks demanding higher-level cognition. Such superior
accomplishments naturally raises several questions: Are these models indeed capable of having
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

