Invariant subspaces and PCA in nearly matrix
multiplication time

Aleksandros Sobczyk
IBM Research and ETH Zurich
obc@zurich.ibm.com

Marko Mladenović
ETH Zurich
mmladenovic@ethz.ch

Mathieu Luisier
ETH Zurich
mluisier@iis.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Approximating invariant subspaces of generalized eigenvalue problems (GEPs) is
a fundamental computational problem at the core of machine learning and scientific computing. It is, for example, the root of Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) for dimensionality reduction, data visualization, and noise filtering, and of
Density Functional Theory (DFT), arguably the most popular method to calculate the electronic structure of materials. Given Hermitian H, S ∈ Cn×n , where
S is positive-definite, let Πk be the true spectral projector on the invariant subspace that is associated with the k smallest (or largest) eigenvalues of the GEP
ek
HC = SCΛ, for some k ∈ [n]. We show that we can compute a matrix Π

−1
ω+η
−1
e
such that ∥Πk − Πk ∥2 ≤ ϵ, in O n
polylog(n, ϵ , κ(S), gapk ) bit operations in the floating point model, for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1), with probability 1 − 1/n.
Here, η > 0 is arbitrarily small, ω ≲ 2.372 is the matrix multiplication exponent, κ(S) = ∥S∥2 ∥S−1 ∥2 , and gapk is the gap between eigenvalues k and k + 1.
To achieve such provable “forward-error” guarantees, our methods rely on a new
O(nω+η ) stability analysis for the Cholesky factorization, and a smoothed analysis for computing spectral gaps, which can be of independent interest. Ultimately,
we obtain new matrix multiplication-type bit complexity upper bounds for PCA
problems, including classical PCA and (randomized) low-rank approximation.

1

Introduction

Generalized eigenvalue problems (GEPs) arise naturally in a plethora of applications in machine
learning, scientific computing, and engineering. Given a pair of matrices H and S, often referred to
as a matrix pencil, the problem of interest has the following form
HC = SCΛ,

(1)

where C and Λ are the unknown eigenvector and eigenvalue matrices, respectively. Of particular
importance are the so-called “Hermitian definite” or simply “definite” GEPs/pencils, in which case
H is Hermitian and S is Hermitian and positive-definite. In many important applications, the quantity of interest is an (arbitrarily large) subset of eigenvectors, defining an invariant subspace, rather
than the entire C and Λ solutions of the GEP.
In data science and machine learning, invariant subspaces play a central role in many problems,
including Spectral Clustering [111, 124], Language Models [73], Image Processing [118, 11], Recommendation Systems [46], Principal Components Analysis (PCA) [45, 79, 122], Support Vector
Machines [99], and many others [50, 35, 96, 12]. We particularly focus on PCA applications, which
can take the form of a GEP as in Eq. (1) where H is the sample covariance and S the identity.
In more advanced settings, H and S can be defined over a kernel [122, 20]; See Section 4 and
Appendix G for more details. Another closely related application comes from Density Functional
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

