Diversity-Driven Synthesis: Enhancing Dataset
Distillation through Directed Weight Adjustment

Jiawei Du1,2

Xin Zhang1,2,3

Juncheng Hu4

Wenxing Huang1,2,5

Joey Tianyi Zhou1,2

1

Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
3
XiDian University, Xi’an, China 4 National University of Singapore, Singapore
5
Hubei University, WuHan, China

Abstract
The sharp increase in data-related expenses has motivated research into condensing
datasets while retaining the most informative features. Dataset distillation has
thus recently come to the fore. This paradigm generates synthetic datasets that are
representative enough to replace the original dataset in training a neural network.
To avoid redundancy in these synthetic datasets, it is crucial that each element
contains unique features and remains diverse from others during the synthesis
stage. In this paper, we provide a thorough theoretical and empirical analysis
of diversity within synthesized datasets. We argue that enhancing diversity can
improve the parallelizable yet isolated synthesizing approach. Specifically, we
introduce a novel method that employs dynamic and directed weight adjustment
techniques to modulate the synthesis process, thereby maximizing the representativeness and diversity of each synthetic instance. Our method ensures that each
batch of synthetic data mirrors the characteristics of a large, varying subset of
the original dataset. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets, including CIFAR, Tiny-ImageNet, and ImageNet-1K, demonstrate the superior performance of
our method, highlighting its effectiveness in producing diverse and representative
synthetic datasets with minimal computational expense. Our code is available at
https://github.com/AngusDujw/Diversity-Driven-Synthesis.

1

Introduction

With the rapid growth in dataset size and the need for efficient data storage and processing [8, 17,
14, 13], how to condense datasets while preserving their key characteristics becomes a significant
challenge in machine learning community [12, 38]. Unlike previous research [29, 39, 50, 44] that
focuses on constructing a representative subset through selecting from the original data, Dataset
Distillation [43, 31, 20] aims to synthesize a small and compact dataset that retains informative
features from the original dataset. A model trained on the synthetic dataset is thus supposed to
achieve comparable performance as one trained on the original dataset. The development of dataset
distillation reduces data-related costs [7, 34, 49] and helps us better understand how Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) extract knowledge from large-scale datasets.
Numerous studies dedicate significant effort to synthesizing distilled datasets more effectively.
For example, Zhao et al. employ a gradient-matching approach [52, 54] to guide the synthesis
process. Trajectory-matching methods [1, 2, 5, 6] further align gradient trajectories to optimize
the synthetic data. Additionally, distribution matching [42, 53, 55] and kernel inducing points
methods [28, 25, 23, 24] also contribute to synthesizing representative data. Despite the great
progress achieved by these methods on datasets like CIFAR [16], their extensive computational
overhead (both GPU memory and GPU time) hinders the extension of these methods to large-scale
datasets like ImageNet-1K [3].
Email: dujiawei@u.nus.edu, joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com.

represents the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

