LLM-based Skill Diffusion for Zero-shot Policy
Adaptation

Woo Kyung Kim1 , Youngseok Lee2 , Jooyoung Kim1 , Honguk Woo1∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sunkyunkwan University
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
{kwk2696,yslee.gs,onsaemiro,hwoo}@skku.edu
1

Abstract
Recent advances in data-driven imitation learning and offline reinforcement learning have highlighted the use of expert data for skill acquisition and the development
of hierarchical policies based on these skills. However, these approaches have
not significantly advanced in adapting these skills to unseen contexts, which may
involve changing environmental conditions or different user requirements. In this
paper, we present a novel LLM-based policy adaptation framework LDuS which
leverages an LLM to guide the generation process of a skill diffusion model upon
contexts specified in language, facilitating zero-shot skill-based policy adaptation
to different contexts. To implement the skill diffusion model, we adapt the lossguided diffusion with a sequential in-painting technique, where target trajectories
are conditioned by masking them with past state-action sequences, thereby enabling
the robust and controlled generation of skill trajectories in test-time. To have a loss
function for a given context, we employ the LLM-based code generation with iterative refinement, by which the code and controlled trajectory are validated to align
with the context in a closed-loop manner. Through experiments, we demonstrate
the zero-shot adaptability of LDuS to various context types including different
specification levels, multi-modality, and varied temporal conditions for several
robotic manipulation tasks, outperforming other language-conditioned imitation
and planning methods.

1

Introduction

Skill-based learning has demonstrated its potentials in generalizing to novel downstream tasks by
leveraging pre-trained skills learned from the offline dataset. Furthermore, the integration of skillbased learning and natural language realizes the remarkable ability to perform practical tasks via
the provision of a human-oriented interface where agents are controlled by instructions describing
the goals of the task. Building upon this notion, several previous studies have investigated bridging
the gap between the human instructions and physical world manipulation by learning semantically
meaningful skills given the language-annotated dataset [1, 2, 3]. However, due to the inherently
open-ended nature of language, it is impractical to obtain a dataset annotated with a sufficiently
wide range of contexts, encompassing various environmental conditions and user requirements, to
develop a versatile language-conditioned policy capable of accommodating such diverse contexts.
Consequently, as shown in the left side of Figure 1, these prior works are limited to processing the
narrow scope of instructions that primarily convey only the goal of the task without any contextual
information (presented as case 1).
To address the challenges in language-conditioned skill learning, we explore large language model
(LLM)-based policy adaptation approaches that enable zero-shot adaptation to contexts specified in
∗

Honguk Woo is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

