Stepwise Alignment for Constrained
Language Model Policy Optimization

Akifumi Wachi∗†

Thien Q. Tran∗†

Rei Sato†

Takumi Tanabe†

Youhei Akimoto‡§

†
LY Corporation ‡ University of Tsukuba § RIKEN AIP
{akifumi.wachi, tran.thien, sato.rei, takumi.tanabe}@lycorp.co.jp
akimoto@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract
Safety and trustworthiness are indispensable requirements for real-world applications of AI systems using large language models (LLMs). This paper formulates
human value alignment as an optimization problem of the language model policy
to maximize reward under a safety constraint, and then proposes an algorithm,
Stepwise Alignment for Constrained Policy Optimization (SACPO). One key idea
behind SACPO, supported by theory, is that the optimal policy incorporating reward
and safety can be directly obtained from a reward-aligned policy. Building on this
key idea, SACPO aligns LLMs step-wise with each metric while leveraging simple
yet powerful alignment algorithms such as direct preference optimization (DPO).
SACPO offers several advantages, including simplicity, stability, computational
efficiency, and flexibility of algorithms and datasets. Under mild assumptions, our
theoretical analysis provides the upper bounds on optimality and safety constraint
violation. Our experimental results show that SACPO can fine-tune Alpaca-7B better than the state-of-the-art method in terms of both helpfulness and harmlessness.
Code and models are available at https://github.com/line/sacpo.
Warning: This paper contains content that may be offensive or harmful.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in diverse real-world
applications [13] such as translation [54], content creation [53], coding [14, 21], summarization [42],
medicine [45], and robotics [40], among others. As the utilization of LLMs in artificial intelligence
(AI) systems permeates our daily lives, the importance of responsible and ethical use grows; safety
issues have been highlighted [22, 30, 32]. Consequently, as AI continues to evolve and become more
integrated into society, it is crucial that we actively research and develop solutions to ensure that the
benefits of AI are realized while minimizing negative societal impacts.
To address this challenge, alignment [24] has been used to embed human values and goals into LLMs
to enhance their utility and safety. Notably, alignment based on human feedback has emerged as a key
mechanism in making LLMs more helpful and harmless, as exemplified by reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF, [15, 34]). Standard RLHF training flows fit a reward model to a human
preference dataset and then optimize a language model (LM) policy to maximize the reward without
overly diverging from the original policy. However, RLHF measures the quality of outputs in terms
of a single metric (i.e., reward); thus, the achieved level of safety is not usually high, and a model that
refuses to answer, while technically considered harmless, renders the response quite unhelpful [16].
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

