TinyTTA: Efficient Test-Time Adaptation via
Early-Exit Ensembles on Edge Devices

Hong Jia1,3

Young D. Kwon1,4 Alessio Orsino1,2 Ting Dang3
Domenico Talia2 Cecilia Mascolo1
1
University of Cambridge 2 University of Calabria 3 University of Melbourne
4
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge
{hj359,ydk21,cm542}@cam.ac.uk
{aorsino,talia}@dimes.unical.it
{hong.jia,ting.dang}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
The increased adoption of Internet of Things (IoT) devices has led to the generation of large data streams with applications in healthcare, sustainability, and
robotics. In some cases, deep neural networks have been deployed directly on these
resource-constrained units to limit communication overhead, increase efficiency
and privacy, and enable real-time applications. However, a common challenge
in this setting is the continuous adaptation of models necessary to accommodate
changing environments, i.e., data distribution shifts. Test-time adaptation (TTA)
has emerged as one potential solution, but its validity has yet to be explored in
resource-constrained hardware settings, such as those involving microcontroller
units (MCUs). TTA on constrained devices generally suffers from i) memory
overhead due to the full backpropagation of a large pre-trained network, ii) lack
of support for normalization layers on MCUs, and iii) either memory exhaustion
with large batch sizes required for updating or poor performance with small batch
sizes. In this paper, we propose TinyTTA, to enable, for the first time, efficient
TTA on constrained devices with limited memory. To address the limited memory constraints, we introduce a novel self-ensemble and batch-agnostic early-exit
strategy for TTA, which enables continuous adaptation with small batch sizes for
reduced memory usage, handles distribution shifts, and improves latency efficiency.
Moreover, we develop the TinyTTA Engine, a first-of-its-kind MCU library that
enables on-device TTA. We validate TinyTTA on a Raspberry Pi Zero 2W and an
STM32H747 MCU. Experimental results demonstrate that TinyTTA improves TTA
accuracy by up to 57.6%, reduces memory usage by up to six times, and achieves
faster and more energy-efficient TTA. Notably, TinyTTA is the only framework
able to run TTA on MCU STM32H747 with a 512 KB memory constraint while
maintaining high performance.

1

Introduction

Deploying deep neural networks on IoT devices, such as microcontroller units (MCUs), holds
significant potential in many applications requiring real-time data analysis and low-latency responses,
such as real-time human health monitoring [1] and robotics [2]. However, a practical challenge in
deploying these models on MCUs in real-world scenarios is their adaptation capability. The data
encountered in real settings often exhibit distribution shifts due to unforeseen noise and environment.
For instance, sensor data can be affected by natural fluctuations and distortions, including weather
changes (e.g., fog and snow) and sensor-related issues (e.g., defocus blur) [3, 4]. Existing mitigation
strategies, such as fine-tuning [5], typically necessitate updating the entire model, which may be
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

