MSAGPT: Neural Prompting Protein Structure
Prediction via MSA Generative Pre-Training

Bo Chen1∗† , Zhilei Bei1∗† , Xingyi Cheng2 , Pan Li2 , Jie Tang1 , Le Song2,3
1
Tsinghua University 2 BioMap Research 3 MBZUAI
cb21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
https://github.com/THUDM/MSAGPT

Abstract
Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA) plays a pivotal role in unveiling the evolutionary trajectories of protein families. The accuracy of protein structure predictions is
often compromised for protein sequences that lack sufficient homologous information to construct high-quality MSA. Although various methods have been proposed
to generate virtual MSA under these conditions, they fall short in comprehensively
capturing the intricate co-evolutionary patterns within MSA or require guidance
from external oracle models. Here we introduce MSAGPT, a novel approach to
prompt protein structure predictions via MSA generative pre-training in the lowMSA regime. MSAGPT employs a simple yet effective 2D evolutionary positional
encoding scheme to model the complex evolutionary patterns. Endowed by this, its
flexible 1D MSA decoding framework facilitates zero- or few-shot learning. Moreover, we demonstrate that leveraging the feedback from AlphaFold2 can further
enhance the model’s capacity via Rejective Fine-tuning (RFT) and Reinforcement
Learning from AF2 Feedback (RLAF). Extensive experiments confirm the efficacy
of MSAGPT in generating faithful virtual MSA to enhance the structure prediction
accuracy (up to +8.5% TM-Score on few-shot scenarios). The transfer learning
capabilities also highlight its great potential for facilitating other protein tasks.

1

Introduction

The advent of deep learning has significantly propelled progress across various scientific domains,
exemplified by breakthroughs such as AlphaFold series [1, 2] for accurate biomolecular interaction
predictions, AlphaGeometry [3] for intricate geometry and mathematical reasoning——to name a
few. Among these, AlphaFold2 (AF2) represents a landmark within structural biology, achieving
an in silico precision of approximately 90% atomic accuracy that rivals wet lab experiments on
protein structure predictions (PSP). The remarkable success of AF2 can be attributed to its innovative
end-to-end use of co-evolutionary information supported by Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA).
MSA aggregates homologous sequences from vast databases, providing a comprehensive overview
of evolutionary trajectories, which is critical for accurately predicting protein structures [1, 2, 4].
An illustrative example in Figure 1(a) showcases that the correlations analysis among amino acids
(AAs) sites could reveal contacts or conservative regions in the folding structure. Unfortunately,
not all proteins possess a rich set of homologous counterparts. Statistical investigations reveal that
approximately 20% of metagenomic proteins [5] and around 11% of proteins from eukaryotic and
viral origins [6] are classified as "orphan" proteins. This presents a significant challenge for MSAsearch algorithms in constructing high-quality MSA, consequently impeding the performance of PSP
models [2].
* BC and ZB contributed equally.
†

Work done while interned at BioMap.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

