IWBVT: Instance Weighting-based Bias-Variance
Trade-off for Crowdsourcing

Liangxiao Jiang∗
School of Computer Science
China University of Geosciences
Wuhan 430074, China
ljiang@cug.edu.cn

Wenjun Zhang
School of Computer Science
China University of Geosciences
Wuhan 430074, China
wjzhang@cug.edu.cn

Chaoqun Li
School of Mathematics and Physics
China University of Geosciences
Wuhan 430074, China
chqli@cug.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, a large number of algorithms for label integration and noise
correction have been proposed to infer the unknown true labels of instances in
crowdsourcing. They have made great advances in improving the label quality
of crowdsourced datasets. However, due to the presence of intractable instances,
these algorithms are usually not as significant in improving the model quality as
they are in improving the label quality. To improve the model quality, this paper
proposes an instance weighting-based bias-variance trade-off (IWBVT) approach.
IWBVT at first proposes a novel instance weighting method based on the complementary set and entropy, which mitigates the impact of intractable instances
and thus makes the bias and variance of trained models closer to the unknown
true results. Then, IWBVT performs probabilistic loss regressions based on the
bias-variance decomposition, which achieves the bias-variance trade-off and thus
reduces the generalization error of trained models. Experimental results indicate
that IWBVT can serve as a universal post-processing approach to significantly
improving the model quality of existing state-of-the-art label integration algorithms and noise correction algorithms. Our codes and datasets are available at
https://github.com/jiangliangxiao/IWBVT.

1

Introduction

Crowdsourcing eases the difficulty of obtaining training datasets for supervised learning [8]. In
crowdsourcing scenarios, instances are annotated not by domain experts but by crowd workers
from crowdsourcing platforms [1, 12]. While crowd workers are more cost-effective compared to
domain experts, they typically possess inferior expertise and are thus more prone to assigning noisy
labels [2, 13]. To mitigate the impact of noisy labels, a common practice in crowdsourcing is repeated
annotating, where each instance is annotated by multiple workers to obtain multiple noisy labels [21].
Subsequently, a multitude of algorithms have been proposed to infer the unknown true label of an
instance from its multiple noisy labels [3, 11, 15].
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

