Constrained Synthesis with Projected Diffusion Models

Jacob K. Christopher
University of Virginia
csk4sr@virginia.edu

Stephen Baek
University of Virginia
baek@virginia.edu

Ferdinando Fioretto
University of Virginia
fioretto@virginia.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces an approach to endow generative diffusion processes the
ability to satisfy and certify compliance with constraints and physical principles.
The proposed method recast the traditional sampling process of generative diffusion models as a constrained optimization problem, steering the generated data
distribution to remain within a specified region to ensure adherence to the given
constraints. These capabilities are validated on applications featuring both convex
and challenging, non-convex, constraints as well as ordinary differential equations,
in domains spanning from synthesizing new materials with precise morphometric properties, generating physics-informed motion, optimizing paths in planning
scenarios, and human motion synthesis.

1

Introduction

Generative diffusion models excel at robustly synthesizing content from raw noise through a sequential
denoising process [14, 24]. They have revolutionized high-fidelity creation of complex data, and
their applications have rapidly expanded beyond mere image synthesis, finding relevance in areas
such as engineering [29, 34], automation [3, 16], chemistry [1, 15], and medical analysis [2, 6].
However, although diffusion models excel at generating content that is coherent and aligns closely
with the original data distribution, their direct application in scenarios requiring stringent adherence to
predefined criteria poses significant challenges. Particularly the use of diffusion models in scientific
and engineering domains where the generated data needs to not only resemble real-world examples but
also rigorously comply with established specifications and physical laws remains an open challenge.
Given these limitations, one might consider training a diffusion model on a dataset that already
adheres to specific constraints. However, even with “feasible” training data, this approach does
not guarantee adherence to desired criteria due to the stochastic nature of the diffusion process.
Furthermore, there are frequent scenarios where the training data must be altered to generate outputs
that align with specific properties, potentially not present in the original data. This issue often leads
to a distribution shift further exacerbating the inability of generative models to produce “valid” data.
As we will show in a real-world experiment (§6.1), this challenge is particularly acute in scientific
and engineering domains, where training data is often sparse and confined to specific distributions,
yet the synthesized outputs are required to meet stringent properties or precise standards [29].
This paper addresses these challenges and introduces Projected Diffusion Models (PDM), a novel approach that recast the traditional sampling strategy in diffusion processes as a constrained-optimization
problem. This perspective allows us to apply traditional techniques from constraint optimization
to the sampling process. In this work, the problem is solved by iteratively projecting the diffusion
sampling process onto arbitrary constraint sets, ensuring that the generated data adheres strictly to
imposed constraints or physical principles. We provide theoretical support for PDM’s capability to
not only certify adherence to the constraints but also to optimize the generative model’s original
objective of replicating the true data distribution. This alignment is a significant advantage of PDM,
yielding state-of-the-art FID scores while maintaining strict compliance with the imposed constraints.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

