Meaningful Learning: Enhancing Abstract Reasoning
in Large Language Models via Generic Fact Guidance

Kai Xiong♠ Xiao Ding♠∗ Ting Liu♠ Bing Qin♠
Dongliang Xu♦ Qing Yang♦ Hongtao Liu♦ Yixin Cao♣∗
♠

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
♣
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
♦
Du Xiaoman (Beijing) Science Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China
{kxiong, xding, tliu, qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn
{xudongliang, yangqing, liuhongtao01}@duxiaoman.com
yxcao@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have developed impressive performance and strong
explainability across various reasoning scenarios, marking a significant stride towards mimicking human-like intelligence. Despite this, when tasked with several
simple questions supported by a generic fact, LLMs often struggle to abstract
and apply the generic fact to provide consistent and precise answers, revealing a
deficiency in abstract reasoning abilities. This has sparked a vigorous debate about
whether LLMs are genuinely reasoning or merely memorizing. In light of this, we
design a preliminary study to quantify and delve into the abstract reasoning abilities
of existing LLMs. Our findings reveal a substantial discrepancy between their
general reasoning and abstract reasoning performances. To relieve this problem,
we tailor an abstract reasoning dataset (AbsR) together with a meaningful learning
paradigm to teach LLMs how to leverage generic facts for reasoning purposes.
The results show that our approach not only boosts the general reasoning performance of LLMs but also makes considerable strides towards their capacity for
abstract reasoning, moving beyond simple memorization or imitation to a more
nuanced understanding and application of generic facts. The code is available at
https://github.com/Waste-Wood/MeanLearn.

1

Introduction

Humans proceed with meaningful learning to induce common patterns or high-level abstractions to
acquire abstract reasoning abilities [29, 37]. Such capabilities allow us to apply broad principles
across diverse situations, demonstrating a deep understanding and versatile application of knowledge.
As shown in Figure 1 (a), humans can deduce “rock dissolved” and “the skin suffers pain” when
given “adding rock into hydrochloric acid” and “acid touches human skin”, respectively. This stems
from the established expertise in the human mind (the generic fact “acid is corrosive”), and extends
to applications in different scenarios. Of late, remarkable headways of LLMs have pushed AI
much further towards human-like intelligence [2, 47]. Interestingly, can LLMs act like humans to
instinctively consider the generic fact for flexible applications in different scenarios?
In our pilot investigation, we observed that LLMs appear to lack satisfying capabilities in abstract
reasoning. As illustrated in Table 1, there is a notable discrepancy—exceeding 17%—between vanilla
∗

Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

