AWT: Transferring Vision-Language Models via
Augmentation, Weighting, and Transportation

Yuhan Zhu1 Yuyang Ji1 Zhiyu Zhao1,2 Gangshan Wu1 Limin Wang1,2∗
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/AWT

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) have shown impressive results in various visual classification tasks. However, we often fail to fully unleash their potential
when adapting them for new concept understanding due to limited information on
new classes. To address this limitation, we introduce a novel adaptation framework,
AWT (Augment, Weight, then Transport). AWT comprises three key components:
augmenting inputs with diverse visual perspectives and enriched class descriptions
through image transformations and language models; dynamically weighting inputs
based on the prediction entropy; and employing optimal transport to mine semantic
correlations in the vision-language space. AWT can be seamlessly integrated into
various VLMs, enhancing their zero-shot capabilities without additional training
and facilitating few-shot learning through an integrated multimodal adapter module.
We verify AWT in multiple challenging scenarios, including zero-shot and few-shot
image classification, zero-shot video action recognition, and out-of-distribution
generalization. AWT consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in each
setting. In addition, our extensive studies further demonstrate AWT’s effectiveness
and adaptability across different VLMs, architectures, and scales.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in vision-language models (VLMs) [1–8], which undergo extensive pre-training on
web-scale image-text pairs, have exhibited remarkable success in various classification tasks. VLMs
are trained to associate images with relevant textual descriptions. In the standard protocol (Fig. 1(a)),
raw images and class names are projected into a joint vision-language embedding space, where the
class with the shortest distance to the image representation is selected as the prediction result.
However, directly using raw images and class names in testing has limitations [1, 9]. Visually, the
broad scope of pre-training compels VLMs to analyze all image elements, lacking capability of
focusing on specific interested regions. For instance, a model might miss critical facial features of a
cat while unnecessarily focusing on irrelevant elements like “bench” and “grass” (Fig. 1(a)). Textually,
since VLM pre-training associates visual elements with diverse and rich textual descriptions (e.g.,
colors and textures), merely using class names during test falls short of capturing the full spectrum of
visual content. To enhance input effectiveness, the literature focuses on post-training prompts [9–33]
(Fig. 1(b)) that provide contextual cues, thereby helping the model in prioritizing relevant features,
such as cat’s attributes. However, this approach often depends on the availability of training resources,
which may not be always practical.
In this study, we are interested in enhancing inputs for better adaptation of VLMs without training
prompts. We advocate for data augmentation as a simple yet effective strategy, as depicted in Fig. 1(c).
∗

Corresponding author: lmwang@nju.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

