Embedding-Aligned Language Models

Guy Tennenholtz†∗, Yinlam Chow‡ , Chih-Wei Hsu† , Lior Shani† , Ethan Liang‡ , Craig Boutilier†

† Google Research, ‡ Google Deepmind

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for training large language models (LLMs) to adhere
to objectives defined within a latent embedding space. Our method leverages
reinforcement learning (RL), treating a pre-trained LLM as an environment. Our
embedding-aligned guided language (EAGLE) agent is trained to iteratively steer
the LLM’s generation towards optimal regions of the latent embedding space, w.r.t.
some predefined criterion. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the EAGLE agent
using the MovieLens 25M and Amazon Review datasets to surface content gaps
that satisfy latent user demand. We also demonstrate the benefit of using an optimal
design of a state-dependent action set to improve EAGLE’s efficiency. Our work
paves the way for controlled and grounded text generation using LLMs, ensuring
consistency with domain-specific knowledge and data representations.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) such as Gemini [Team et al., 2023] and GPT [Achiam et al., 2023]
have revolutionized the field of natural language processing, achieving remarkable success in text
generation, translation, comprehension, as well as expert-level performance on challenging tasks
(e.g., exams, coding). However, effectively applying (or fine-tuning) LLMs to domain-specific tasks
often requires considerable domain knowledge and labeled human data [Jeong et al., 2023, Ouyang
et al., 2022, Ziegler et al., 2019]. Fortunately, in many cases, domain knowledge is already captured
and encoded within latent embedding spaces.
Latent embeddings are continuous vectors, ubiquitous in fields such as recommender systems [Hansen
et al., 2020], reinforcement learning (RL) [Nabati et al., 2023, Pertsch et al., 2021], and image
classification [Girdhar et al., 2023, Radford et al., 2021]. They offer a powerful means to represent
entities, concepts, and relationships within a specific domain. For example, in recommender systems,
embeddings of items and users encapsulate information about preferences and behavior [Zhao et al.,
2023], embeddings of images can capture their content and style [Radford et al., 2021], while
embeddings of scientific articles can represent their research area and findings [Taher Harikandeh
et al., 2023]. The utility of a latent embedding lies in its underlying compact representation of entities,
concepts or relationships, and the associated metrics, allowing one to construct simpler, more efficient
models or induce control over various processes [Arvanitidis et al., 2018, 2021, Radford et al., 2021,
Tennenholtz and Mannor, 2022]. Importantly, latent embeddings are often pre-computed, and can
thus serve as a readily available rich source of domain knowledge.
This leads to the key question: can we leverage latent embeddings to better control and guide
LLM generation? In this paper, we present a novel framework which accomplishes this by exploiting
latent embedding spaces to define an objective function for an LLM in an iterative RL-driven process.
As an example, consider the challenge of assisting content creators in generating valuable content
within a recommender ecosystem (e.g., YouTube, Reddit, Spotify) [Boutilier et al., 2024]. An
∗

Correspondence to: guytenn@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

