CLAP4CLIP: Continual Learning with Probabilistic
Finetuning for Vision-Language Models

1

Saurav Jha1 , Dong Gong1∗, Lina Yao1,2
University of New South Wales (UNSW Sydney), 2 CSIRO’s Data61

{saurav.jha, dong.gong}@unsw.edu.au; lina.yao@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) aims to help deep neural networks learn new knowledge
while retaining what has been learned. Owing to their powerful generalizability, pretrained vision-language models such as Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training
(CLIP) [1] have lately gained traction as practical CL candidates. However, the
domain mismatch between the pre-training and the downstream CL tasks often calls
for finetuning of the CLIP on the latter. Most existing finetuning methods exhibit
deterministic nature. This makes them overlook the many possible interactions
across the input modalities and deems them unsafe for high-risk tasks requiring
reliable uncertainty estimation. To address these, our work proposes Continual
LeArning with Probabilistic finetuning (CLAP) - a probabilistic modeling framework over visual-guided text features per task, thus providing more calibrated CL
finetuning. Unlike recent data-hungry anti-forgetting CL techniques, CLAP alleviates forgetting by exploiting the rich pre-trained knowledge of CLIP for weight
initialization and distribution regularization of task-specific parameters. Cooperating with the diverse range of existing prompting methods, CLAP can surpass the
predominant deterministic finetuning approaches for CL with CLIP. We conclude
with out-of-the-box applications of superior uncertainty estimation abilities of
CLAP including novel data detection and exemplar selection within the existing CL
setups. Our code is available at https://github.com/srvCodes/clap4clip.

1

Introduction

Learning in the real world involves dealing with the ever-changing distributions of task streams and
their data [2, 3, 4]. Given the constraints on resources and privacy, there is also no guarantee for
re-training a network on all previously seen data [5]. Continual learning (CL) aims to learn from such
data/task stream without catastrophic forgetting [6, 2] of past data/tasks. A challenging CL setup is
the class-incremental learning setting, where new classes emerge with new tasks, and at test time, a
model must infer from all seen classes without known task IDs [7, 8].
Recent years have seen pre-trained multi-modal foundation models excel on several domains [1, 9, 10].
One such example for the vision-language (VL) domain is the CLIP [1] model that comes with
strong zero-shot generalizability acquired by learning to match large-scale image-text pairs in a
contrastive manner [11]. However, to adapt well to downstream tasks, CLIP must be finetuned on the
task-specific data [12, 13]. Considering both the need for continually finetuning pre-trained models
on streaming tasks and their perks over training from scratch [14], our work studies CL with CLIP.
An issue with the existing deterministic approaches to finetuning [13, 12] is that these overlook
the uncertainties arising from many possible interactions between the visual and textual cues of
downstream tasks. For instance, on the textual side, while a good generic hand-crafted prompt for
images is “A photo of a {class}”, there can be instances where further tailored prompts help
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

