The Star Geometry of Critic-Based
Regularizer Learning

Oscar Leong
Department of Statistics and Data Science
University of California, Los Angeles
oleong@stat.ucla.edu

Eliza O’Reilly
Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
eoreill2@jh.edu

Yong Sheng Soh
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
matsys@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Variational regularization is a classical technique to solve statistical inference tasks
and inverse problems, with modern data-driven approaches parameterizing regularizers via deep neural networks showcasing impressive empirical performance.
Recent works along these lines learn task-dependent regularizers. This is done by
integrating information about the measurements and ground-truth data in an unsupervised, critic-based loss function, where the regularizer attributes low values to
likely data and high values to unlikely data. However, there is little theory about the
structure of regularizers learned via this process and how it relates to the two data
distributions. To make progress on this challenge, we initiate a study of optimizing
critic-based loss functions to learn regularizers over a particular family of regularizers: gauges (or Minkowski functionals) of star-shaped bodies. This family contains
regularizers that are commonly employed in practice and shares properties with
regularizers parameterized by deep neural networks. We specifically investigate
critic-based losses derived from variational representations of statistical distances
between probability measures. By leveraging tools from star geometry and dual
Brunn-Minkowski theory, we illustrate how these losses can be interpreted as dual
mixed volumes that depend on the data distribution. This allows us to derive exact
expressions for the optimal regularizer in certain cases. Finally, we identify which
neural network architectures give rise to such star body gauges and when such
regularizers have favorable properties for optimization. More broadly, this work
highlights how the tools of star geometry can aid in understanding the geometry of
unsupervised regularizer learning.

1

Introduction

The choice and design of regularization functionals to promote structure in data has a long history in
statistical inference and inverse problems, with roots dating back to classical Tikhonov regularization
[89]. In such problems, one is tasked with solving the following: given measurements y ∈ Rm of
the form y = A(x0 ) + η for some forward model A : Rd → Rm and noise η ∈ Rm , recover an
estimate of the ground-truth signal x0 ∈ Rd . Typically, the challenge in such problems is that they
are ill-posed, meaning that either there are no solutions, infinitely many solutions, or the problem is
discontinuous in the data y [7]. A pervasive and now classical technique is to identify regularization
functionals R : Rd → R such that, when minimized, promote structure that is present in the ground38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

