Watch Out for Your Agents! Investigating Backdoor
Threats to LLM-Based Agents
Wenkai Yang∗1 , Xiaohan Bi∗2 , Yankai Lin†1 , Sishuo Chen2 , Jie Zhou3 , Xu Sun†4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc., China
4
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{wenkaiyang, yankailin}@ruc.edu.cn bxh@stu.pku.edu.cn xusun@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Driven by the rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs), LLM-based
agents have been developed to handle various real-world applications, including
finance, healthcare, and shopping, etc. It is crucial to ensure the reliability and
security of LLM-based agents during applications. However, the safety issues of
LLM-based agents are currently under-explored. In this work, we take the first
step to investigate one of the typical safety threats, backdoor attack, to LLM-based
agents. We first formulate a general framework of agent backdoor attacks, then we
present a thorough analysis of different forms of agent backdoor attacks. Specifically, compared with traditional backdoor attacks on LLMs that are only able to
manipulate the user inputs and model outputs, agent backdoor attacks exhibit more
diverse and covert forms: (1) From the perspective of the final attacking outcomes,
the agent backdoor attacker can not only choose to manipulate the final output
distribution, but also introduce the malicious behavior in an intermediate reasoning
step only, while keeping the final output correct. (2) Furthermore, the former category can be divided into two subcategories based on trigger locations, in which the
backdoor trigger can either be hidden in the user query or appear in an intermediate
observation returned by the external environment. We implement the above variations of agent backdoor attacks on two typical agent tasks including web shopping
and tool utilization. Extensive experiments show that LLM-based agents suffer
severely from backdoor attacks and such backdoor vulnerability cannot be easily
mitigated by current textual backdoor defense algorithms. This indicates an urgent
need for further research on the development of targeted defenses against backdoor
attacks on LLM-based agents.3 Warning: This paper may contain biased content.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [2, 51, 52] have revolutionized rapidly to demonstrate outstanding
capabilities in language generation [35, 36], reasoning and planning [57, 67], and even tool utilization [42, 46]. Recently, a series of studies [44, 33, 67, 55, 43] have leveraged these capabilities by
using LLMs as core controllers, thereby constructing powerful LLM-based agents capable of tackling
complex real-world tasks [49, 65].
∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Authors
3
Code and data are available at https://github.com/lancopku/agent-backdoor-attacks.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

