Testing Calibration in Nearly-Linear Time

Lunjia Hu
Harvard University
lunjia@alumni.stanford.edu
Kevin Tian
University of Texas at Austin
kjtian@cs.utexas.edu

Arun Jambulapati
University of Michigan
jmblpati@gmail.com
Chutong Yang
University of Texas at Austin
cyang98@utexas.edu

Abstract
In the recent literature on machine learning and decision making, calibration has
emerged as a desirable and widely-studied statistical property of the outputs of
binary prediction models. However, the algorithmic aspects of measuring model
calibration have remained relatively less well-explored. Motivated by [BGHN23a],
which proposed a rigorous framework for measuring distances to calibration, we
initiate the algorithmic study of calibration through the lens of property testing.
We define the problem of calibration testing from samples where given n draws
from a distribution D on (predictions, binary outcomes), our goal is to distinguish
between the cases where D is perfectly calibrated or ε-far from calibration. We
make the simple observation that the empirical smooth calibration linear program
can be reformulated as an instance of minimum-cost flow on a highly-structured
graph, and design an exact dynamic programming-based solver for it which runs
in time O(n log2 (n)), and solves the calibration testing problem informationtheoretically optimally in the same time. This improves upon state-of-the-art
black-box linear program solvers requiring Ω(nω ) time, where ω > 2 is the
exponent of matrix multiplication. We also develop algorithms for tolerant variants
of our testing problem improving upon black-box linear program solvers, and
give sample complexity lower bounds for alternative calibration measures to the
one considered in this work. Finally, we present experiments showing the testing
problem we define faithfully captures standard notions of calibration, and that our
algorithms scale efficiently to accommodate large sample sizes.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic predictions are at the heart of modern data science. In domains as wide-ranging as
forecasting (e.g. predicting the chance of rain from meteorological data [MW84, Mur98]), medicine
(e.g. assessing the likelihood of disease [Doi07]), computer vision (e.g. assigning confidence values
for categorizing images [VDDP17]), and more (e.g. speech recognition [AAA+ 16] and recommender
systems [RRSK11]), prediction models have by now become essential components of the decisionmaking pipeline. Particularly in the context of critical, high-risk use cases, the interpretability of
prediction models is therefore paramount in downstream applications. That is, how do we assign
meaning to the predictions our model gives us, especially when the model is uncertain?
We focus on perhaps the most ubiquitous form of prediction modeling: binary predictions, represented
as tuples (v, y) in [0, 1] × {0, 1} (where the v coordinate is our prediction of the likelihood of an event,
and the y coordinate is the observed outcome). We model prediction-outcome pairs in the binary
prediction setting by a joint distribution D over [0, 1] × {0, 1}, fixed in the following discussion. In
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

