Flexible mapping of abstract domains by grid cells via
self-supervised extraction and projection of
generalized velocity signals
Abhiram Iyer1, 3, 4 , Sarthak Chandra2, 3 , Sugandha Sharma2, 3 , and Ila Fiete2, 3, 4
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA
2
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA
3
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA
4
K. Lisa Yang Integrative Computational Neuroscience (ICoN), MIT, Cambridge, MA ,
{abiyer,sarthakc,susharma,fiete}@mit.edu

Abstract
Grid cells in the medial entorhinal cortex create remarkable periodic maps of
explored space during navigation. Recent studies show that they form similar maps
of abstract cognitive spaces. Examples of such abstract environments include auditory tone sequences in which the pitch is continuously varied or images in which
abstract features are continuously deformed (e.g., a cartoon bird whose legs stretch
and shrink). Here, we hypothesize that the brain generalizes how it maps spatial
domains to mapping abstract spaces. To sidestep the computational cost of learning
representations for each high-dimensional sensory input, the brain extracts selfconsistent, low-dimensional descriptions of displacements across abstract spaces,
leveraging the spatial velocity integration of grid cells to efficiently build maps
of different domains. Our neural network model for abstract velocity extraction
factorizes the content of these abstract domains from displacements within the
domains to generate content-independent and self-consistent, low-dimensional
velocity estimates. Crucially, it uses a self-supervised geometric consistency constraint that requires displacements along closed loop trajectories to sum to zero,
an integration that is itself performed by the downstream grid cell circuit over
learning. This process results in high fidelity estimates of velocities and allowed
transitions in abstract domains, a crucial prerequisite for efficient map generation in
these high-dimensional environments. We also show how our method outperforms
traditional dimensionality reduction and deep-learning based motion extraction
networks on the same set of tasks. This is the first neural network model to explain
how grid cells can flexibly represent different abstract spaces and makes the novel
prediction that they should do so while maintaining their population correlation and
manifold structure across domains. Fundamentally, our model sheds light on the
mechanistic origins of cognitive flexibility and transfer of representations across
vastly different domains in brains, providing a potential self-supervised learning
(SSL) framework for leveraging similar ideas in transfer learning and data-efficient
generalization in machine learning and robotics.

1

Introduction

Grid cells in the medial entorhinal cortex are of paramount importance for navigating and representing
spatial domains. Interestingly, a series of recent experiments have shown that the brain still uses the
same cells to represent non-spatial environments that are continuously traversed. These include free
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

