Robust Reinforcement Learning from Corrupted
Human Feedback∗
Alexander Bukharin1

Ilgee Hong1

Haoming Jiang2

Zixuan Zhang1

Zichong Li1

Qingru Zhang1

Tuo Zhao1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) provides a principled framework for aligning AI systems with human preference data. For various reasons, e.g.,
personal bias, context ambiguity, lack of training, etc, human annotators may give
incorrect or inconsistent preference labels. To tackle this challenge, we propose a
robust RLHF approach – R3 M , which models the potentially corrupted preference
label as sparse outliers. Accordingly, we formulate the robust reward learning as an
ℓ1 -regularized maximum likelihood estimation problem. Computationally, we develop an efficient alternating optimization algorithm, which only incurs negligible
computational overhead compared with the standard RLHF approach. Theoretically, we prove that under proper regularity conditions, R3 M can consistently learn
the underlying reward and identify outliers, provided that the number of outlier
labels scales sublinearly with the preference sample size. Furthermore, we remark
that R3 M is versatile and can be extended to various preference optimization methods, including direct preference optimization (DPO). Our experiments on robotic
control and natural language generation with large language models (LLMs) show
that R3 M improves robustness of the reward against several types of perturbations
to the preference data.

1

Introduction

As artificial intelligence (AI) systems continue to advance and become increasingly sophisticated,
ensuring their alignment with human values and preferences has emerged as a paramount concern,
particularly for recent large language models [37, 28]. One promising approach to achieving this
alignment is Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), which involves training AI
systems through a process of reward modeling based on human-provided feedback and preferences
[13, 3, 50].
A significant challenge in RLHF, however, arises from the inherent uncertainty present in the
preference data provided by human evaluators [17, 4]. Since RLHF often targets highly complex
scenarios where defining precise preference standards is difficult, if not impossible, annotators may
provide undesirable or inconsistent preference labels, especially when they lack sufficient experience
or training. In the case of a robotics system designed to assist with household tasks, an untrained
annotator might label actions that complete the task efficiently but in a manner that could potentially
cause property damage or compromise safety as preferable, overlooking the importance of safe and
responsible operation.
An even more concerning scenario is that some human evaluators may maliciously assign incorrect
preference labels [44, 32]. Personal prejudices, agendas, or lack of understanding about the true goals
of the system could lead some annotators to intentionally mislabel examples, which could undermine
the entire RLHF process and cause the model to learn undesirable or misaligned behaviors, posing a
∗

The authors are listed in alphabetical order: 1 Georgia Tech, 2 Amazon.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

