Trajectory Diffusion for ObjectGoal Navigation

Xinyao Yu1,2∗ , Sixian Zhang1,2∗ Xinhang Song1,2 , Xiaorong Qin1,2 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2,3
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Laboratory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, Beijing, 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
3
Institute of Intelligent Computing Technology, Suzhou, CAS
{xinyao.yu, sixian.zhang, xinhang.song, xiaorong.qin}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Object goal navigation requires an agent to navigate to a specified object in an
unseen environment based on visual observations and user-specified goals. Human
decision-making in navigation is sequential, planning a most likely sequence of
actions toward the goal. However, existing ObjectNav methods, both end-to-end
learning methods and modular methods, rely on single-step planning. They output
the next action based on the current model input, which easily overlooks temporal
consistency and leads to myopic planning. To this end, we aim to learn sequence
planning for ObjectNav. Specifically, we propose trajectory diffusion to learn
the distribution of trajectory sequences conditioned on the current observation
and the goal. We utilize DDPM and automatically collected optimal trajectory
segments to train the trajectory diffusion. Once the trajectory diffusion model is
trained, it can generate a temporally coherent sequence of future trajectory for
agent based on its current observations. Experimental results on the Gibson and
MP3D datasets demonstrate that the generated trajectories effectively guide the
agent, resulting in more accurate and efficient navigation. The code is available at
https://github.com/sx-zhang/T-diff.git.

1

Introduction

Embodied AI aims to develop agents with a comprehensive understanding of their environment,
capable of interacting with humans, other agents and entities in real physical environments. As a
fundamental task of embodied AI, visual object goal navigation (ObjectNav) task involves placing
an agent in an unseen environment and tasking it to navigate to a user-specified object (e.g., ‘find a
toilet’) based on visual sensory input. To efficiently complete the ObjectNav task, the agent needs to
construct an information-rich memory to store past experiences (i.e., what it has previously seen) to
avoid redundant searching. Additionally, it needs to learn a planner to plan the future (i.e., determine
the most efficient sequence of actions to navigate to the target) to avoid unnecessary exploration.
Humans are innately smart navigators, as they encode both short-term memories from current
navigation and long-term memories from daily life into a cognitive map. This map records detailed
information about the semantics, positions, and relationships within spatial environments [40]. In
practice, the human decision-making process is understood as finding the most possible sequence of
releases based on cognitive information [41]. Human planning is a sequential process that ensures
temporal consistency and global optimality. However, prior methods of ObjectNav employ single-step
planning rather than sequential planning for navigation. As illustrated in Fig. 1, prior end-to-end
learning methods [66, 45, 62, 28, 18, 33, 34] formulate their planners as end-to-end networks
and train them using reinforcement learning (RL) [66, 45, 62, 28, 18] or imitation learning (IL)
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

