Learning the Expected Core of
Strictly Convex Stochastic Cooperative Games

Nam Phuong Tran
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
Coventry, United Kingdom
nam.p.tran@warwick.ac.uk

The Anh Ta
CSIRO’s Data61
Marsfield, NSW, Australia
theanh.ta@csiro.au

Debmalya Mandal
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
Coventry, United Kingdom
debmalya.mandal@warwick.ac.uk

Shuqing Shi
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, United Kingdom
shuqing.shi@kcl.ac.uk

Yali Du
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, United Kingdom
yali.du@kcl.ac.uk

Long Tran-Thanh
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
Coventry, United Kingdom
long.tran-thanh@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Reward allocation, also known as the credit assignment problem, has been an
important topic in economics, engineering, and machine learning. An important
concept in reward allocation is the core, which is the set of stable allocations
where no agent has the motivation to deviate from the grand coalition. In previous
works, computing the core requires either knowledge of the reward function in
deterministic games or the reward distribution in stochastic games. However, this
is unrealistic, as the reward function or distribution is often only partially known
and may be subject to uncertainty. In this paper, we consider the core learning
problem in stochastic cooperative games, where the reward distribution is unknown.
Our goal is to learn the expected core, that is, the set of allocations that are stable
in expectation, given an oracle that returns a stochastic reward for an enquired
coalition each round. Within the class of strictly convex games, we present an
algorithm named Common-Points-Picking that returns a point in the expected
core given a polynomial number of samples, with high probability. To analyse the
algorithm, we develop a new extension of the separation hyperplane theorem for
multiple convex sets.

1

Introduction

The reward allocation problem is a fundamental challenge in cooperative games that seeks reward
allocation schemes to motivate agents to collaborate or satisfy certain constraints, and its solution
concepts have recently gained popularity within the machine learning literature through its application
in explainable AI (XAI) [17, 28, 13, 31] and cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) [29, 12, 30]. In the realm of XAI, designers often seek to understand which factors of
the model contribute to the outputs. Solution concepts such as the Shapley value [17, 28] and the
core [31, 13] provide frameworks for assessing the influence that each factor has on the model’s
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

