AuctionNet: A Novel Benchmark for Decision-Making
in Large-Scale Games

Kefan Su1,2∗ , Yusen Huo2 , Zhilin Zhang2 , Shuai Dou2 , Chuan Yu2 , Jian Xu2†,
Zongqing Lu1† , Bo Zheng2
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Alibaba Group
1
{sukefan,zongqing.lu}@pku.edu.cn
2
{huoyusen.huoyusen,zhangzhilin.pt,doushuai.ds,
yuchuan.yc,xiyu.xj,bozheng}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Decision-making in large-scale games is an essential research area in artificial
intelligence (AI) with significant real-world impact. However, the limited access to
realistic large-scale game environments has hindered research progress in this area.
In this paper, we present AuctionNet, a benchmark for bid decision-making in largescale ad auctions derived from a real-world online advertising platform. AuctionNet
is composed of three parts: an ad auction environment, a pre-generated dataset
based on the environment, and performance evaluations of several baseline bid
decision-making algorithms. More specifically, the environment effectively replicates the integrity and complexity of real-world ad auctions through the interaction
of several modules: the ad opportunity generation module employs deep generative
networks to bridge the gap between simulated and real-world data while mitigating
the risk of sensitive data exposure; the bidding module implements diverse autobidding agents trained with different decision-making algorithms; and the auction
module is anchored in the classic Generalized Second Price (GSP) auction but also
allows for customization of auction mechanisms as needed. To facilitate research
and provide insights into the environment, we have also pre-generated a substantial
dataset based on the environment. The dataset contains 10 million ad opportunities,
48 diverse auto-bidding agents, and over 500 million auction records. Performance
evaluations of baseline algorithms such as linear programming, reinforcement
learning, and generative models for bid decision-making are also presented as a
part of AuctionNet. AuctionNet has powered the NeurIPS 2024 Auto-Bidding in
Large-Scale Auctions competition, providing competition environments for over
1,500 teams. We believe that AuctionNet is applicable not only to research on bid
decision-making in ad auctions but also to the general area of decision-making in
large-scale games. Code3 : https://github.com/alimama-tech/AuctionNet.

1

Introduction

Decision-making in large-scale games is a fundamental area of research in artificial intelligence.
Agents in a large-scale game need to make strategic decisions to fulfill their objectives under certain
constraints in a competitive environment. The research advances in this area have a profound impact
on a broad range of real-world applications [13, 34, 35, 37]. Online advertising, with a market size of
∗

This work is done during internship at Alibaba Group.
Corresponding author.
3
Alibaba Group retains full ownership rights to this benchmark.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

