Mirror and Preconditioned Gradient Descent in
Wasserstein Space

Clément Bonet
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
clement.bonet@ensae.fr

Théo Uscidda
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
theo.uscidda@ensae.fr

Pierre-Cyril Aubin-Frankowski
TU Wien
pierre-cyril.aubin@tuwien.ac.at

Adam David
Institute of Mathematics
Technische Universität Berlin
david@math.tu-berlin.de
Anna Korba
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
anna.korba@ensae.fr

Abstract
As the problem of minimizing functionals on the Wasserstein space encompasses
many applications in machine learning, different optimization algorithms on Rd
have received their counterpart analog on the Wasserstein space. We focus here
on lifting two explicit algorithms: mirror descent and preconditioned gradient
descent. These algorithms have been introduced to better capture the geometry of
the function to minimize and are provably convergent under appropriate (namely
relative) smoothness and convexity conditions. Adapting these notions to the
Wasserstein space, we prove guarantees of convergence of some Wassersteingradient-based discrete-time schemes for new pairings of objective functionals
and regularizers. The difficulty here is to carefully select along which curves the
functionals should be smooth and convex. We illustrate the advantages of adapting
the geometry induced by the regularizer on ill-conditioned optimization tasks, and
showcase the improvement of choosing different discrepancies and geometries in a
computational biology task of aligning single-cells.

1

Introduction

Minimizing functionals on the space of probability distributions has become ubiquitous in machine
learning for e.g. sampling [13, 129], generative modeling [53, 86], learning neural networks [36, 90,
107], dataset transformation [4, 63], or modeling population dynamics [23, 120]. It is a challenging
task as it is an infinite-dimensional problem. Wasserstein gradient flows [5] provide an elegant way to
solve such problems on the Wasserstein space, i.e., the space of probability distributions with bounded
second moment, equipped with the Wasserstein-2 distance from optimal transport (OT). These flows
provide continuous paths of distributions decreasing the objective functional and can be seen as analog
to Euclidean gradient flows [111]. Their implicit time discretization, referred to as the JKO scheme
[66], has been studied in depth [1, 26, 95, 111]. In contrast, explicit schemes, despite being easier to
implement, have been less investigated. Most previous works focus on the optimization of a specific
objective functional with a time-discretation of its gradient flow with the Wasserstein-2 metrics. For
instance, the forward Euler discretization leads to the Wasserstein gradient descent. The latter takes
the form of gradient descent (GD) on the position of particles for functionals with a closed-form
over discrete measures, e.g. Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD), which can be of interest to
train neural networks [7, 30]. For objectives involving absolutely continuous measures, such as the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence for sampling, other discretizations can be easily computed such
as the Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) [106]. This leaves the question open of assessing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

