Nearest Neighbor Speculative Decoding for
LLM Generation and Attribution
Minghan Li1∗, Xilun Chen2 , Ari Holtzman3 , Beidi Chen2,4
Jimmy Lin5 , Wen-tau Yih2 , Xi Victoria Lin2
1
Cohere 2 Meta FAIR 3 University of Chicago
4
Carnegie Mellon University 5 University of Waterloo
minghan@cohere.com, aholtzman@uchicago.edu, beidic@andrew.cmu.edu
jimmylin@uwaterloo.ca, {xilun, scottyih, victorialin}@meta.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) often hallucinate and lack the ability to provide
attribution for their generations. Semi-parametric LMs, such as kNN-LM, approach
these limitations by refining the output of an LM for a given prompt using its
nearest neighbor matches in a non-parametric data store. However, these models
often exhibit slow inference speeds and produce non-fluent texts. In this paper, we
introduce Nearest Neighbor Speculative Decoding (N EST), a novel semi-parametric
language modeling approach that is capable of incorporating real-world text spans
of arbitrary length into the LM generations and providing attribution to their
sources. N EST performs token-level retrieval at each inference step to compute a
semi-parametric mixture distribution and identify promising span continuations
in a corpus. It then uses an approximate speculative decoding procedure that
accepts a prefix of the retrieved span or generates a new token. N EST significantly
enhances the generation quality and attribution rate of the base LM across a variety
of knowledge-intensive tasks, surpassing the conventional kNN-LM method and
performing competitively with in-context retrieval augmentation. In addition,
N EST substantially improves the generation speed, achieving a 1.8× speedup
in inference time when applied to Llama-2-Chat 70B. Code will be released at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/NEST/tree/main.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong potential as multi-task solvers, excelling
in a wide range of applications (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a;
Anil et al., 2024). Despite their advanced capabilities, LLMs frequently encounter the problem of
hallucination, particularly when dealing with long-tail knowledge that is less represented in their
training data (Kandpal et al., 2023; Asai et al., 2023a). To address this limitation, retrieval augmentation incorporates information retrieval and nearest neighbour search from a non-parametric data store
to enhance evidence-based and situated reasoning with LLMs. The resulting semi-parametric LMs
exhibit a reduced tendency to generate unsupported content (Khandelwal et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al.,
2022; Shi et al., 2024a,b; Asai et al., 2023a).
However, the effectiveness of retrieval-augmented language models (RALMs) in ensuring accurate
and reliable content generation varies. The widely used in-context retrieval-augmentation (RA)
regime (Ram et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024a,b) softly biases the LM output distribution by prepending
retrieved content to the input, which does not reliably guarantee faithful attribution of information.
Approaches such as kNN-LM (Khandelwal et al., 2020) modify the LM output with a non-parametric
∗

Work done during internship at Meta.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

