Simplifying Constraint Inference with Inverse
Reinforcement Learning

Adriana Hugessen
Mila, Université de Montréal

Harley Wiltzer
Mila, McGill University

Glen Berseth
Mila, Université de Montréal

{adriana.knatchbull-hugessen,wiltzerh,glen.berseth}@mila.quebec

Abstract
Learning safe policies has presented a longstanding challenge for the reinforcement
learning (RL) community. Various formulations of safe RL have been proposed;
However, fundamentally, tabula rasa RL must learn safety constraints through
experience, which is problematic for real-world applications. Imitation learning is
often preferred in real-world settings because the experts’ safety preferences are
embedded in the data the agent imitates. However, imitation learning is limited in
its extensibility to new tasks, which can only be learned by providing the agent
with expert trajectories. For safety-critical applications with sub-optimal or inexact
expert data, it would be preferable to learn only the safety aspects of the policy
through imitation, while still allowing for task learning with RL. The field of
inverse constrained RL, which seeks to infer constraints from expert data, is a
promising step in this direction. However, prior work in this area has relied on
complex tri-level optimizations in order to infer safe behavior (constraints). This
challenging optimization landscape leads to sub-optimal performance on several
benchmark tasks. In this work, we present a simplified version of constraint
inference that performs as well or better than prior work across a collection of
continuous-control benchmarks. Moreover, besides improving performance, this
simplified framework is easier to implement, tune, and more readily lends itself to
various extensions, such as offline constraint inference. Our code is made available
at https://github.com/ahugs/simple-icrl.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant advances in recent years, yet real-world applications of RL remain limited due to various challenges, including particularly safety concerns
[Dulac-Arnold et al., 2021]. One common setting where RL holds promise for real-world deployments is replacing existing, possibly sub-optimal, human-managed control policies. For example, in
the field of power network control, decisions are often made by a combination of automatic control
policies combined with careful human monitoring and intervention [Marot et al., 2022]. However,
concerns regarding the deployment of autonomous systems on safety-critical tasks have hindered the
adoption of RL for replacing legacy control systems. This is particularly true for deep RL, which
functions as a black box controller.
In the setting of replacing legacy controllers, however, the challenge is simplified due to access to
data produced by the current control system. While existing control policies may be sub-optimal, they
are nonetheless “safe” in the sense that they obey some explicitly or implicitly defined constraints
corresponding to a human understanding of safety. Ideally, we would like to be able to learn an RL
policy that can outperform the current system, in terms of optimizing the reward, while continuing to
respect these constraints. When these constraints are unknown (i.e. defined implicitly through human
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

