Diffusion for World Modeling:
Visual Details Matter in Atari†
Eloi Alonso∗
University of Geneva

Adam Jelley∗
University of Edinburgh

Amos Storkey
University of Edinburgh

Vincent Micheli
University of Geneva

Tim Pearce‡
Microsoft Research

Anssi Kanervisto
Microsoft Research

François Fleuret‡
University of Geneva

Abstract
World models constitute a promising approach for training reinforcement learning
agents in a safe and sample-efficient manner. Recent world models predominantly
operate on sequences of discrete latent variables to model environment dynamics.
However, this compression into a compact discrete representation may ignore
visual details that are important for reinforcement learning. Concurrently, diffusion
models have become a dominant approach for image generation, challenging
well-established methods modeling discrete latents. Motivated by this paradigm
shift, we introduce DIAMOND (DIffusion As a Model Of eNvironment Dreams),
a reinforcement learning agent trained in a diffusion world model. We analyze
the key design choices that are required to make diffusion suitable for world
modeling, and demonstrate how improved visual details can lead to improved
agent performance. DIAMOND achieves a mean human normalized score of 1.46
on the competitive Atari 100k benchmark; a new best for agents trained entirely
within a world model. We further demonstrate that DIAMOND’s diffusion world
model can stand alone as an interactive neural game engine by training on static
Counter-Strike: Global Offensive gameplay. To foster future research on diffusion
for world modeling, we release our code, agents, videos and playable world models
at https://diamond-wm.github.io.

1

Introduction

Generative models of environments, or “world models" (Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018), are becoming
increasingly important as a component for generalist agents to plan and reason about their environment
(LeCun, 2022). Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated a wide variety of successes in recent
years (Silver et al., 2016; Degrave et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022), but is well-known to be sample
inefficient, which limits real-world applications. World models have shown promise for training
reinforcement learning agents across diverse environments (Hafner et al., 2023; Schrittwieser et al.,
2020), with greatly improved sample-efficiency (Ye et al., 2021), which can enable learning from
experience in the real world (Wu et al., 2023).
Recent world modeling methods (Hafner et al., 2021; Micheli et al., 2023; Robine et al., 2023;
Hafner et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) often model environment dynamics as a sequence of discrete
latent variables. Discretization of the latent space helps to avoid compounding error over multi-step
time horizons. However, this encoding may lose information, resulting in a loss of generality and
reconstruction quality. This may be problematic for more real-world scenarios where the information
†
∗

To prevent confusion, this is the final version of (Alonso et al., 2023) and is not related to (Ding et al., 2024).
Equal contribution. ‡ Equal supervision. Contact: eloi.alonso@unige.ch and adam.jelley@ed.ac.uk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

