Learning General Parameterized Policies for Infinite
Horizon Average Reward Constrained MDPs via
Primal-Dual Policy Gradient Algorithm

Qinbo Bai
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
bai113@purdue.edu

Washim Uddin Mondal
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
Kanpur, UP, India 208016
wmondal@iitk.ac.in

Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
vaneet@purdue.edu

Abstract
This paper explores the realm of infinite horizon average reward Constrained
Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs). To the best of our knowledge, this work
is the first to delve into the regret and constraint violation analysis of average
reward CMDPs with a general policy parametrization. To address this challenge,
we propose a primal dual-based policy gradient algorithm that adeptly manages
the constraints while ensuring a low regret guarantee toward achieving a global
optimal policy. In particular, our proposed algorithm achieves Õ(T 4/5 ) objective
regret and Õ(T 4/5 ) constraint violation bounds.

1

Introduction

The framework of Reinforcement Learning (RL) is concerned with a class of problems where an agent
learns to yield the maximum cumulative reward in an unknown environment via repeated interaction.
RL finds applications in diverse areas, such as wireless communication, transportation, and epidemic
control [1, 2, 3]. RL problems are mainly categorized into three setups: episodic, infinite horizon
discounted reward, and infinite horizon average reward. Among them, the infinite horizon average
reward setup is particularly significant for real-world applications. It aligns with most of the practical
scenarios and captures their long-term goals. Some applications in real life require the learning
procedure to respect the boundaries of certain constraints. In an epidemic control setup, for example,
vaccination policies must take the supply shortage (budget constraint) into account. Such restrictive
decision-making routines are described by constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDP) [4, 5, 6].
Existing papers on CMDPs utilize either a tabular or a linear MDP structure. This work provides the
first algorithm for an infinite horizon average reward CMDP with general parametrization and proves
its sub-linear regret and constraint violation bounds.
There are two primary ways to solve a CMDP problem in the infinite horizon average reward setting.
The first one, known as the model-based approach, involves constructing estimates of the transition
probabilities of the underlying CMDP, which are subsequently utilized to derive policies [6, 7, 5].
The caveat of this approach is the large memory requirement to store the estimated parameters, which
effectively curtails its applicability to CMDPs with large state spaces. The alternative strategy, known
as the model-free approach, either directly estimates the policy function or maintains an estimate
of the Q function, which is subsequently used for policy generation [8]. Model-free algorithms
typically demand lower memory and computational resources than their model-based counterparts.
Although the CMDP has been solved in a model-free manner in the tabular [8] and linear [9] setups,
its exploration with the general parameterization is still open and is the goal of this paper.
General parameterization indexes the policies by finite-dimensional parameters (e.g., weights of
neural networks) to accommodate large state spaces. The learning is manifested by updating these
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

