Derivatives of Stochastic Gradient Descent in
parametric optimization

Franck Iutzeler
Université Paul Sabatier,
Institut de Mathématiques de
Toulouse, France.

Edouard Pauwels
Toulouse School of Economics,
Université Toulouse Capitole,
Toulouse, France.

Samuel Vaiter
CNRS &
Université Côte d’Azur,
Laboratoire J. A. Dieudonné.
Nice, France.

Abstract
We consider stochastic optimization problems where the objective depends on
some parameter, as commonly found in hyperparameter optimization for instance.
We investigate the behavior of the derivatives of the iterates of Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) with respect to that parameter and show that they are driven by an
inexact SGD recursion on a different objective function, perturbed by the convergence of the original SGD. This enables us to establish that the derivatives of SGD
converge to the derivative of the solution mapping in terms of mean squared error
whenever the objective is strongly convex. Specifically, we demonstrate that with
constant step-sizes, these derivatives stabilize within a noise ball centered at the
solution derivative, and that with vanishing step-sizes they exhibit O(log(k)2 /k)
convergence rates. Additionally, we prove exponential convergence in the interpolation regime. Our theoretical findings are illustrated by numerical experiments
on synthetic tasks.

1

Introduction

The differentiation of iterative algorithms has been a subject of research since the 1990s (Gilbert,
1992; Christianson, 1994; Beck, 1994), and was succinctly described as “piggyback differentiation” by Griewank and Faure (2003). This idea has gained renewed interest within the machine
learning community, particularly for applications such as hyperparameter optimization (Maclaurin
et al., 2015; Franceschi et al., 2017), meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017; Rajeswaran et al., 2019), and
learning discretization of total variation (Chambolle and Pock, 2021; Bogensperger et al., 2022).
When applied to an optimization problem, an important theoretical concern is the convergence of
the derivatives of iterates to the derivatives of the solution. Traditional guarantees focus on asymptotic convergence to the solution derivative, as described by the implicit function theorem (Gilbert,
1992; Christianson, 1994; Beck, 1994). This issue has inspired recent works for smooth optimization algorithms (Mehmood and Ochs, 2020, 2022), generic nonsmooth iterations (Bolte et al., 2022),
and second-order methods (Bolte et al., 2023).
Convergence analysis of iterative processes have predominantly focused on deterministic algorithms
such as the gradient descent. In this work, we extend these results in the context of strongly convex
parametric optimization by studying the iterative differentiation of the Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) algorithm. Since the seminal work of Robbins and Monro (1951), SGD has been a workhorse
of stochastic optimization and is extensively employed in training various machine learning models (Bottou et al., 2018; Gower et al., 2019). A critical aspect of our work is based on the fact that
the sequence of iterative derivatives in this stochastic setting is itself a stochastic gradient sequence.
The goal of this work is to answer the following question:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

