DECO-Bench: Unified Benchmark for Decoupled
Task-Agnostic Synthetic Data Release

Farzaneh Askari‹,1,2 , Lingjuan Lyu1 , Vivek Sharma‹,:,1
1
Sony AI, Sony Research,
2
McGill University
farzaneh.askari@mail.mcgill.ca, lingjuan.lv@sony.com, viveksharma@sony.com

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the question of how to systematically benchmark taskagnostic decoupling methods for privacy-preserving machine learning (ML). Sharing datasets that include sensitive information often triggers privacy concerns,
necessitating robust decoupling methods to separate sensitive and non-sensitive
attributes. Despite the development of numerous decoupling techniques, a standard benchmark for systematically comparing these methods remains absent. Our
framework integrates various decoupling techniques along with synthetic data
generation and evaluation protocols within a unified system. Using our framework,
we benchmark various decoupling techniques and evaluate their privacy-utility
trade-offs. Finally, we release our source code, pre-trained models, datasets of
decoupled representations to foster research in this area.

1

Introduction

The advancement of machine learning and its integration into real-world applications are rapidly
accelerating due to globalization and the abundance of data. However, the use of all data sources
remains limited because of compliance with modern privacy standards. The privacy-preserving
machine learning community has addressed this issue by proposing decoupling techniques for raw
data. These methods aim to alleviate privacy concerns by separating sensitive from non-sensitive
information and anonymizing the sensitive data.
Imagine a party owning a large dataset of face images with well-annotated attributes (e.g., race, age,
gender, emotions). This data could benefit many research studies and applications, such as face
recognition and age prediction. However, privacy concerns hinder the sharing of this data. The data
holder cannot foresee all potential use cases before releasing the dataset, making it essential to employ
task-agnostic decoupling methods as a privacy-preserving measure. The representation decoupling
studies often utilize adversarial representation learning [32, 52, 17, 44, 31, 37, 38, 45, 35, 47, 48],
including non-linear neural networks and non-convex optimization. Consequently, they lack formal
privacy guarantees (in contrast with differential privacy, [14, 15]) and their privacy and utility
performance is evaluated empirically and varies across studies.
Our goal is to propose a benchmarking framework to systematically evaluate decoupling techniques.
By benchmarking these techniques, we aim to accelerate privacy-preserving research and create a
level playing field for researchers. While our framework is designed to be task and data agnostic, this
study focuses on visual data, specifically image datasets and image classification for benchmarking
and dataset release.
Equal contribution. 2 This work was conducted while FA was doing internship at Sony AI. : VS started
and led the project. Correspondence to: Vivek Sharma.
‹

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

