Quantifying the Gain in Weak-to-Strong
Generalization
Moses Charikar
Stanford University
moses@cs.stanford.edu

Chirag Pabbaraju
Stanford University
cpabbara@cs.stanford.edu

Kirankumar Shiragur
Microsoft Research
kshiragur@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent advances in large language models have shown capabilities that are extraordinary and near-superhuman. These models operate with such complexity that
reliably evaluating and aligning them proves challenging for humans. This leads to
the natural question: can guidance from weak models (like humans) adequately
direct the capabilities of strong models? In a recent and somewhat surprising work,
Burns et al. [BIK+ 23] empirically demonstrated that when strong models (like
GPT-4) are finetuned using labels generated by weak supervisors (like GPT-2), the
strong models outperform their weaker counterparts—a phenomenon they term
weak-to-strong generalization.
In this work, we present a theoretical framework for understanding weak-tostrong generalization. Specifically, we show that the improvement in performance
achieved by strong models over their weaker counterparts is quantified by the misfit
error incurred by the strong model on labels generated by the weaker model. Our
theory reveals several curious algorithmic insights. For instance, we can predict
the amount by which the strong model will improve over the weak model, and also
choose among different weak models to train the strong model, based on its misfit
error. We validate our theoretical findings through various empirical assessments.

1

Introduction

Present-day AI models demonstrate incredible capabilities at a variety of extremely difficult tasks.
For this reason, they are frequently described as being superhuman, in that it seems hard to imagine a
human displaying the same abilities as the AI model. For example, move 37 in AlphaGo’s famous
victory against Go expert Lee Sedol [Met16] has been described as being beyond the realm of human
imagination. In this sense, today’s AI models are well on the path of exhibiting new and emergent
abilities [WTB+ 22]. Ultimately, we want these new abilities to be aligned with what would be
beneficial to humanity. This rationale is what primarily guides the training of large-scale AI models
through human feedback [CLB+ 17]. However, given that we expect AI models to pick up skills that
we ourselves don’t fully grasp as humans, how can we enable these highly capable models to realize
their potential?
A recent work by [BIK+ 23] shows that not all hope is lost in this endeavor. To model humans as being
weak supervisors for increasingly strong AI models, they conduct the following “weak-to-strong
generalization” experiment. Suppose we finetune a small language model like GPT-2 [RWC+ 19] on
data with ground-truth labels for a task. What happens if we then finetune a large language model
like GPT-4 [Ope23a] on data labeled by GPT-2, instead of data having ground-truth labels? Would
GPT-4 simply overfit to GPT-2’s labels and do no better, or would it outperform GPT-2, given that it
is inherently a much stronger model? The surprising experimental result is that GPT-4 trained in this
manner outperforms GPT-2 when evaluated on the true data, for a variety of finetuning tasks. Note
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

