LoQT: Low-Rank Adapters for Quantized Pretraining
Sebastian Loeschcke∗
University of Copenhagen
sbl@di.ku.dk
Michael J. Kastoryano
University of Copenhagen
mika@di.ku.dk

Mads Toftrup∗
Aarhus University
toftrup@cs.au.dk

Serge Belongie
University of Copenhagen
s.belongie@di.ku.dk

Vésteinn Snæbjarnarson
University of Copenhagen
vesn@di.ku.dk

Abstract
Despite advances using low-rank adapters and quantization, pretraining of large
models on consumer hardware has not been possible without model sharding, offloading during training, or per-layer gradient updates. To address these limitations,
we propose Low-Rank Adapters for Quantized Training (LoQT), a method for efficiently training quantized models. LoQT uses gradient-based tensor factorization
to initialize low-rank trainable weight matrices that are periodically merged into
quantized full-rank weight matrices. Our approach is suitable for both pretraining
and fine-tuning models. We demonstrate this for language modeling and downstream task adaptation, finding that LoQT enables efficient training of models up
to 7B parameters on a 24GB GPU. We also demonstrate the feasibility of training
a 13B model using per-layer gradient updates on the same hardware.
https://github.com/sebulo/LoQT

1

Introduction
Llama 13B

RTX 4090 Memory Type
Training large neural networks requires substanLoQT A8bit LW
OOM
tial hardware and energy resources. Reducing
LoQT A8bit
Optimizer
these requirements is important for both cost efModel
LoQT
Forward
ficiency and environmental reasons, while also
GaLore A8bit LW
Gradients
lowering the entry barrier for researchers and
Unknown
GaLore A8bit
practitioners in general. In this work, we target
GaLore
the memory component—a key part of the hardAdam
ware requirements. Memory use during training
comes primarily from storing the weights of the
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Memory Usage (GB)
model, the optimizer states, and activations. To
target the memory footprint of the weights, vari- Figure 1: Memory usage of Llama 13B, rank 1024.
ous applications of quantization [1, 2, 3, 4] have LW: per-layer gradient updates. A8bit: Adam 8bit.
been used. For targeting the optimizer states,
variations on low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [5, 6, 3, 7] have been suggested to decrease the number of
trainable parameters for fine-tuning, in combination with the use of low precision representations.
Low-rank approaches for projecting gradients to a lower rank have also been suggested [8]. In this
work, we combine these approaches to address the model size and optimizer states, resulting in a
highly memory-efficient configuration that is also suitable for pretraining.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

