SOFTS: Efficient Multivariate Time Series Forecasting
with Series-Core Fusion
Lu Han∗, Xu-Yang Chen∗, Han-Jia Ye†, De-Chuan Zhan
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{hanlu, chenxy, yehj, zhandc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Multivariate time series forecasting plays a crucial role in various fields such as finance, traffic management, energy, and healthcare. Recent studies have highlighted
the advantages of channel independence to resist distribution drift but neglect
channel correlations, limiting further enhancements. Several methods utilize mechanisms like attention or mixer to address this by capturing channel correlations,
but they either introduce excessive complexity or rely too heavily on the correlation to achieve satisfactory results under distribution drifts, particularly with a
large number of channels. Addressing this gap, this paper presents an efficient
MLP-based model, the Series-cOre Fused Time Series forecaster (SOFTS), which
incorporates a novel STar Aggregate-Redistribute (STAR) module. Unlike traditional approaches that manage channel interactions through distributed structures,
e.g., attention, STAR employs a centralized strategy to improve efficiency and
reduce reliance on the quality of each channel. It aggregates all series to form
a global core representation, which is then dispatched and fused with individual
series representations to facilitate channel interactions effectively. SOFTS achieves
superior performance over existing state-of-the-art methods with only linear complexity. The broad applicability of the STAR module across different forecasting
models is also demonstrated empirically. We have made our code publicly available
at https://github.com/Secilia-Cxy/SOFTS.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting plays a critical role in numerous applications across various fields, including
environment [9], traffic management [16], energy [17], communication [45], and healthcare [28].
The ability to accurately predict future values based on previously observed data is fundamental for
decision-making, policy development, and strategic planning in these areas. Historically, models such
as ARIMA and Exponential Smoothing were standard in forecasting, noted for their simplicity and
effectiveness in certain contexts [2]. However, the emergence of deep learning models, particularly
those exploiting structures like Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [14, 3, 30] and Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) [1, 8], has shifted the paradigm towards more complex models capable of
understanding intricate patterns in time series data. To overcome the inability to capture long-term
dependencies, Transformer-based models have been a popular direction and achieved remarkable
performance, especially on long-term multivariate time series forecasting [51, 29, 27].
Earlier on, Transformer-based methods perform embedding techniques like linear or convolution
layers to aggregate information from different channels, then extract information along the temporal
dimension via attention mechanisms [51, 37, 52]. However, such channel mixing structures were
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

