ALPINE: Unveiling The Planning Capability of
Autoregressive Learning in Language Models

Siwei Wang1∗ Yifei Shen1∗ Shi Feng2 Haoran Sun3 Shang-Hua Teng4† Wei Chen1
1
Microsoft Research Asia ({siweiwang, yifeishen, weic}@microsoft.com)
2
Harvard University (shifeng@fas.harvard.edu)
3
Peking University (sunhaoran0301@stu.pku.edu.cn)
4
University of Southern California (shanghua@usc.edu)

Abstract
Planning is a crucial element of both human intelligence and contemporary large
language models (LLMs). In this paper, we initiate a theoretical investigation
into the emergence of planning capabilities in Transformer-based LLMs via their
next-word prediction mechanisms. We model planning as a network path-finding
task, where the objective is to generate a valid path from a specified source node
to a designated target node. Our mathematical characterization shows that Transformer architectures can execute path-finding by embedding the adjacency and
reachability matrices within their weights. Furthermore, our theoretical analysis
of gradient-based learning dynamics reveals that LLMs can learn both the adjacency and a limited form of the reachability matrices. These theoretical insights
are then validated through experiments, which demonstrate that Transformer architectures indeed learn the adjacency and an incomplete reachability matrices,
consistent with our theoretical predictions. When applying our methodology to the
real-world planning benchmark Blocksworld, our observations remain consistent.
Additionally, our analyses uncover a fundamental limitation of current Transformer
architectures in path-finding: these architectures cannot identify reachability relationships through transitivity, which leads to failures in generating paths when
concatenation is required. These findings provide new insights into how the internal mechanisms of autoregressive learning facilitate intelligent planning and
deepen our understanding of how future LLMs might achieve more advanced and
general planning-and-reasoning capabilities across diverse applications.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT have impressed many with their powerful capabilities across a wide range of tasks, including language processing, knowledge extraction, reasoning,
planning, coding, tool use, and more [1]. However, we continue to be intrigued by the underlying
mechanisms that fuel the power of LLMs. While all current LLMs are built on the Transformer
architecture, which uses autoregressive learning to predict the next word in a language sequence, the
overarching question remains:
Why does the process of next-word prediction give rise to intelligence?
There is no definite answer to this question yet, but researchers are approaching the problem from
various angles, aiming to characterize the power and limitations of LLMs, as well as to capture
their underlying acquisition, abstraction, generalization, adaptation, and reasoning mechanisms.
∗
†

denotes equal contributions. Corresponding author: Wei Chen (weic@microsoft.com)
Supported by a Simons Foundation Investigator Award.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

