Unveiling Causal Reasoning in Large Language
Models: Reality or Mirage?

Haoang Chi1,2∗, He Li2∗ , Wenjing Yang2†, Feng Liu3 , Long Lan2 , Xiaoguang Ren1 ,
Tongliang Liu4 , Bo Han5
1
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, 2 National University of Defense Technology,
3
University of Melbourne, 4 University of Sydney, 5 Hong Kong Baptist University
{haoangchi618,fengliu.ml}@gmail.com, rxg_nudt@126.com
{lihe_117,wenjing.yang, long.lan}@nudt.edu.cn,
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au, bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Causal reasoning capability is critical in advancing large language models (LLMs)
toward strong artificial intelligence. While versatile LLMs appear to have demonstrated capabilities in understanding contextual causality and providing responses
that obey the laws of causality, it remains unclear whether they perform genuine
causal reasoning akin to humans. However, current evidence indicates the contrary. Specifically, LLMs are only capable of performing shallow (level-1) causal
reasoning, primarily attributed to the causal knowledge embedded in their parameters, but they lack the capacity for genuine human-like (level-2) causal reasoning.
To support this hypothesis, methodologically, we delve into the autoregression
mechanism of transformer-based LLMs, revealing that it is not inherently causal.
Empirically, we introduce a new causal Q&A benchmark called CausalProbe-2024,
whose corpora are fresh and nearly unseen for the studied LLMs. The LLMs
exhibit a significant performance drop on CausalProbe-2024 compared to earlier
benchmarks, indicating the fact that they primarily engage in level-1 causal reasoning. To bridge the gap towards level-2 causal reasoning, we draw inspiration
from the fact that human reasoning is usually facilitated by general knowledge
and intended goals. We propose G2 -Reasoner, a method that incorporates general
knowledge and goal-oriented prompts into LLMs’ causal reasoning processes.
Experiments demonstrate that G2 -Reasoner significantly enhances LLMs’ causal
reasoning capability, particularly in fresh and counterfactual contexts. This work
sheds light on a new path for LLMs to advance towards genuine causal reasoning,
going beyond level-1 and making strides towards level-2.

1

Introduction

The emergent of large language models (LLMs), such as GPT 4 [45], Gemini 1.5 [16], and Claude 3
[2], have significantly changed the paradigm of how people work and do research in recent years,
demonstrating competitive abilities (LLMs) in instruction following [1, 7, 45, 60], in-context learning
[8, 12, 67], reasoning [63, 70], coding [10, 18, 51] and etc. LLMs have demonstrated remarkable
abilities in processing and generating human-like text, leading to a belief that they may possess the
intelligence akin to human cognition. Reasoning is an essential component of human intelligence and
a prominent characteristic that distinguishes humans from other species [47]. Many recent works
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

