A Synthetic Dataset for Personal Attribute Inference

Hanna Yukhymenko1 , Robin Staab2 , Mark Vero2 , Martin Vechev2
Department of Mathematics, 2 Department of Computer Science - ETH Zurich
hyukhymenko@ethz.ch, {robin.staab,mark.vero,martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch
1

Abstract
Recently powerful Large Language Models (LLMs) have become easily accessible
to hundreds of millions of users world-wide. However, their strong capabilities and
vast world knowledge do not come without associated privacy risks. In this work,
we focus on the emerging privacy threat LLMs pose – the ability to accurately
infer personal information from online texts. Despite the growing importance of
LLM-based author profiling, research in this area has been hampered by a lack of
suitable public datasets, largely due to ethical and privacy concerns associated with
real personal data. We take two steps to address this problem: (i) we construct a
simulation framework for the popular social media platform Reddit using LLM
agents seeded with synthetic personal profiles; (ii) using this framework, we
generate SynthPAI, a diverse synthetic dataset of over 7800 comments manually
labeled for personal attributes. We validate our dataset with a human study showing
that humans barely outperform random guessing on the task of distinguishing our
synthetic comments from real ones. Further, we verify that our dataset enables
meaningful personal attribute inference research by showing across 18 state-of-theart LLMs that our synthetic comments allow us to draw the same conclusions as
real-world data. Combined, our experimental results, dataset and pipeline form a
strong basis for future privacy-preserving research geared towards understanding
and mitigating inference-based privacy threats that LLMs pose.

1

Introduction

The increasing capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) alongside their widespread adoption
have sparked ample discussions about their potential misuse [1, 2]. Besides issues such as toxic,
unsafe, or otherwise harmful generations, potential privacy implications of LLMs have been receiving
an increasing amount of attention [3–5]. Most existing LLM privacy research focuses on memorization, the issue of models repeating training data at inference time [3]. However, as recently shown by
Staab et al. [6], and previously outlined by Weidinger et al. [7], current frontier LLMs can also be
misused to accurately infer personal attributes from online texts at a scale unattainable by humans.
Even despite the legal relevance of such automated personal attribute inferences (PAIs) (§2), research
in this area has been significantly held back by a lack of suitable openly available datasets.
The PAI Data Gap This lack of data is a result of multiple factors: As PAI research, by nature,
deals with personal (and sensitive) data underlying strict data protection regulations (e.g., GDPR §2),
making real-world datasets public is legally challenging. While prior work on PAI used real-world
data [6, 8], they each had to construct their datasets from scratch, not releasing them due to associated
ethical and legal concerns. Staab et al. [6] tried to address this issue to an extent by releasing synthetic
examples instead of their actual data. However, they acknowledge that these samples fall short of
real-world texts both in setting and style and, as such, are not a viable long-term replacement for real
data. Additionally, due to the considerable effort in obtaining personal attribute labels over free text,
even the few partially available datasets (§2) contain labels for only a very restricted set of attributes.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

