RL on Incorrect Synthetic Data Scales
the Efficiency of LLM Math Reasoning by Eight-Fold
∗,1

Amrith Setlur

1

2

3

Saurabh Garg Xinyang (Young) Geng Naman Garg
1
1,2
Virginia Smith Aviral Kumar
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Google DeepMind
MultiOn

Abstract
Training on model-generated synthetic data is a promising approach for finetuning
LLMs, but it remains unclear when it helps or hurts. In this paper, we investigate
this question for math reasoning via an empirical study, followed by building a
conceptual understanding of our observations. First, we find that while the typical
approach of finetuning a model on synthetic correct or positive problem-solution
pairs generated by capable models offers modest performance gains, sampling
more correct solutions from the finetuned learner itself followed by subsequent
fine-tuning on this self-generated data doubles the efficiency of the same synthetic
problems. At the same time, training on model-generated positives can amplify
various spurious correlations, resulting in flat or even inverse scaling trends as the
amount of data increases. Surprisingly, we find that several of these issues can be
addressed if we also utilize negative responses, i.e., model-generated responses that
are deemed incorrect by a final answer verifier. Crucially, these negatives must be
constructed such that the training can appropriately recover the utility or advantage
of each intermediate step in the negative response. With this per-step scheme, we
are able to attain consistent gains over only positive data, attaining performance
similar to amplifying the amount of synthetic data by 8×. We show that training
on per-step negatives can help to unlearn spurious correlations in the positive data,
and is equivalent to advantage-weighted reinforcement learning (RL), implying
that it inherits robustness benefits of RL over imitating positive data alone.

1

Introduction

Training large language models (LLMs) relies on the ability to train on large amounts of high-quality
data. It is predicted that we will run out of high-quality internet data by 2026 [32, 58], necessitating
training on model-generated data, or what is commonly referred to as synthetic data. Recent trends
illustrate that scaling up synthetic data can lead to improvements [8, 29] on hard reasoning problems,
while other results illustrate that training on synthetic data can steer the performance of the model into
a downward spiral [3, 17, 51]—amplying biases, misinformation, and undesired stylistic properties.
Thus while in principle, synthetic data could potentially address data scarcity, it must be designed in
an appropriate manner to be effective. However, this has been hard due to a lack of an understanding
of how synthetic data contributes to LLM behavior.
To provide clarity on how synthetic data contributes to performance, we aim to understand its impact
on LLM capabilities via a study on math reasoning, a prevalent scenario where synthetic data is used.
Typically, in this setting, synthetic data corresponds to correct or positive model-generated responses
for a novel set of initial problems synthesized by prompting capable models [29, 31]. The resulting
model is then evaluated on a held-out set of problems drawn from a test set. Perhaps as expected,
we find that performance improves when finetuning models on positive synthetic responses, though
the scaling rates for performance improvement are often substantially slower than those observed
during pretraining. Concretely, we find that under the scaling law of Zhang et al. [71], the error rate
−0.05
−0.15
scales as ≈D
to D
in the size D of synthetic dataset. Second, we observe that not all types
∗

Corresponding author. Please send correspondences to asetlur@andrew.cmu.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

