On Causal Discovery in the Presence of Deterministic
Relations
Loka Li1∗ , Haoyue Dai2∗ , Hanin Al Ghothani1 , Biwei Huang3 ,
Jiji Zhang4 , Shahar Harel5 , Isaac Bentwich5 , Guangyi Chen1,2 , Kun Zhang1,2
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2
Carnegie Mellon University, 3 University of California San Diego
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 5 Quris AI
{longkang.li, kun.zhang}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Many causal discovery methods typically rely on the assumption of independent
noise, yet real-life situations often involve deterministic relationships. In these
cases, observed variables are represented as deterministic functions of their parental
variables without noise. When determinism is present, constraint-based methods
encounter challenges due to the violation of the faithfulness assumption. In this
paper, we find, supported by both theoretical analysis and empirical evidence,
that score-based methods with exact search can naturally address the issues of
deterministic relations under rather mild assumptions. Nonetheless, exact scorebased methods can be computationally expensive. To enhance the efficiency and
scalability, we develop a novel framework for causal discovery that can detect
and handle deterministic relations, called Determinism-aware Greedy Equivalent
Search (DGES). DGES comprises three phases: (1) identify minimal deterministic
clusters (i.e., a minimal set of variables with deterministic relationships), (2) run
modified Greedy Equivalent Search (GES) to obtain an initial graph, and (3)
perform exact search exclusively on the deterministic cluster and its neighbors.
The proposed DGES accommodates both linear and nonlinear causal relationships,
as well as both continuous and discrete data types. Furthermore, we investigate the
identifiability conditions of DGES. We conducted extensive experiments on both
simulated and real-world datasets to show the efficacy of our proposed method.
The code is available at https://github.com/lokali/DGES.git.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery from observational data has attracted considerable attention in recent decades and
has been widely applied in various fields such as machine learning [1], healthcare [2], manufacturing
[3] and neuroscience [4]. Most causal discovery methods operate under the assumption of independent
noises in the probabilistic system. However, real-world scenarios frequently encounter deterministic
relationships. For example, the body mass index (BMI) is defined as the weight divided by the square
of the body height, composing a deterministic relation among weight, height, and BMI.
Constraint-based and score-based methods are two primary categories in causal discovery. Constraintbased methods, such as PC [5] and FCI [6], leverage conditional independence tests (CIT) to estimate
the graph skeleton and then determine the orientation. Under the Markov and faithfulness assumptions
[7], these methods are guaranteed to asymptotically output the true Markov equivalence class (MEC).
However, the faithfulness assumption is sensitive to many factors, such as the statistical errors with
finite samples. Moreover, in the presence of deterministic relations, the faithfulness assumption is
∗

Equal contributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

