No-Regret M♮-Concave Function Maximization:
Stochastic Bandit Algorithms and NP-Hardness of
Adversarial Full-Information Setting

Taihei Oki∗
Hokkaido University
Hokkaido, Japan
oki@icredd.hokudai.ac.jp

Shinsaku Sakaue∗
The University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP
Tokyo, Japan
sakaue@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
M♮ -concave functions, a.k.a. gross substitute valuation functions, play a fundamental role in many fields, including discrete mathematics and economics. In practice,
perfect knowledge of M♮ -concave functions is often unavailable a priori, and we
can optimize them only interactively based on some feedback. Motivated by such
situations, we study online M♮ -concave function maximization problems, which are
interactive versions of the problem studied by Murota and Shioura (1999). For the
stochastic bandit setting, we present O(T −1/2 )-simple regret and O(T 2/3 )-regret
algorithms under T times access to unbiased noisy value oracles of M♮ -concave
functions. A key to proving these results is the robustness of the greedy algorithm
to local errors in M♮ -concave function maximization, which is one of our main
technical results. While we obtain those positive results for the stochastic setting,
another main result of our work is an impossibility in the adversarial setting. We
prove that, even with full-information feedback, no algorithms that run in polynomial time per round can achieve O(T 1−c ) regret for any constant c > 0 unless
P = NP. Our proof is based on a reduction from the matroid intersection problem
for three matroids, which would be a novel idea in the context of online learning.

1

Introduction

M♮ -concave functions form a fundamental function class in discrete convex analysis [32], and various
combinatorial optimization problems are written as M♮ -concave function maximization. In economics,
M♮ -concave functions (restricted to the unit-hypercube) are known as gross substitute valuations [19,
13, 25]; in operations research, M♮ -concave functions are often used in modeling resource allocation
problems [46, 30]. Furthermore, M♮ -concave functions form a theoretically interesting special case
of (DR-)submodular functions that the greedy algorithm can exactly maximize (see, Murota and
Shioura [33], Murota [32, Note 6.21], and Soma [48, Remark 3.3.1]), while it is impossible for the
submodular case [34, 10] and the greedy algorithm can find only approximately optimal solutions [35].
Due to the wide-ranging applications and theoretical importance, efficient methods for maximizing
M♮ -concave functions have been extensively studied [33, 46, 30, 20, 39].
When it comes to maximizing M♮ -concave functions in practice, we hardly have perfect knowledge of
objective functions in advance. For example, it is difficult to know the exact utility an agent gains from
some items, which is often modeled by a gross substitute valuation function. Similar issues are also
prevalent in submodular function maximization, and researchers have addressed them by developing
no-approximate-regret algorithms in various settings, including stochastic/adversarial environments
∗

Equal contribution, alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

