Supervised Kernel Thinning

Albert Gong

Kyuseong Choi

Raaz Dwivedi

Cornell Tech, Cornell University
agong,kc728,dwivedi@cornell.edu

Abstract
The kernel thinning algorithm of [10] provides a better-than-i.i.d. compression of
a generic set of points. By generating high-fidelity coresets of size significantly
smaller than the input points, KT is known to speed up unsupervised tasks like
Monte Carlo integration, uncertainty quantification, and non-parametric hypothesis
testing, with minimal loss in statistical accuracy. In this work, we generalize
the KT algorithm to speed up supervised learning problems involving kernel
methods. Specifically, we combine two classical algorithms—Nadaraya-Watson
(NW) regression or kernel smoothing, and kernel ridge regression (KRR)—with
KT to provide a quadratic speed-up in both training and inference times. We show
how distribution compression with KT in each setting reduces to constructing an
appropriate kernel, and introduce the Kernel-Thinned NW and Kernel-Thinned
KRR estimators. We prove that KT-based regression estimators enjoy significantly
superior computational efficiency over the full-data estimators and improved
statistical efficiency over i.i.d. subsampling of the training data. En route, we
also provide a novel multiplicative error guarantee for compressing with KT. We
validate our design choices with both simulations and real data experiments.

1

Introduction

In supervised learning, the goal of coreset methods is to find a representative set of points on which to
perform model training and inference. On the other hand, coreset methods in unsupervised learning
have the goal of finding a representative set of points, which can then be utilized for a broad class of
downstream tasks—from integration [10, 9] to non-parametric hypothesis testing [8]. This work aims
to bridge these two research threads.
Leveraging recent advancements from compression in the unsupervised setting, we tackle the problem
of non-parametric regression (formally defined in Sec. 2). Given a dataset of n i.i.d. samples,
(xi , yi )ni=1 , we want to learn a function f such that f (xi ) ≈ yi . The set of allowable functions
is determined by the kernel function, which is a powerful building block for capturing complex,
non-linear relationships. Due to its powerful performance in practice and closed-form analysis,
non-parametric regression methods based on kernels (a.k.a “kernel methods”) have become a popular
choice for a wide range of supervised learning tasks [13, 20, 24].
There are two popular approaches to non-parametric kernel regression. First, perhaps a more classical
approach, is kernel smoothing, also referred to as Nadaraya-Watson (NW) regression. The NW
estimator at a point x is effectively a smoothing of labels yi such that xi is close to x. These weights
are computed using the kernel function (see Sec. 2 for formal definitions). Importantly, the NW
estimator takes Θ(n) pre-processing time (to simply store the data) and Θ(n) inference time for each
test point x (n kernel evaluations and n simple operations).
Another popular approach is kernel ridge regression (KRR), which solves a non-parametric least
squares subject to the regression function lying in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) of a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

