Pricing and Competition for Generative AI

Rafid Mahmood
NVIDIA & University of Ottawa
rmahmood@nvidia.com

Abstract
Compared to classical machine learning (ML) models, generative models offer a
new usage paradigm where (i) a single model can be used for many different tasks
out-of-the-box; (ii) users interact with this model over a series of natural language
prompts; and (iii) the model is ideally evaluated on binary user satisfaction with
respect to model outputs. Given these characteristics, we explore the problem of
how developers of new generative AI software can release and price their technology. We first develop a comparison of two different models for a specific task with
respect to user cost-effectiveness. We then model the pricing problem of generative
AI software as a game between two different companies who sequentially release
their models before users choose their preferred model for each task. Here, the
price optimization problem becomes piecewise continuous where the companies
must choose a subset of the tasks on which to be cost-effective and forgo revenue
for the remaining tasks. In particular, we reveal the value of market information by
showing that a company who deploys later after knowing their competitor’s price
can always secure cost-effectiveness on at least one task, whereas the company
who is the first-to-market must price their model in a way that incentivizes higher
prices from the latecomer in order to gain revenue. Most importantly, we find that
if the different tasks are sufficiently similar, the first-to-market model may become
cost-ineffective on all tasks regardless of how this technology is priced.

1

Introduction

The recent explosion of generative artificial intelligence (AI) has introduced new machine learning
(ML) frameworks for applications from chatbots to robotics [Wu et al., 2023, Nasiriany et al., 2024].
Whereas in classical ML, a user interacted with a single model designed for a specific predictive task
(e.g., classification) via input data and output predictions, a single generative AI model can solve
a variety of tasks for a user out-of-the-box [Brown et al., 2020]. Moreover, users interact with the
generative model over a universal interface of natural language prompting [Arora et al., 2022].
The prompt-based paradigm has fostered two recent human-AI interaction trends. First, prompting
facilitates such a wide distribution of tasks (i.e., user inputs and model outputs) that conventional
metrics for evaluating models have become insufficient, leaving the most effective evaluation metric
to be a binary score of whether the user is satisfied with the model output [Li et al., 2024, Chiang et al.,
2024]. For example, Ziegler et al. [2024] empirically analyzed the GitHub Copilot software to reveal
that the frequency of generated code approved by a user ‘is a better predictor of perceived [user]
productivity than alternative measures.’ Second, if a user does not receive a satisfactory output, they
can try again in another prompting round by inputting to the model additional information [Castro
et al., 2023]. For instance, the Anthropic HH and the Chatbot Arena datasets report on average 2.3
and 1.3 prompting rounds per conversation, respectively [Bai et al., 2022, Chiang et al., 2024].
In this work, we study the impact of these interaction characteristics on the pricing of generative AI
technology. While classical ML products can be priced by analyzing the user demand for a model that
can achieve a given performance metric on a specific task [Gurkan and de Véricourt, 2022, Mahmood
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

