MixEval: Deriving Wisdom of the Crowd from
LLM Benchmark Mixtures
Jinjie Ni∗†, ♢ Fuzhao Xue∗ , ♣ Xiang Yue∗ ,
Yuntian Deng, Mahir Shah, ♢ Kabir Jain, ♣ Graham Neubig, ♢ Yang You
♢
National University of Singapore, ♣ Carnegie Mellon University, ▲ Allen Institute for AI
♢

▲

♢

https://mixeval.github.io/
Abstract
Evaluating large language models (LLMs) is challenging. Traditional ground-truthbased benchmarks fail to capture the comprehensiveness and nuance of real-world
queries, while LLM-as-judge benchmarks suffer from grading biases and limited
query quantity. Both of them may also become contaminated over time. Userfacing evaluation, such as Chatbot Arena, provides reliable signals but is costly
and slow. In this work, we propose MixEval, a new paradigm for establishing
efficient, gold-standard LLM evaluation by strategically mixing off-the-shelf benchmarks. It bridges (1) comprehensive and well-distributed real-world user queries
and (2) efficient and fairly-graded ground-truth-based benchmarks, by matching
queries mined from the web with similar queries from existing benchmarks. Based
on MixEval, we further build MixEval-Hard, which offers more room for
model improvement. Our benchmarks’ advantages lie in (1) a 0.96 model ranking
correlation with Chatbot Arena arising from the highly impartial query distribution
and grading mechanism, (2) fast, cheap, and reproducible execution (6% of the
time and cost of MMLU), and (3) dynamic evaluation enabled by the rapid and
stable data update pipeline. We provide extensive meta-evaluation and analysis for
our and existing LLM benchmarks to deepen the community’s understanding of
LLM evaluation and guide future research directions.

1

Introduction

That Which is Measured, Improves. Evaluation is essential in the AI community for two main
reasons: (1) benchmarks provide early signals to model developers, aiding in refining data and
model design, and (2) benchmarks guide users in selecting suitable models for specific use cases.
Therefore, benchmarks offer feedback to the entire community, facilitating model optimization.
Consequently, the main concern of evaluating LLMs is impartiality–we need to optimize impartial
objectives so that the community advances in the right direction. In practical LLM evaluations, three
primary biases contribute to a lack of impartiality: (1) query bias–evaluation queries falling short
of comprehensiveness or appropriate distribution (2) grading bias–the grading process involving
significant bias or error (3) generalization bias–models overfitting the evaluation data.
Large Scale User-facing Evaluation Provides a More Impartial Signal. Practitioners generally
adopt either automatic or user-facing approaches for LLM benchmarking. Automatic benchmarking
typically employs traditional ground-truth-based benchmarks, such as MMLU [17], which often fail
to capture real-world query comprehensiveness and nuance while involving a comparatively impartial
grading process; or employs open-ended benchmarks using LLMs as graders, such as MT-Bench
[39], suffering from both grading bias and query incomprehensiveness due to the preference biases
and high cost of frontier LLM judges. Additionally, the static nature of automatic benchmarks results
∗
†

Core contributors.
Correspondence to: Jinjie Ni <jinjieni@nus.edu.sg>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

