Accelerating Pre-training of Multimodal LLMs
via Chain-of-Sight

Ziyuan Huang1 Kaixiang Ji1 Biao Gong1 Zhiwu Qing2 Qinglong Zhang1
Kecheng Zheng1 Jian Wang1 Jingdong Chen1 Ming Yang1
1
Ant Group 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
https://chain-of-sight.github.io/

Abstract
This paper introduces Chain-of-Sight, a vision-language bridge module that accelerates the pre-training of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Our
approach employs a sequence of visual resamplers that capture visual details at
various spacial scales. This architecture not only leverages global and local visual contexts effectively, but also facilitates the flexible extension of visual tokens
through a compound token scaling strategy, allowing up to a 16× increase in the
token count post pre-training. Consequently, Chain-of-Sight requires significantly
fewer visual tokens in the pre-training phase compared to the fine-tuning phase.
This intentional reduction of visual tokens during pre-training notably accelerates
the pre-training process, cutting down the wall-clock training time by ∼73%. Empirical results on a series of vision-language benchmarks reveal that the pre-train
acceleration through Chain-of-Sight is achieved without sacrificing performance,
matching or surpassing the standard pipeline of utilizing all visual tokens throughout the entire training process. Further scaling up the number of visual tokens for
pre-training leads to stronger performances, competitive to existing approaches in
a series of benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Recently, Large Language Models [70, 6, 80, 5, 3] have received unprecedented attention, owing to
their remarkable capabilities in text comprehension and generation. Riding on the success of LLMs,
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [74, 90, 63, 56, 26, 88, 73] demonstrate impressive
zero-shot transferability across a wide range of vision-language tasks, such as image captioning,
visual question answering, and visual grounding.
The exceptional generalization ability exhibited by the contemporary MLLMs can be largely attributed
to their extensive pre-training on a massive amount of data [16, 14, 69, 31, 18]. However, as the
volume of data escalates, so does the wall-clock training time, which has become a major obstackle
in further explorations. According to [63], 60,000 GPU hours are needed for training a 7B model on
just 96 million image-text pairs. This intensive computational demand is not only prohibitive to many
researchers, but also leads to a significant carbon footprint.
One of the key reasons for the prolonged training time is the extensive length of visual tokens
Typically, the image-text pairs in the pre-training phase involve around 23 text tokens (see Table 1). In
contrast, most MLLMs handle substantially more visual tokens during pre-training, e.g., 144 [10, 11],
256 [4, 50, 97], or even higher [63, 16, 55, 56, 64, 48]. Reducing the number of visual tokens presents
a straightforward way to speed up training, as it allows for an increase in batch size and a concurrent
decrease in step time. Meanwhile, the reduced memory consumption allows for better optimization
stages [81], further reducing time requirements. However, training with fewer visual tokens often
results in compromised performance for existing vision-language models.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

