Hierarchical Uncertainty Exploration via
Feedforward Posterior Trees
Elias Nehme
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
seliasne@campus.technion.ac.il

Rotem Mulayoff
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
rotem.mulayof@gmail.com

Tomer Michaeli
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
When solving ill-posed inverse problems, one often desires to explore the space of
potential solutions rather than be presented with a single plausible reconstruction.
Valuable insights into these feasible solutions and their associated probabilities
are embedded in the posterior distribution. However, when confronted with data
of high dimensionality (such as images), visualizing this distribution becomes
a formidable challenge, necessitating the application of effective summarization
techniques before user examination. In this work, we introduce a new approach
for visualizing posteriors across multiple levels of granularity using tree-valued
predictions. Our method predicts a tree-valued hierarchical summarization of
the posterior distribution for any input measurement, in a single forward pass
of a neural network. We showcase the efficacy of our approach across diverse
datasets and image restoration challenges, highlighting its prowess in uncertainty
quantification and visualization. Our findings reveal that our method performs
comparably to a baseline that hierarchically clusters samples from a diffusion-based
posterior sampler, yet achieves this with orders of magnitude greater speed. Code
and examples are available at our webpage.

1

Introduction

Communicating prediction uncertainty is a crucial element in advancing the reliability of machine
learning models. This is particularly important in the realm of imaging inverse problems, in which a
given input can typically be associated with a multitude of plausible solutions. In such cases, it is
advantageous to equip users with efficient tools for exploring and visualizing the set of admissible
solutions. Such tools may be of high value especially in safety-critical domains, such as scientific
and medical image analysis [1–4], where inaccuracies in predictions could impact human lives.
Information about the plausible solutions and their respective likelihoods is encapsulated within
the posterior distribution. However, high-dimensional posteriors are challenging to visualize. One
popular approach for communicating uncertainty is to generate samples from the posterior [5–14].
Yet, in complex domains with high uncertainty levels, users may need to sift through hundreds of
posterior samples per input to be able to confidently validate or refute suspicions about the unobserved
ground-truth image [15]. Several methods have been proposed for generating a concise set of samples
that highlight posterior diversity [15, 16]. However, choosing this set to be small is often insufficient
for summarizing the posterior, while choosing it to be large hinders the user’s ability to properly
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

