ENOT: Expectile Regularization for Fast and Accurate
Training of Neural Optimal Transport

Nazar Buzun∗
AIRI, MIPT
buzun@airi.net

Maksim Bobrin∗
Skoltech, AIRI
m.bobrin@skoltech.ru

Dmitry V. Dylov
Skoltech, AIRI
d.dylov@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We present a new approach for Neural Optimal Transport (NOT) training procedure,
capable of accurately and efficiently estimating optimal transportation plan via
specific regularization on dual Kantorovich potentials. The main bottleneck of
existing NOT solvers is associated with the procedure of finding a near-exact
approximation of the conjugate operator (i.e., the c-transform), which is done either
by optimizing over non-convex max-min objectives or by the computationally
intensive fine-tuning of the initial approximated prediction. We resolve both issues
by proposing a new theoretically justified loss in the form of expectile regularization
which enforces binding conditions on the learning process of the dual potentials.
Such a regularization provides the upper bound estimation over the distribution of
possible conjugate potentials and makes the learning stable, completely eliminating
the need for additional extensive fine-tuning. Proposed method, called ExpectileRegularized Neural Optimal Transport (ENOT), outperforms previous state-ofthe-art approaches in the established Wasserstein-2 benchmark tasks by a large
margin (up to a 3-fold improvement in quality and up to a 10-fold improvement in
runtime). Moreover, we showcase performance of ENOT for various cost functions
in different tasks, such as image generation, demonstrating generalizability and
robustness of the proposed algorithm.
Project page with code
https://skylooop.github.io/enot/

1

Introduction

Computational optimal transport (OT) has enriched machine learning (ML) by offering a new viewangle on the conventional ML tasks through the lens of comparison of probability measures (Villani
et al. [2009], Ambrosio et al. [2003], Peyré et al. [2019], Santambrogio [2015]). In different works,
OT is primarily employed either 1) as a differentiable proxy, with the OT distance playing the role
of a similarity metric between the measures, or 2) as a generative model, defined by the plan of
optimal transportation. One notable advantage of using OT in the latter setting is that, compared
to other generative approaches, such as GANs, Normalizing Flows, or Diffusion Models, there is
no assumption for one of the measures to be defined in a closed form (e.g., Gaussian or uniform)
or to be pairwise-aligned, admitting various applications of the OT theory. Both loss objective and
generative formulations of OT proved successful in a vast range of modern ML areas, including
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

