Quantitative Convergences of Lie Group Momentum
Optimizers

Lingkai Kong
School of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
lkong75@gatech.edu

Molei Tao
School of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
mtao@gatech.edu

Abstract
Explicit, momentum-based dynamics that optimize functions defined on Lie groups
can be constructed via variational optimization and momentum trivialization. Structure preserving time discretizations can then turn this dynamics into optimization
algorithms. This article investigates two types of discretization, Lie Heavy-Ball,
which is a known splitting scheme, and Lie NAG-SC, which is newly proposed.
Their convergence rates are explicitly quantified under L-smoothness and local
strong convexity assumptions. Lie NAG-SC provides acceleration over the momentumless case, i.e. Riemannian gradient descent, but Lie Heavy-Ball does not.
When compared to existing accelerated optimizers for general manifolds, both
Lie Heavy-Ball and Lie NAG-SC are computationally cheaper and easier to implement, thanks to their utilization of group structure. Only gradient oracle and
exponential map are required, but not logarithm map or parallel transport which
are computational costly.1

1

Introduction

First-order optimization, i.e., with the gradient of the potential (i.e. the objective function) given as
the oracle, is ubiquitously employed in machine learning. Within this class of algorithms, momentum
is often introduced to accelerate convergence; for example, in Euclidean setups, it has been proved to
yield the optimal dimension-independent convergence order, for a large class of first-order optimizers,
under strongly convex and L-smooth assumptions of the objective function[21, Sec. 2].
Gradient Descent (GD) without momentum can be generalized to Riemannian manifold by moving to
the negative gradient direction using the exponential map with a small step size. This generalization
is algorithmically straight forward, but quantifying the convergence rate in curved spaces needs
nontrivial efforts [6, 32, 27]. In comparison, generalizing momentum GD to manifold itself is
nontrivial due to curved geometry; for example, the iteration must be kept on the manifold and the
momentum must stay in the tangent space, which changes with the iteration, at the same time. It is
even more challenging to quantify the convergence rate theoretically due to the loss of linearity in
the space, leading to the lack of triangle inequality and cosine rule. Finally, there is not necessarily
acceleration unless the generalization is done delicately.
Regardless, optimization on manifolds is an important task, for which the manifold structure can
either naturally come from the problem setup or be artificially introduced. A simple but extremely
important example is to compute the leading eigenvalues of a large matrix, which can be approached
efficiently via optimization on the Stiefel manifold [19]; a smaller scale version can also be solved
via optimization on SO(n) [7, 29, 8, 26]. More on the modern machine learning side, one can
algorithmically add orthonormal constraints to deep learning models to improve their accuracy and
robustness [e.g., 5, 9, 17, 19, 24]. Both examples involve SO(n), which is an instance of an important
type of curved spaces called Lie groups.
1

Code can be found at https://github.com/konglk1203/Accelerated_Optimizer_On_Lie_Group

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

