Achievable distributional robustness when the robust
risk is only partially identified

Julia Kostin
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
jkostin@ethz.ch
Nicola Gnecco
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
nicola.gnecco@gmail.com

Fanny Yang
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
fan.yang@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
In safety-critical applications, machine learning models should generalize well
under worst-case distribution shifts, that is, have a small robust risk. Invariancebased algorithms can provably take advantage of structural assumptions on the
shifts when the training distributions are heterogeneous enough to identify the
robust risk. However, in practice, such identifiability conditions are rarely satisfied
– a scenario so far underexplored in the theoretical literature. In this paper, we aim
to fill the gap and propose to study the more general setting of partially identifiable
robustness. In particular, we define a new risk measure, the worst-case robust
risk, and its corresponding (population) minimax quantity that is an algorithmindependent measure for the best achievable robustness under partial identifiability.
We introduce these concepts broadly, and then study them within the framework
of linear structural causal models for concreteness of the presentation. We use the
introduced minimax quantity to show how previous approaches provably achieve
suboptimal robustness in the partially identifiable case. We confirm our findings
through empirical simulations and real-world experiments and demonstrate how
the test error of existing robustness methods grows increasingly suboptimal as the
proportion of previously unseen test directions increases.

1

Introduction

The success of machine learning methods typically relies on the assumption that the training and
test data follow the same distribution. However, this assumption is often violated in practice. For
instance, this can happen if the test data are collected at a later time or using a different measuring
device. Without further assumptions on the test distribution, generalization under distribution shift is
impossible. However, practitioners often have partial information about the set of possible "shifts"
that may occur during test time, inducing a set of feasible test distributions that the model should
generalize to. We refer to the resulting set as the robustness set. When a probabilistic model for these
possible test distributions is available or estimable, one may aim for good performance on a ”typical”
held-out distribution using a probabilistic framework. When no extra information is available or
estimable, one possibility is to find a model β that has a small risk R(β; P) on the hardest feasible
test distribution. More formally, we aim to achieve a small robust risk defined by
Rrob (β) :=

sup
P∈Prob (θ ⋆ )

R(β; P),

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

(1)

