Mixture of neural fields for heterogeneous
reconstruction in cryo-EM

Axel Levy∗
Stanford University
axlevy@stanford.edu
David Shustin∗
Princeton University
dshustin@princeton.edu

Rishwanth Raghu∗
Princeton University
rraghu@princeton.edu

Adele Rui-Yang Peng
Princeton University
adelep@princeton.edu

Oliver Biggs Clarke
Columbia University
oc2188@cumc.columbia.edu

Huan Li
Columbia University
hl3170@columbia.edu

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University
gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu

Ellen D. Zhong
Princeton University
zhonge@princeton.edu

Abstract
Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is an experimental technique for protein
structure determination that images an ensemble of macromolecules in nearphysiological contexts. While recent advances enable the reconstruction of dynamic
conformations of a single biomolecular complex, current methods do not adequately
model samples with mixed conformational and compositional heterogeneity. In particular, datasets containing mixtures of multiple proteins require the joint inference
of structure, pose, compositional class, and conformational states for 3D reconstruction. Here, we present Hydra, an approach that models both conformational and
compositional heterogeneity fully ab initio by parameterizing structures as arising
from one of K neural fields. We employ a new likelihood-based loss function and
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on synthetic datasets composed of
mixtures of proteins with large degrees of conformational variability. We additionally demonstrate Hydra on an experimental dataset of a cellular lysate containing
a mixture of different protein complexes. Hydra expands the expressivity of heterogeneous reconstruction methods and thus broadens the scope of cryo-EM to
increasingly complex samples. Webpage: https://hydra.cs.princeton.edu

1

Introduction

Structural information is key to understanding the function of macromolecular complexes, making
protein structure determination a crucial tool in basic structural biology and rational drug design.
Among experimental structure determination methods, cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM)
is unique in its capability to reveal dynamic information about large macromolecular complexes in
near-native states.
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

