BricksRL: A Platform for Democratizing Robotics and
Reinforcement Learning Research and Education with
LEGO
Sebastian Dittert
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
sebastian.dittert@upf.edu

Vincent Moens
PyTorch Team, Meta
vincentmoens@gmail.com

Gianni De Fabritiis
ICREA, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
g.defabritiis@gmail.com

Abstract
We present BricksRL, a platform designed to democratize access to robotics for
reinforcement learning research and education. BricksRL facilitates the creation,
design, and training of custom LEGO robots in the real world by interfacing them
with the TorchRL library for reinforcement learning agents. The integration of
TorchRL with the LEGO hubs, via Bluetooth bidirectional communication, enables
state-of-the-art reinforcement learning training on GPUs for a wide variety of
LEGO builds. This offers a flexible and cost-efficient approach for scaling and also
provides a robust infrastructure for robot-environment-algorithm communication.
We present various experiments across tasks and robot configurations, providing
built plans and training results. Furthermore, we demonstrate that inexpensive
LEGO robots can be trained end-to-end in the real world to achieve simple tasks,
with training times typically under 120 minutes on a normal laptop. Moreover,
we show how users can extend the capabilities, exemplified by the successful
integration of non-LEGO sensors. By enhancing accessibility to both robotics and
reinforcement learning, BricksRL establishes a strong foundation for democratized
robotic learning in research and educational settings.

1

Introduction

As the field of artificial intelligence continues to evolve, robotics emerges as a fascinating area for
deploying and evaluating machine learning algorithms in dynamic, real-life settings [14, 39, 46].
These applications allow embodied agents to interact within complex environments, similar to humans
and animals, they must navigate a variety of challenging constraints during their learning process.
Reinforcement learning (RL), in particular, has emerged as a promising approach to learning complex
behavior with robots [20, 29]. Despite the rich potential for innovation, the learning process of
algorithms under real-world conditions is a challenge [1, 38, 46]. The complexity of setting up a
robotics lab, combined with the high cost of equipment and the steep learning curve in RL, often limits
the ability of researchers, educators, and hobbyists to contribute to and benefit from cutting-edge
developments. To address these challenges, we introduce BricksRL, a comprehensive open-source
framework designed to democratize access to robotics and RL. BricksRL builds upon Pybricks [44],
a versatile Python package for controlling modular LEGO robotics hub, motors and sensors, actively
maintained and supported by a vibrant community, and TorchRL [6], a modern framework for training
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

