From Trojan Horses to Castle Walls: Unveiling
Bilateral Data Poisoning Effects in Diffusion Models

Zhuoshi Pan1,⋆ Yuguang Yao2,3,⋆ Gaowen Liu3 Bingquan Shen4
H. Vicky Zhao1 Ramana Rao Kompella3 Sijia Liu2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Michigan State University
3
Cisco Research 4 National University of Singapore
∗
Equal contributions

Abstract
While state-of-the-art diffusion models (DMs) excel in image generation, concerns
regarding their security persist. Earlier research highlighted DMs’ vulnerability
to data poisoning attacks, but these studies placed stricter requirements than conventional methods like ‘BadNets’ in image classification. This is because the art
necessitates modifications to the diffusion training and sampling procedures. Unlike the prior work, we investigate whether BadNets-like data poisoning methods
can directly degrade the generation by DMs. In other words, if only the training
dataset is contaminated (without manipulating the diffusion process), how will
this affect the performance of learned DMs? In this setting, we uncover bilateral
data poisoning effects that not only serve an adversarial purpose (compromising the functionality of DMs) but also offer a defensive advantage (which can be
leveraged for defense in classification tasks against poisoning attacks). We show
that a BadNets-like data poisoning attack remains effective in DMs for producing incorrect images (misaligned with the intended text conditions). Meanwhile,
poisoned DMs exhibit an increased ratio of triggers, a phenomenon we refer to
as ‘trigger amplification’, among the generated images. This insight can be then
used to enhance the detection of poisoned training data. In addition, even under
a low poisoning ratio, studying the poisoning effects of DMs is also valuable for
designing robust image classifiers against such attacks. Last but not least, we
establish a meaningful linkage between data poisoning and the phenomenon of
data replications by exploring DMs’ inherent data memorization tendencies. Code
is available at https://github.com/OPTML-Group/BiBadDiff.

1

Introduction

Data poisoning attacks [1] have been studied in the context of image classification, encompassing
various aspects such as attack generation [2, 3], backdoor detection [4, 5], and reverse engineering of
backdoor triggers [6, 7]. This threat model has also been explored in other ML paradigms, including
federated learning [8], graph neural networks [9], and generative modeling [10]. In this work, we
are inspired from conventional data poisoning attacks and peer into its effects on diffusion models
(DMs), the state-of-the-art generative modeling techniques that have gained popularity in various
computer vision tasks [11].
In the context of DMs, data poisoning attacks to produce backdoored DMs have been studied in
recent works [12–16]. We direct readers to Sec. 2 for detailed reviews of these works. Nevertheless,
in comparison to previous research, our work establishes the following notable distinctions.
❶ Attack perspective (termed as ‘Trojan Horses’): Earlier research predominantly tackled the
problem of poisoning attack generation in DMs, i.e., addressing the inquiry of whether a DM could be
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

