Learning Interaction-aware 3D Gaussian Splatting for
One-shot Hand Avatars
Xuan Huang1∗ , Hanhui Li1∗, Wanquan Liu1 , Xiaodan Liang1 ,
Yiqiang Yan2 , Yuhao Cheng2 , Chengqiang Gao1†
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University
2
Lenovo Research
huangx355@mail2.sysu.edu.cn lihh77@mail.sysu.edu.cn
liuwq63@mail.sysu.edu.cn xdliang328@gmail.com
yanyq@lenovo.com chengyh5@lenovo.com
gaochq6@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose to create animatable avatars for interacting hands with
3D Gaussian Splatting (GS) and single-image inputs. Existing GS-based methods designed for single subjects often yield unsatisfactory results due to limited input views, various hand poses, and occlusions. To address these challenges, we introduce a novel two-stage interaction-aware GS framework that
exploits cross-subject hand priors and refines 3D Gaussians in interacting areas. Particularly, to handle hand variations, we disentangle the 3D presentation
of hands into optimization-based identity maps and learning-based latent geometric features and neural texture maps. Learning-based features are captured
by trained networks to provide reliable priors for poses, shapes, and textures,
while optimization-based identity maps enable efficient one-shot fitting of out-ofdistribution hands. Furthermore, we devise an interaction-aware attention module
and a self-adaptive Gaussian refinement module. These modules enhance image
rendering quality in areas with intra- and inter-hand interactions, overcoming the
limitations of existing GS-based methods. Our proposed method is validated via
extensive experiments on the large-scale InterHand2.6M dataset, and it significantly improves the state-of-the-art performance in image quality. Project Page:
https://github.com/XuanHuang0/GuassianHand.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in 3D reconstruction and differential rendering techniques have significantly
improved hand avatar creation and related applications. However, creating avatars for interacting
hands from a single image remains challenging. The limited input view does not provide sufficient
geometry and texture information for accurate reconstruction. Moreover, intra- and inter-hand
interactions exacerbate information loss and introduce complex geometric deformations.
Extensive efforts have been made to tackle these issues, as shown in Figure 2: (a) Early approaches
depend on explicit parametric meshes (e.g. MANO [1]) for geometry modeling, and utilize UV
map [2, 3, 4, 5], vertex color [6, 7], or image space rendering [8] for appearance. Despite the
efficiency in rendering, these methods fail to achieve realistic rendering results with the coarse
mesh resolution and the simple combination of hand appearance and geometry. (b) More recently,
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

