3D Equivariant Pose Regression via Direct Wigner-D
Harmonics Prediction
Jongmin Lee*

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
{ljm1121, mscho}@postech.ac.kr
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/3D_EquiPose

Abstract
Determining the 3D orientations of an object in an image, known as single-image
pose estimation, is a crucial task in 3D vision applications. Existing methods typically learn 3D rotations parametrized in the spatial domain using Euler angles or
quaternions, but these representations often introduce discontinuities and singularities. SO(3)-equivariant networks enable the structured capture of pose patterns with
data-efficient learning, but the parametrizations in spatial domain are incompatible
with their architecture, particularly spherical CNNs, which operate in the frequency
domain to enhance computational efficiency. To overcome these issues, we propose a frequency-domain approach that directly predicts Wigner-D coefficients
for 3D rotation regression, aligning with the operations of spherical CNNs. Our
SO(3)-equivariant pose harmonics predictor overcomes the limitations of spatial
parameterizations, ensuring consistent pose estimation under arbitrary rotations.
Trained with a frequency-domain regression loss, our method achieves state-ofthe-art results on benchmarks such as ModelNet10-SO(3) and PASCAL3D+, with
significant improvements in accuracy, robustness, and data efficiency.

1

Introduction

Predicting the 3D pose of objects, i.e., position
and orientation, in 3D space from an image is
crucial for numerous applications, including augmented reality [59], robotics [4, 5, 63, 69], autonomous vehicles [21, 50], and cryo-electron
microscopy [79]. Estimating 3D orientation is
particularly challenging due to rotational symmetries and the non-linear nature of rotations. In
addition, unlike translations, rotations introduce
unique challenges such as gimbal lock and the
requirement for continuous, singularity-free representations. Existing methods often learn 3D
rotations using spatial domain parameterizations
like Euler angles, quaternions, or axis-angle representations, as illustrated in Figure 1. However,
these parameterizations suffer from issues such
as discontinuities and singularities [54, 58, 80],
which can hinder the performance and reliability.
*

Predict 3D Rotations in Spatial

Predict Parametric Distb’n
(𝜇, 𝛴)

(e.g., Euler, Quaternion, 6D ..)

Predict Non-Parametric Distb’n

(e.g., Gaussian, vMF, Bingham ..)

Predict Wigner-D Harmonics

(e.g., HEALPix, SuperFibonacci ..)

Figure 1: Types of representations for 3D rotation prediction. Existing methods consider
predicting 3D rotations in the spatial domain. Our
method predicts Wigner-D coefficients in the frequency domain, to obtain accurate pose in continuous space using an SO(3)-equivariant network.

The current affiliation of Jongmin Lee is with LG AI Research. Contact: jongminlee@lgresearch.ai.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

