PEAC: Unsupervised Pre-training for
Cross-Embodiment Reinforcement Learning

Chengyang Ying1 Zhongkai Hao1 Xinning Zhou1 Xuezhou Xu1
Hang Su1,2∗ Xingxing Zhang1 Jun Zhu1,2
1
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University
2
Pazhou Lab (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
ycy21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Designing generalizable agents capable of adapting to diverse embodiments has
achieved significant attention in Reinforcement Learning (RL), which is critical for deploying RL agents in various real-world applications. Previous CrossEmbodiment RL approaches have focused on transferring knowledge across embodiments within specific tasks. These methods often result in knowledge tightly
coupled with those tasks and fail to adequately capture the distinct characteristics
of different embodiments. To address this limitation, we introduce the notion of
Cross-Embodiment Unsupervised RL (CEURL), which leverages unsupervised
learning to enable agents to acquire embodiment-aware and task-agnostic knowledge through online interactions within reward-free environments. We formulate
CEURL as a novel Controlled Embodiment Markov Decision Process (CE-MDP)
and systematically analyze CEURL’s pre-training objectives under CE-MDP. Based
on these analyses, we develop a novel algorithm Pre-trained Embodiment-Aware
Control (PEAC) for handling CEURL, incorporating an intrinsic reward function specifically designed for cross-embodiment pre-training. PEAC not only
provides an intuitive optimization strategy for cross-embodiment pre-training but
also can integrate flexibly with existing unsupervised RL methods, facilitating
cross-embodiment exploration and skill discovery. Extensive experiments in both
simulated (e.g., DMC and Robosuite) and real-world environments (e.g., legged
locomotion) demonstrate that PEAC significantly improves adaptation performance and cross-embodiment generalization, demonstrating its effectiveness in
overcoming the unique challenges of CEURL. The project page and code are in
https://yingchengyang.github.io/ceurl.

1

Introduction

Cross-embodiment reinforcement learning (RL) involves designing algorithms that effectively function across various physical embodiments. The fundamental goal is to enable agents to apply skills
and strategies learned from some embodiments to other embodiments, which may own different
physical dynamics, action-effectors, shapes, and so on [28, 70, 58, 52, 12, 69, 60]. This capability significantly enhances the generalization of RL agents, reducing the necessity for embodiment-specific
training. By adeptly adapting to new and shifting embodiment, cross-embodiment RL ensures that
agents maintain reliable performance in unpredictable real-world scenarios, thereby benefiting the
deployment process and reducing the need for extensive data collection for each new embodiment.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

