NeuralFuse: Learning to Recover the Accuracy of
Access-Limited Neural Network Inference in
Low-Voltage Regimes

Hao-Lun Sun1 , Lei Hsiung2 , Nandhini Chandramoorthy3 , Pin-Yu Chen3 , Tsung-Yi Ho4
1

National Tsing Hua University 2 Dartmouth College 3 IBM Research
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
s109062594@m109.nthu.edu.tw
lei.hsiung.gr@dartmouth.edu
{pin-yu.chen, nandhini.chandramoorthy}@ibm.com
tyho@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become ubiquitous in machine learning, but
their energy consumption remains problematically high. An effective strategy for
reducing such consumption is supply-voltage reduction, but if done too aggressively,
it can lead to accuracy degradation. This is due to random bit-flips in static random
access memory (SRAM), where model parameters are stored. To address this
challenge, we have developed NeuralFuse, a novel add-on module that handles the
energy-accuracy tradeoff in low-voltage regimes by learning input transformations
and using them to generate error-resistant data representations, thereby protecting
DNN accuracy in both nominal and low-voltage scenarios. As well as being easy to
implement, NeuralFuse can be readily applied to DNNs with limited access, such
cloud-based APIs that are accessed remotely or non-configurable hardware. Our
experimental results demonstrate that, at a 1% bit-error rate, NeuralFuse can reduce
SRAM access energy by up to 24% while recovering accuracy by up to 57%. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first approach to addressing low-voltage-induced
bit errors that requires no model retraining.

1

Introduction

Energy-efficient computing is of primary importance to the effective deployment of deep neural
networks (DNNs), particularly in edge devices and in on-chip AI systems. Increasing DNN computation’s energy efficiency and lowering its carbon footprint require iterative efforts from both
chip designers and algorithm developers. Processors with specialized hardware accelerators for
AI computing, capable of providing orders of magnitude better performance and energy efficiency
for AI computation, are now ubiquitous. However, alongside reduced precision/quantization and
architectural optimizations, endowing such systems with the capacity for low-voltage operation is a
powerful lever for reducing their power consumption.
The computer engineering literature contains ample evidence of the effects of undervolting and
low-voltage operation on accelerator memories that store weights and activations during computation.
Aggressive scaling-down of static random access memory’s (SRAM’s) supply voltage to below the
rated value saves power, thanks to the quadratic dependence of dynamic power on voltage. Crucially,
Project Page: https://trustsafeai-neuralfuse.static.hf.space
Code: https://github.com/IBM/NeuralFuse
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

