The Well: a Large-Scale Collection of Diverse
Physics Simulations for Machine Learning

Ruben Ohana 1,2,∗, Michael McCabe 1,∗, Lucas Meyer 1, Rudy Morel 1,2,
Fruzsina J. Agocs 2,3,†, Miguel Beneitez 4,†, Marsha Berger 2,5,†, Blakesley Burkhart 2,6,†,
Stuart B. Dalziel 4,†, Drummond B. Fielding 2,7,†, Daniel Fortunato 2,†,
Jared A. Goldberg 2,†, Keiya Hirashima 1,2,8,†, Yan-Fei Jiang 2,†, Rich R. Kerswell 4,†,
Suryanarayana Maddu 2,†, Jonah Miller9,†, Payel Mukhopadhyay 10,†, Stefan S. Nixon 4,†,
Jeff Shen 11,†, Romain Watteaux 12,†, Bruno Régaldo-Saint Blancard 1,2,
François Rozet1,13, Liam H. Parker1,2,10, Miles Cranmer 1,4, Shirley Ho 1,2,5,11
1

Polymathic AI 2 Flatiron Institute 3 University of Colorado, Boulder 4 University of Cambridge
5
New York University 6 Rutgers University 7 Cornell University 8 University of Tokyo
9
Los Alamos National Laboratory 10 University of California, Berkeley
11
Princeton University 12 CEA DAM 13 University of Liège

Abstract
Machine learning based surrogate models offer researchers powerful tools for
accelerating simulation-based workflows. However, as standard datasets in this
space often cover small classes of physical behavior, it can be difficult to evaluate
the efficacy of new approaches. To address this gap, we introduce the Well: a
large-scale collection of datasets containing numerical simulations of a wide variety of
spatiotemporal physical systems. The Well draws from domain experts and numerical
software developers to provide 15TB of data across 16 datasets covering diverse
domains such as biological systems, fluid dynamics, acoustic scattering, as well as
magneto-hydrodynamic simulations of extra-galactic fluids or supernova explosions.
These datasets can be used individually or as part of a broader benchmark suite. To
facilitate usage of the Well, we provide a unified PyTorch interface for training and
evaluating models. We demonstrate the function of this library by introducing example
baselines that highlight the new challenges posed by the complex dynamics of the Well.
The code and data is available at https://github.com/PolymathicAI/the_well.

1 Introduction
Simulation is one of the most ubiquitous and important tools in the modern computational science and engineering toolbox. From forecasting [1–3], to optimization [4, 5], to parameter inference [6, 7], practitioners
lean heavily on simulation to evaluate how physical systems will evolve over time in response to varying
initial conditions or stimuli. For many physical phenomena, this evolution can be described by systems of
partial differential equations (PDEs) which model fundamental physical behavior aggregated to the continuum level under different material assumptions. Unfortunately, finding analytical solutions is infeasible for
all but restricted classes of PDEs [8]. As a result, numerical methods which solve discretized versions of
these equations with well-understood convergence and approximation properties have become the preeminent approach in this space. However, in some cases, numerical methods can provide accuracy in excess
of what is needed for applications at significant computational cost while lower resolution direct simulation
may not resolve key features of the dynamics. This has spurred the development of faster, simplified models
referred to as surrogate models that resolve only the essential features for a given scale of simulation [9, 10].
Equal contribution. Contact: {rohana, mmccabe}@flatironinstitute.org
Domain expert, alphabetical order.

∗
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

