Deep Learning in Medical Image Registration: Magic
or Mirage?

Rohit Jena1,4 Deeksha Sethi1 Pratik Chaudhari1,2,∗ James C. Gee1,3,4,∗
1
Computer and Information Science 2 Electrical and Systems Engineering
3
Radiology 4 Penn Image Computing and Science Laboratory
{rjena, deesethi, pratikac}@seas.upenn.edu, gee@upenn.edu

Abstract
Classical optimization and learning-based methods are the two reigning paradigms
in deformable image registration. While optimization-based methods boast generalizability across modalities and robust performance, learning-based methods
promise peak performance, incorporating weak supervision and amortized optimization. However, the exact conditions for either paradigm to perform well over
the other are shrouded and not explicitly outlined in the existing literature. In this
paper, we make an explicit correspondence between the mutual information of the
distribution of per-pixel intensity and labels, and the performance of classical registration methods. This strong correlation hints to the fact that architectural designs
in learning-based methods is unlikely to affect this correlation, and therefore, the
performance of learning-based methods. This hypothesis is thoroughly validated
with state-of-the-art classical and learning-based methods. However, learningbased methods with weak supervision can perform high-fidelity intensity and label
registration, which is not possible with classical methods. Next, we show that
this high-fidelity feature learning does not translate to invariance to domain shift,
and learning-based methods are sensitive to such changes in the data distribution.
We reassess and recalibrate performance expectations from classical and DLIR
methods under access to label supervision, training time, and its generalization
capabilities under minor domain shifts.

1

Introduction

Deformable Image Registration (DIR) refers to the local, non-linear (hence deformable) alignment
of images by estimating a dense displacement field. Many workflows in medical image analysis
require images to be in a standard coordinate system for comparison, analysis, and visualization.
In neuroimaging, communicating and comparing data between subjects requires the images to lie
in a standard coordinate system [48, 96, 89, 32, 81, 85]. This assumption universally does not
apply when brain image data are compared across individuals or for the same individual at different
time points. Anatomical correspondences between diseased patients and normative brain templates
help identify and localize abnormalities like tumors, lesions, or atrophy. Failed or anomalous
correspondences impact diagnosis, treatment planning, and disease progression monitoring. DIR
is also used to capture and quantify biomechanics and dynamics of different anatomical structures
including myocardial motion tracking [74, 73, 7], improved monitoring of airflow and pulmonary
function in lung imaging [66, 27, 97], and tracking of organ motion in radiation therapy [45, 14,
68, 78]. Latest breakthrough advances in imaging techniques like fluorescence and light-sheet
microscopy [36, 69, 29, 98], in-situ hybridization, and multiplexing [65, 102] have led to image
registration being imperative in advancing life sciences research. Relevant research includes a brainwide mesoscale connectome of the mouse brain [67], uncovering behavior of individual neurons in C.
∗

Equal advising

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

