Interfacing Foundation Models’ Embeddings

Xueyan Zou∗§♠ , Linjie Li∗♯ , Jianfeng Wang♯ , Jianwei Yang♯ , Mingyu Ding‡ , Junyi Wei§
Zhengyuan Yang♯ , Feng Li† , Hao Zhang† , Shilong Liu& , Arul Aravinthan§ , Yong Jae Lee§¶ , Lijuan Wang♯¶
§
UW-Madison ♯ Microsoft ‡ UC Berkeley † HKUST & Tsinghua University
¶ Equal Advisory Contribution ♠ Main Technical Contribution ∗ Equal Contribution
https://github.com/UX-Decoder/FIND, https://github.com/UX-Decoder/vlcore

Figure 1: The proposed FIND interface is generalizable to tasks that span granularity (pixel to image)
and modality (vision to language). The retrieval space for this figure is the COCO validation set.

Abstract
Foundation models possess strong capabilities in reasoning and memorizing across
modalities. To further unleash the power of foundation models, we present FIND,
a generalized interface for aligning foundation models’ embeddings with unified
image and dataset-level understanding spanning modality and granularity. As
shown in Fig. 1, a lightweight transformer interface without tuning any foundation model weights is enough for segmentation, grounding, and retrieval in an
interleaved manner. The proposed interface has the following favorable attributes:
(1) Generalizable. It applies to various tasks spanning retrieval, segmentation,
etc., under the same architecture and weights. (2) Interleavable. With the benefit
of multi-task multi-modal training, the proposed interface creates an interleaved
shared embedding space. (3) Extendable. The proposed interface is adaptive to
new tasks, and new models. In light of the interleaved embedding space, we introduce FIND-Bench, which introduces new training and evaluation annotations
to the COCO dataset for interleaved segmentation and retrieval. We are the first
work aligning foundations models’ embeddings for interleave understanding.
Meanwhile, our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on FIND-Bench
and competitive performance on standard retrieval and segmentation settings.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

