Transformers on Markov data: Constant depth suffices

Nived Rajaraman ˚
UC Berkeley

Marco Bondaschi
EPFL

Kannan Ramchandran
UC Berkeley

Michael Gastpar
EPFL

Ashok Vardhan Makkuva
EPFL

Abstract
Attention-based transformers have been remarkably successful at modeling generative processes across various domains and modalities. In this paper, we study
the behavior of transformers on data drawn from k th -order Markov processes,
where the conditional distribution of the next symbol in a sequence depends on
the previous k symbols observed. We observe a surprising phenomenon empirically which contradicts previous findings: when trained for sufficiently long, a
transformer with a fixed depth and 1 head per layer is able to achieve low test
loss on sequences drawn from k th -order Markov sources, even as k grows. Furthermore, this low test loss is achieved by the transformer’s ability to represent
and learn the in-context conditional empirical distribution. On the theoretical
side, our main result is that a transformer with a single head and three layers can
represent the in-context conditional empirical distribution for k th -order Markov
sources, concurring with our empirical observations. Along the way, we prove that
attention-only transformers with Oplog2 pkqq layers can represent the in-context
conditional empirical distribution by composing induction heads to track the previous k symbols in the sequence. These results provide more insight into our
current understanding of the mechanisms by which transformers learn to capture
context, by understanding their behavior on Markov sources. Code is available at:
https://github.com/Bond1995/Constant-depth-Transformers.

1

Introduction

Attention-based transformers have revolutionized the field of natural language processing (NLP) [1, 2]
and beyond [3, 4], achieving significant performance gains across tasks like machine translation, text
generation, and sentiment analysis. A key factor in their success is their ability to model sequences
far more efficiently, and the ability to learn in-context [5, 6].
To understand this capability, a canonical approach is to sample the input from a k th -order Markov
process, where the next symbol’s conditional distribution depends only on the previous k symbols.
Recent studies [7, 6, 8] have investigated the ability of transformers to learn Markov processes
and establish that learning happens in phases. The transformer eventually learns to represent the
conditional k-gram model, which is the in-context MLE of the Markov process.
The results in [6, 8] seem to suggest that for low depth transformers to learn Markov processes
of order k, it is essential that the number of heads scale linearly in k. At first glance, this is a bit
concerning - real world data generating processes often contain long-range dependencies. How is it
that transformers succeed at capturing these kinds of long-range dependencies, while at the same time
requiring so many heads to be able to capture the necessary context for k th -order Markov sources?
˚

Correspondence to nived.rajaraman@berkeley.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

