Compact Language Models via Pruning and
Knowledge Distillation

Saurav Muralidharan∗ Sharath Turuvekere Sreenivas∗ Raviraj Joshi
Marcin Chochowski Mostofa Patwary Mohammad Shoeybi Bryan Catanzaro
Jan Kautz Pavlo Molchanov
NVIDIA
{sauravm,sharatht,ravirajj,mchochowski,mpatwary,mshoeybi,
bcatanzaro,jkautz,pmolchanov}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) targeting different deployment scales and sizes
are currently produced by training each variant from scratch; this is extremely
compute-intensive. In this paper, we investigate if pruning an existing LLM and
then re-training it with a fraction (<3%) of the original training data can be a
suitable alternative to repeated, full retraining. To this end, we develop a set of
practical and effective compression best practices for LLMs that combine depth,
width, attention and MLP pruning with knowledge distillation-based retraining; we
arrive at these best practices through a detailed empirical exploration of pruning
strategies for each axis, methods to combine axes, distillation strategies, and search
techniques for arriving at optimal compressed architectures. We use this guide
to compress the Nemotron-4 family of LLMs by a factor of 2-4×, and compare
their performance to similarly-sized models on a variety of language modeling
tasks. Deriving 8B and 4B models from an already pretrained 15B model using our
approach requires up to 40× fewer training tokens per model compared to training
from scratch; this results in compute cost savings of 1.8× for training the full model
family (15B, 8B, and 4B). M INITRON models exhibit up to a 16% improvement
in MMLU scores compared to training from scratch, perform comparably to
other community models such as Mistral 7B, Gemma 7B and Llama-3 8B, and
outperform state-of-the-art compression techniques from the literature. We have
open-sourced M INITRON model weights on Huggingface 2 , with corresponding
supplementary material including example code available on GitHub 3 .

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) now dominate realworld natural language processing and have demonstrated excellent proficiency in understanding difficult contexts [7, 40, 52, 49, 48]. To aid users targeting different deployment sizes and scales, model
providers often train an entire family of models from
scratch, each with a different size (number of parameters). For instance, the LLaMa-2 model family [49]
includes three different variants with 7, 13, and 70 bil-

MMLU Score (%)

1

Gemma7B Nemotron-4 15B
65 Minitron 8B
Mistral 7B
40x cheaper
60
9% bettter

LLaMa-3 8B

Minitron 4B
55
50
45

Phi-2
Nemotron-3 8B
Minitron (resulting models)
Pruning start
Pruning Path
Gemma2B
Other Models
0.1
2.5
5.0
7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0
Cost to train the model (trillion tokens)
LLaMa-2 7B

∗

Equal contribution.
Minitron Collection on HuggingFace
3
https://github.com/NVlabs/Minitron
2

Figure 1: M INITRON results. Our approach
greatly reduces training costs for additional
models (40×) while improving accuracy.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

