Structure Consistent Gaussian Splatting with
Matching Prior for Few-shot Novel View Synthesis

Rui Peng1,2 Wangze Xu1 Luyang Tang1,2 Liwei Liao1 Jianbo Jiao3 Ronggang Wang ,1,2
1
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media
Technology, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 University of Birmingham
ruipeng@stu.pku.edu.cn rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the substantial progress of novel view synthesis, existing methods, either based on the Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) or more recently 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS), suffer significant degradation when the input becomes sparse.
Numerous efforts have been introduced to alleviate this problem, but they still
struggle to synthesize satisfactory results efficiently, especially in the large scene.
In this paper, we propose SCGaussian, a Structure Consistent Gaussian Splatting
method using matching priors to learn 3D consistent scene structure. Considering
the high interdependence of Gaussian attributes, we optimize the scene structure
in two folds: rendering geometry and, more importantly, the position of Gaussian
primitives, which is hard to be directly constrained in the vanilla 3DGS due to
the non-structure property. To achieve this, we present a hybrid Gaussian representation. Besides the ordinary non-structure Gaussian primitives, our model also
consists of ray-based Gaussian primitives that are bound to matching rays and
whose optimization of their positions is restricted along the ray. Thus, we can
utilize the matching correspondence to directly enforce the position of these Gaussian primitives to converge to the surface points where rays intersect. Extensive
experiments on forward-facing, surrounding, and complex large scenes show the
effectiveness of our approach with state-of-the-art performance and high efficiency.
Code is available at https://github.com/prstrive/SCGaussian.

1

Introduction

Few-shot novel view synthesis (NVS) aims to reconstruct the scene given only a sparse collection
of views, which has always been a cornerstone and challenging task in computer vision. Neural
radiance field (NeRF) [29], emerged as an excelled 3D representation, has shown great success in
rendering photo-realistic novel views. However, such impressive results require an expensive and
time-consuming collection of dense images which impedes many practical applications, e.g., the
input is typically much sparser in autonomous driving, robotics, and virtual reality. Although many
attempts have been proposed to solve this challenging few-shot rendering problem from the aspect of
pre-training [6, 52, 60, 17], regularization terms [20, 32, 58, 43], external priors [8, 39, 51, 46, 15],
etc., these NeRF-based methods still suffer from low rendering speed and high computational cost,
i.e., each scene requires hours or even days of training time.
Recently, an efficient representation 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [19] is proposed to leverage a
set of Gaussian primitives (initialized from the Structure-from-motion (SFM) [41, 42] points) along
with some attributes to explicitly model the 3D scene. Through replacing the cumbersome volume
rendering in NeRF methods with the efficient differentiable splatting, which directly projects the
Gaussian primitives onto the 2D image plane, 3DGS has expressed remarkable improvement in both
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

