Provably Robust Score-Based Diffusion Posterior
Sampling for Plug-and-Play Image Reconstruction

Xingyu Xu∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Yuejie Chi†
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
In a great number of applications, the goal is to infer an unknown image from
a small number of noisy measurements collected from a known and possibly
nonlinear forward model describing certain sensing or imaging modality, which is
often ill-posed. Score-based diffusion models, thanks to their impressive empirical
success, have emerged as an appealing candidate of an expressive prior in image
reconstruction. In order to accommodate diverse tasks at once, it is of great interest
to develop efficient, consistent and robust algorithms that incorporate unconditional
score functions of an image prior distribution in conjunction with flexible choices
of forward models. This work develops an algorithmic framework for employing
score-based diffusion models as an expressive data prior in nonlinear inverse
problems with general forward models. Motivated by the plug-and-play framework
in the imaging community, we introduce a diffusion plug-and-play method (DPnP)
that alternatively calls two samplers, a proximal consistency sampler based solely
on the likelihood function of the forward model, and a denoising diffusion sampler
based solely on the score functions of the image prior. The key insight is that
denoising under white Gaussian noise can be solved rigorously via both stochastic
(i.e., DDPM-type) and deterministic (i.e., DDIM-type) samplers using the same set
of score functions trained for generation. We establish both asymptotic and nonasymptotic performance guarantees of DPnP, and provide numerical experiments
to illustrate its promise in various tasks. To the best of our knowledge, DPnP is
the first provably-robust posterior sampling method for nonlinear inverse problems
using unconditional diffusion priors.

1

Introduction

In a great number of sensing and imaging applications, the paramount goal is to infer an unknown
image x⋆ ∈ Rd from a collection of measurements y ∈ Rm that are possibly noisy, incomplete, and
even nonlinear. Examples include restoration tasks such as inpainting, super-resolution, denoising,
as well as imaging tasks such as magnetic resonance imaging [LDP07], optical imaging [SEC+ 15],
microscopy imaging [HSMC17], radar and sonar imaging [PEPC10], and many more.
Due to sensing and resource constraints, the problem of image reconstruction is often ill-posed,
where the desired resolution of the unknown image overwhelms the set of available observations.
Consequently, this necessitates the need of incorporating prior information regarding the unknown
image to assist the reconstruction process. Over the years, numerous types of prior information
have been considered and adopted, from hand-crafted priors such as subspace or sparsity constraints
[Don06, CR12], to data-driven ones prescribed in the form of neural networks [UVL18, BJPD17].
These priors can be regarded as some sort of generative models for the unknown image, which postulate the high-dimensional image admits certain parsimonious representation in a low-dimensional
data manifold. It is desirable that the generative models are sufficiently expressive to capture the
∗
†

xingyuxu@andrew.cmu.edu
yuejiec@andrew.cmu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

