Model-Based Diffusion for Trajectory Optimization

Chaoyi Pan∗ , Zeji Yi∗ , Guanya Shi† , Guannan Qu†
Carnegie Mellon University
{chaoyip,zejiy,guanyas,gqu}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in diffusion models have demonstrated their strong capabilities in
generating high-fidelity samples from complex distributions through an iterative
refinement process. Despite the empirical success of diffusion models in motion
planning and control, the model-free nature of these methods does not leverage
readily available model information and limits their generalization to new scenarios
beyond the training data (e.g., new robots with different dynamics). In this work,
we introduce Model-Based Diffusion (MBD), an optimization approach using the
diffusion process to solve trajectory optimization (TO) problems without data.
The key idea is to explicitly compute the score function by leveraging the model
information in TO problems, which is why we refer to our approach as modelbased diffusion. Moreover, although MBD does not require external data, it
can be naturally integrated with data of diverse qualities to steer the diffusion
process. We also reveal that MBD has interesting connections to sampling-based
optimization. Empirical evaluations show that MBD outperforms state-of-the-art
reinforcement learning and sampling-based TO methods in challenging contact-rich
tasks. Additionally, MBD’s ability to integrate with data enhances its versatility and
practical applicability, even with imperfect and infeasible data (e.g., partial-state
demonstrations for high-dimensional humanoids), beyond the scope of standard
diffusion models. Videos and codes: https://lecar-lab.github.io/mbd/

1

Introduction

Trajectory

Trajectory optimization (TO)
aims to optimize the state
Forward Y (i) = αY (i−1) + 1 − αw
and control sequence to minx0
imize a cost function while
Y (0)
Y (i−1)
Y (i)
Y (N )
u1
subject to specified dynamics
y1(0)
y1(N)
y1(i−1)
y1(i)
and constraints. Given nonx1
linear, non-smooth dynam…
…
…
…
uT
ics and non-convex objec(0)
(i−1)
(i)
yT
yT(N)
yT
yT
tives and constraints, tradixT
tional optimization methods
Model
1
(i)
(i)
like gradient-based methods
Backward Y (i−1) =
(Y + (1 − ᾱi) ∇Y log pi(Y ))
information
αi
and interior point methods are
xt+1 = ft(xt, ut )
Model-based score approximation
less effective in solving TO
problems. In response, diffusion models have emerged as
a powerful tool for trajectory
generation in complex dyModel-based diffusion in humanoid running tasks
namical systems due to their
Figure
1:
MBD
refines the trajectory by leveraging the dynamics
expressiveness and scalabilmodel
directly
without
relying on demonstration data.
ity [12, 54, 34, 33, 40, 5].
(i)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

