Unlearnable 3D Point Clouds: Class-wise
Transformation Is All You Need
∗

Xianlong Wang1,2,4,5† , Minghui Li‡ , Wei Liu1,2,4,5† , Hangtao Zhang4,5† ,
Shengshan Hu1,2,4,5† , Yechao Zhang1,2,4,5† , Ziqi Zhou1,2,3§ , Hai Jin1,2,3§
1
National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
Services Computing Technology and System Lab 3 Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
4
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security
5
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security
† School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
‡ School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
§ School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2

{wxl99,minghuili,weiliu73,hangt_zhang,hushengshan,ycz,zhouziqi,hjin}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional unlearnable strategies have been proposed to prevent unauthorized users
from training on the 2D image data. With more 3D point cloud data containing
sensitivity information, unauthorized usage of this new type data has also become
a serious concern. To address this, we propose the first integral unlearnable framework for 3D point clouds including two processes: (i) we propose an unlearnable
data protection scheme, involving a class-wise setting established by a categoryadaptive allocation strategy and multi-transformations assigned to samples; (ii) we
propose a data restoration scheme that utilizes class-wise inverse matrix transformation, thus enabling authorized-only training for unlearnable data. This restoration
process is a practical issue overlooked in most existing unlearnable literature, i.e.,
even authorized users struggle to gain knowledge from 3D unlearnable data. Both
theoretical and empirical results (including 6 datasets, 16 models, and 2 tasks)
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed unlearnable framework. Our code is
available at https://github.com/CGCL-codes/UnlearnablePC.

1

Introduction

Recently, 3D point cloud deep learning has been making remarkable strides in various domains, e.g.,
self-driving [6] and virtual reality [1, 46]. Specifically, numerous 3D sensors scan the surrounding
environment and synthesize massive 3D point cloud data containing sensitive information such as
pedestrian and vehicles [32] to the cloud server for deep learning analysis [12, 23]. However, the raw
point cloud data can be exploited for point cloud unauthorized deep learning if a data breach occurs,
posing a significant privacy threat. Fortunately, the privacy protection approaches for preventing
unauthorized training have been extensively studied in the 2D image domain [9, 19, 28, 29, 39, 42].
They apply elaborate perturbations on images such that trained networks over them exhibit extremely
low generalization, thus failing to learn knowledge from the protected data, known as "making
data unlearnable". Nonetheless, the stark disparity between 2D images and 3D point clouds poses
significant challenges for drawing lessons from existing 2D solutions.
Specifically, migrating 2D unlearnable schemes to 3D suffers from following challenges: (i) Incompatibility with 3D data. Numerous model-agnostic 2D image unlearnable schemes operate
∗

Minghui Li is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

