Score-based generative models are provably robust:
an uncertainty quantification perspective

Nikiforos Mimikos-Stamatopoulos
Department of Mathematics
Université Côte d’Azur
nmimikos@unice.fr

Benjamin J. Zhang
Division of Applied Mathematics
Brown University
benjamin_zhang@brown.edu

Markos A. Katsoulakis
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Massachusetts Amherst
markos@umass.edu

Abstract
Through an uncertainty quantification (UQ) perspective, we show that score-based
generative models (SGMs) are provably robust to the multiple sources of error
in practical implementation. Our primary tool is the Wasserstein uncertainty
propagation (WUP) theorem, a model-form UQ bound that describes how the L2
error from learning the score function propagates to a Wasserstein-1 (d1 ) ball
around the true data distribution under the evolution of the Fokker-Planck equation.
We show how errors due to (a) finite sample approximation, (b) early stopping, (c)
score-matching objective choice, (d) score function parametrization expressiveness,
and (e) reference distribution choice, impact the quality of the generative model
in terms of a d1 bound of computable quantities. The WUP theorem relies on
Bernstein estimates for Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman partial differential equations
(PDE) and the regularizing properties of diffusion processes. Specifically, PDE
regularity theory shows that stochasticity is the key mechanism ensuring SGM
algorithms are provably robust. The WUP theorem applies to integral probability
metrics beyond d1 , such as the total variation distance and the maximum mean
discrepancy. Sample complexity and generalization bounds in d1 follow directly
from the WUP theorem. Our approach requires minimal assumptions, is agnostic to
the manifold hypothesis and avoids absolute continuity assumptions for the target
distribution. Additionally, our results clarify the trade-offs among multiple error
sources in SGMs.

1

Introduction

Score-based generative models (SGMs) [1, 2] are highly effective [3], producing high quality samples,
with more stable and less computationally intensive training methods than generative adversarial nets
and normalizing flows [4]. The models are empirically robust to approximations and errors in learning
the score function. While SGM generalization properties have been studied for idealized conditions [5,
6, 7, 8], analyses of their robustness in practical settings remains underexplored. This paper analyzes
SGMs through the regularity theory of nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) [9], specifically
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equations [10]. Our main result is the Wasserstein uncertainty
propagation (WUP) theorem (Theorem 3.1), a versatile model-form uncertainty quantification (UQ)
bound which we use to theoretically explain the robustness of SGMs to approximation errors in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

