Training Dynamics of Transformers to Recognize
Word Co-occurrence via Gradient Flow Analysis

Hongru Yang∗
The University of Texas at Austin
& Princeton University
hy6385@utexas.edu

Bhavya Kailkhura
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
kailkhura1@llnl.gov

Zhangyang Wang
The University of Texas at Austin
atlaswang@utexas.edu

Yingbin Liang
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Abstract
Understanding the training dynamics of transformers is important to explain the
impressive capabilities behind large language models. In this work, we study the
dynamics of training a shallow transformer on a task of recognizing co-occurrence
of two designated words. In the literature of studying training dynamics of transformers, several simplifications are commonly adopted such as weight reparameterization, attention linearization, special initialization, and lazy regime. In contrast,
we analyze the gradient flow dynamics of simultaneously training three attention
matrices and a linear MLP layer from random initialization, and provide a framework of analyzing such dynamics via a coupled dynamical system. We establish
near minimum loss and characterize the attention model after training. We discover
that gradient flow serves as an inherent mechanism that naturally divide the training
process into two phases. In Phase 1, the linear MLP quickly aligns with the two target signals for correct classification, whereas the softmax attention remains almost
unchanged. In Phase 2, the attention matrices and the MLP evolve jointly to enlarge
the classification margin and reduce the loss to a near minimum value. Technically,
we prove a novel property of the gradient flow, termed automatic balancing of
gradients, which enables the loss values of different samples to decrease almost at
the same rate and further facilitates the proof of near minimum training loss. We
also conduct experiments to verify our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Ever since the invention of self-attention [VSP+ 17], transformers have become a dominating backbone architecture in many machine learning applications such as computer vision
[DBK+ 20, LLC+ 21] and natural language processing [DCLT18]. Nowadays, ChatGPT and
GPT-4 [Ope23] have demonstrated astonishing abilities in many areas such as language understanding, mathematics and coding, which have sparked artificial general intelligence [BCE+ 23].
In the meantime, there has been a burgeoning development of large language models (LLMs)
[TLI+ 23, MH23, ADF+ 23] as well as multi-modal models [Tea23].
Despite the huge empirical success, theoretical understanding of why a pre-trained language model
can possess such impressive performance has been significantly lagging behind. Some previous
∗
Work done while doing a internship at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and visiting Princeton
University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

