Test-Time Dynamic Image Fusion

Bing Cao1,2

Yinan Xia1

Yi Ding1

Changqing Zhang1,2

Qinghua Hu1,2∗

1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin, China
{caobing, xyn, ding_yi0731, zhangchangqing, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
The inherent challenge of image fusion lies in capturing the correlation of multisource images and comprehensively integrating effective information from different
sources. Most existing techniques fail to perform dynamic image fusion while
notably lacking theoretical guarantees, leading to potential deployment risks in
this field. Is it possible to conduct dynamic image fusion with a clear theoretical
justification? In this paper, we give our solution from a generalization perspective. We proceed to reveal the generalized form of image fusion and derive a new
test-time dynamic image fusion paradigm. It provably reduces the upper bound of
generalization error. Specifically, we decompose the fused image into multiple components corresponding to its source data. The decomposed components represent
the effective information from the source data, thus the gap between them reflects
the Relative Dominability (RD) of the uni-source data in constructing the fusion
image. Theoretically, we prove that the key to reducing generalization error hinges
on the negative correlation between the RD-based fusion weight and the uni-source
reconstruction loss. Intuitively, RD dynamically highlights the dominant regions
of each source and can be naturally converted to the corresponding fusion weight,
achieving robust results. Extensive experiments and discussions with in-depth
analysis on multiple benchmarks confirm our findings and superiority. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Yinan-Xia/TTD.

1

Introduction

Image fusion jointly integrates complementary information from multiple sources, aiming to generate
informative and high-quality fused images. With superior scene representation and enhanced visual
perception, image fusion significantly benefits downstream vision tasks [1, 2]. Typically, image
fusion can be categorized into multi-modal, multi-exposure, and multi-focus image fusion tasks.
Multi-modal image fusion encompasses Visible-Infrared image Fusion (VIF) and Medical Image
Fusion (MIF). For VIF [3–5], infrared images effectively highlight thermal targets especially under
extreme conditions, while visible images provide texture details and ambient lighting. For MIF [6, 7],
different medical imaging modalities emphasize various focal areas, enhancing diagnostic capabilities.
Multi-exposure image Fusion (MEF) [8–10] bridges the gap between high dynamic range (HDR)
natural scenes and low dynamic range (LDR) pictures, ensuring better detail preservation in varying
lighting conditions. Multi-Focus image Fusion (MFF) [11–13] aims to produce all-in-focus images
by combining multiple images focused at different depths.
Numerous image fusion methods have been introduced, which can be mainly grouped into traditional
techniques and deep learning approaches. Traditional image fusion methods, such as multi-scale
decomposition-based models [14, 15] and sparse representation-based methods [16], rely on mathematical transformations to fuse images in the transform domain [17]. In contrast, deep learning-based
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

