Improved Sample Complexity for Multiclass PAC
Learning

Steve Hanneke
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Shay Moran
Technion and Google Research
smoran@technion.ac.il

Qian Zhang
Purdue University
zhan3761@purdue.edu

Abstract
We aim to understand the optimal PAC sample complexity in multiclass learning.
While finiteness of the Daniely-Shalev-Shwartz (DS) dimension has been shown
to characterize the PAC learnability of a concept class [Brukhim, Carmon, Dinur,
Moran, and Yehudayoff, 2022], there exist polylog factor gaps in the leading term of
the sample complexity. In this paper, we reduce the gap in terms of the dependence
on the error parameter to a single log factor and also propose two possible routes
towards completely resolving the optimal sample complexity, each based on a
key open question we formulate: one concerning list learning with bounded list
size, the other concerning a new type of shifting for multiclass concept classes.
We prove that a positive answer to either of the two questions would completely
resolve the optimal sample complexity up to log factors of the DS dimension.

1

Introduction

Multiclass learning refers to the problem of classifying an input feature from a set (feature space) X
to a label in a set (label space) Y with |Y| ą 2 (Y can be infinite) [Natarajan, 1989, Ben-David et al.,
1995, Daniely and Shalev-Shwartz, 2014, Brukhim et al., 2022]. When |Y| “ 2, the problem is known
as binary classification. Multiclass learning has wide applications to various tasks in machine learning
including image classification [Rawat and Wang, 2017], natural language processing [Kowsari et al.,
2019], tissue classification [Li et al., 2004], etc. For theoretical analysis of multiclass learning, a
probabilistic setting is typically assumed, where all the feature-label pairs in the training sequence are
assumed to be independent and identically distributed (iid) samples from some distribution P over
X ˆ Y. Then, the objective of the learner is to minimize the error rate of the output classifier under
the distribution P . A basic framework in the probabilistic setting is Probably Approximately Correct
(PAC) learning [Valiant, 1984]. Though the characterization of PAC learnability of a binary concept
class with the finiteness of its Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) dimension has been proved by Vapnik and
Chervonenkis [1968], the characterization of the multiclass PAC learnability remained open until
Brukhim et al. [2022] showed the equivalence between the PAC learnability of a concept class and
the finiteness of its Daniely-Shalev-Shwartz (DS) dimension (dim, see Definition 1.4) [Daniely and
Shalev-Shwartz, 2014] instead of Natarajan dimension or graph dimension.
However, the problem of establishing the optimal sample complexity or error rate (see Section 1.1 for
formal definitions) for multiclass learning remains unsolved. For binary concept classes, Hanneke
[2016] showed that the sample complexity is in Θppd ` logp1{δqq{εq where d is the VC dimension
of the concept class. Since DS dimension and VC dimension coincide for binary concept classes,
it is natural to ask if the sample complexity of a concept class H Ď Y X for |Y| ą 2 is also in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

