LG-CAV: Train Any Concept Activation Vector with
Language Guidance

Qihan Huang1 , Jie Song1, † , Mengqi Xue2 , Haofei Zhang1 ,
Bingde Hu1 , Huiqiong Wang3 , Hao Jiang4 , Xingen Wang1, 5 , Mingli Song1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Hangzhou City University
3
Ningbo Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
4
Alibaba Group, 5 Bangsheng Technology Co., Ltd.
{qh.huang,sjie,haofeizhang,tonyhu,huiqiong_wang,newroot,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn
mqxue@zucc.edu.cn, aoshu.jh@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Concept activation vector (CAV) has attracted broad research interest in explainable
AI, by elegantly attributing model predictions to specific concepts. However, the
training of CAV often necessitates a large number of high-quality images, which
are expensive to curate and thus limited to a predefined set of concepts. To address
this issue, we propose Language-Guided CAV (LG-CAV) to harness the abundant
concept knowledge within the certain pre-trained vision-language models (e.g.,
CLIP). This method allows training any CAV without labeled data, by utilizing the
corresponding concept descriptions as guidance. To bridge the gap between visionlanguage model and the target model, we calculate the activation values of concept
descriptions on a common pool of images (probe images) with vision-language
model and utilize them as language guidance to train the LG-CAV. Furthermore,
after training high-quality LG-CAVs related to all the predicted classes in the
target model, we propose the activation sample reweighting (ASR), serving as
a model correction technique, to improve the performance of the target model
in return. Experiments on four datasets across nine architectures demonstrate
that LG-CAV achieves significantly superior quality to previous CAV methods
given any concept, and our model correction method achieves state-of-the-art
performance compared to existing concept-based methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/hqhQAQ/LG-CAV.

1

Introduction

Concept activation vector (CAV) [16] interprets the pre-trained black-box classification models (target
models) by quantifying the significance of a concept to the model predictions. CAV provides intuitive
insights to comprehend the intrinsic behavior of black-box models, elucidating the patterns behind
their decision-making processes. Owing to its simplicity and effectiveness, it has been followed
by numerous studies [10, 36, 11, 1, 40] and extended to diverse domains, such as recommender
system [45], 3D shape generation [8], abusive language detection [25], etc.
However, the training of CAV usually necessitates an ample amount of high-quality images that
accurately depict the corresponding concept. Unfortunately, in practical contexts, gathering an
adequate number of training images is challenging especially when the number of concepts is
extensive, thereby significantly impacting the quality (estimated using the proposed concept accuracy
and concept-to-class accuracy) of the trained CAVs. Figure 1 delineates the correlation between
† Corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

