Noise-Aware Differentially Private Regression via
Meta-Learning

Ossi Räisä∗
University of Helsinki
ossi.raisa@helsinki.fi

Stratis Markou∗
University of Cambridge
em626@cam.ac.uk

Wessel P. Bruinsma
Microsoft Research AI for Science
wessel.p.bruinsma@gmail.com
Antti Honkela
University of Helsinki
antti.honkela@helsinki.fi

Matthew Ashman
University of Cambridge
mca39@cam.ac.uk

Marlon Tobaben
University of Helsinki
marlon.tobaben@helsinki.fi
Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Many high-stakes applications require machine learning models that protect user
privacy and provide well-calibrated, accurate predictions. While Differential Privacy (DP) is the gold standard for protecting user privacy, standard DP mechanisms
typically significantly impair performance. One approach to mitigating this issue is
pre-training models on simulated data before DP learning on the private data. In
this work we go a step further, using simulated data to train a meta-learning model
that combines the Convolutional Conditional Neural Process (ConvCNP) with an
improved functional DP mechanism of Hall et al. [2013] yielding the DPConvCNP.
DPConvCNP learns from simulated data how to map private data to a DP predictive
model in one forward pass, and then provides accurate, well-calibrated predictions.
We compare DPConvCNP with a DP Gaussian Process (GP) baseline with carefully
tuned hyperparameters. The DPConvCNP outperforms the GP baseline, especially
on non-Gaussian data, yet is much faster at test time and requires less tuning.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved tremendous success across a range of domains, especially in settings
where large datasets are publicly available. However, in many impactful applications such as
healthcare, the data may contain sensitive information about users, whose privacy we want to protect.
Differential Privacy [DP; Dwork et al., 2006] is the gold standard framework for protecting user
privacy, as it provides strong guarantees on the privacy loss incurred on users participating in a dataset.
However, enforcing DP often significantly impairs performance. A recently proposed method to
mitigate this issue is to pre-train a model on non-private data, e.g. from a simulator [Tang et al., 2023],
and then fine-tune it under DP on real private data [Yu et al., 2021, Li et al., 2022, De et al., 2022].
We go a step further and train a meta-learning model with a DP mechanism inside it (Figure 1). While
supervised learning is about learning a mapping from inputs to outputs using a learning algorithm,
in meta-learning we learn a learning algorithm directly from the data, by meta-training, enabling
generalisation to new datasets during meta-testing. Our model is meta-trained on simulated datasets,
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

