GoMatching: A Simple Baseline for Video Text
Spotting via Long and Short Term Matching

1

Haibin He1∗ , Maoyuan Ye1∗, Jing Zhang1† , Juhua Liu1† , Bo Du1 , Dacheng Tao2
School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University, China
2
College of Computing & Data Science at Nanyang Technological University
{haibinhe, yemaoyuan, liujuhua, dubo}@whu.edu.com
jingzhang.cv@gmail.com, dacheng.tao@gmail.com
https://github.com/Hxyz-123/GoMatching

Abstract
Beyond the text detection and recognition tasks in image text spotting, video text
spotting presents an augmented challenge with the inclusion of tracking. While
advanced end-to-end trainable methods have shown commendable performance,
the pursuit of multi-task optimization may pose the risk of producing sub-optimal
outcomes for individual tasks. In this paper, we identify a main bottleneck in the
state-of-the-art video text spotter: the limited recognition capability. In response to
this issue, we propose to efficiently turn an off-the-shelf query-based image text
spotter into a specialist on video and present a simple baseline termed GoMatching,
which focuses the training efforts on tracking while maintaining strong recognition
performance. To adapt the image text spotter to video datasets, we add a rescoring
head to rescore each detected instance’s confidence via efficient tuning, leading to a
better tracking candidate pool. Additionally, we design a long-short term matching
module, termed LST-Matcher, to enhance the spotter’s tracking capability by
integrating both long- and short-term matching results via Transformer. Based on
the above simple designs, GoMatching delivers new records on ICDAR15-video,
DSText, BOVText, and our proposed novel test set with arbitrary-shaped text
termed ArTVideo, which demonstrates GoMatching’s capability to accommodate
general, dense, small, arbitrary-shaped, Chinese and English text scenarios while
saving considerable training budgets.

1

Introduction

Text spotting has received increasing attention due to its various applications, such as video retrieval [1] and autonomous driving [2]. Recently, numerous image text spotting (ITS) methods [3–6]
that simultaneously tackle text detection and recognition, have attained extraordinary accomplishment.
In the video realm, video text spotting (VTS) involves a tracking task additionally. Although VTS
methods [7–12] make significant progress, a substantial discrepancy persists when compared to ITS.
We observe that the text recognition proficiency of VTS models is far inferior to ITS models. To
investigate this issue, we compare the state-of-the-art (SOTA) VTS model TransDETR [12] and
ITS model Deepsolo [5] for image-level text spotting performance on ICDAR15-video [13] and our
established ArTVideo (i.e., Arbitrary-shaped Text in Video) test set (Sec.4.1) which comprises about
30% curved text.
As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), even when evaluating the image-level spotting performance on the VTS
model’s training set, the F1-score of TransDETR is only comparable to the zero-shot performance of
∗

Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

