Facilitating Multimodal Classification via Dynamically
Learning Modality Gap

Yang Yang† , Fengqiang Wan† , Qing-Yuan Jiang∗ † , Yi Xu‡
†
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
‡
Dalian University of Technology
{yyang,fqwan,jiangqy}@njust.edu.cn, yxu@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal learning falls into the trap of the optimization dilemma due to the
modality imbalance phenomenon, leading to unsatisfactory performance in real
applications. A core reason for modality imbalance is that the models of each
modality converge at different rates. Many attempts naturally focus on adjusting
learning procedures adaptively. Essentially, the reason why models converge at
different rates is because the difficulty of fitting category labels is inconsistent for
each modality during learning. From the perspective of fitting labels, we find that
appropriate positive intervention label fitting can correct this difference in learning
ability. By exploiting the ability of contrastive learning to intervene in the learning
of category label fitting, we propose a novel multimodal learning approach that dynamically integrates unsupervised contrastive learning and supervised multimodal
learning to address the modality imbalance problem. We find that a simple yet
heuristic integration strategy can significantly alleviate the modality imbalance
phenomenon. Moreover, we design a learning-based integration strategy to integrate two losses dynamically, further improving the performance. Experiments
on widely used datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method compared with
state-of-the-art (SOTA) multimodal learning approaches. The code is available at
https://github.com/njustkmg/NeurIPS24-LFM.

1

Introduction

Multimodal learning (MML) [3, 38, 47, 41, 10, 26, 31, 43, 13] integrates heterogeneous information
from different modalities to build an effective way to perceive the world. Over the past decades,
multimodal learning has made incredible progress [31, 10, 13] and become a hot research topic with a
wide range of real applications including image caption [6, 14], cross-modal retrieval [21, 44, 54, 37],
vision reasoning [32, 8], action recognition [23, 28], and so on.
In multimodal learning, several recent studies [38, 31] have revealed an interesting phenomenon, i.e.,
the performance of the multimodal model is far from the upper bound or even inferior to the unimodal in certain situations. The root of this problem lies in the existence of the modality imbalance
phenomenon [38]. Concretely, there commonly exists dominant modality and non-dominant modality
in heterogeneous multimodal data. Multimodal learning usually adopts a uniform objective. Due to
greediness [42], the optimization tends to dominant modality while neglecting the non-dominant one
during joint training, thus leading to unsatisfactory performance in real applications.
Recently, many impressive works [38, 11, 31, 13, 24] have been proposed to address the modality imbalance problem. Early pioneering approaches, such as gradient blending (G-Blend) [38], on-the-fly
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

