DDN: Dual-domain Dynamic Normalization for
Non-stationary Time Series Forecasting

Tao Dai1,∗, Beiliang Wu1,∗, Peiyuan Liu2,†, Naiqi Li2,†, Xue Yuerong2 , Shu-Tao Xia2 , Zexuan Zhu1
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
2
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
{daitao.edu, peiyuanliu.edu, linaiqi.thu}@gmail.com; xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently achieved remarkable advancements in
time series forecasting (TSF) due to their powerful ability of sequence dependence
modeling. To date, existing DNN-based TSF methods still suffer from unreliable
predictions for real-world data due to its non-stationarity characteristics, i.e., data
distribution varies quickly over time. To mitigate this issue, several normalization
methods (e.g., SAN) have recently been specifically designed by normalization in
a fixed period/window in the time domain. However, these methods still struggle
to capture distribution variations, due to the complex time patterns of time series
in the time domain. Based on the fact that wavelet transform can decompose
time series into a linear combination of different frequencies, which exhibits
distribution variations with time-varying periods, we propose a novel Dual-domain
Dynamic Normalization (DDN) to dynamically capture distribution variations in
both time and frequency domains. Specifically, our DDN tries to eliminate the
non-stationarity of time series via both frequency and time domain normalization
in a sliding window way. Besides, our DDN can serve as a plug-in-play module,
and thus can be easily incorporated into other forecasting models. Extensive
experiments on public benchmark datasets under different forecasting models
demonstrate the superiority of our DDN over other normalization methods. Code
is available at https://github.com/Hank0626/DDN.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) with powerful dependency modeling capability have recently been
widely used in time series forecasting (TSF) applications, including weather prediction [1], energy
consumption estimation [2], and traffic flow forecasting [3]. Despite the great advancements of
DNN-based TSF methods [4, 5, 6, 7], they still suffer from unreliable predictions for real-world data
due to its non-stationary nature of real-world time series, i.e., data distribution within the series varies
quickly over time (a.k.a, distribution drift [8, 9, 10]). Such non-stationary challenge limits the real
applications of DNN-based TSF methods.
To mitigate the problem of distribution drift, the classic reversible normalization [11] has recently
been proposed with a two-stage pipeline of normalization and de-normalization. The former stage
of normalization eliminates non-stationary factors for converting a non-stationary sequence into a
stationary sequence, which has to acquire the mean and standard deviation of the sequence before.
The latter stage of de-normalization reconstructs non-stationary information from the distribution
prediction model or directly reuses the mean and standard deviation acquired in normalization.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Correspondence to: Peiyuan Liu and Naiqi Li

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

