U NLEARN C ANVAS: A Stylized Image Dataset for
Enhanced Machine Unlearning Evaluation in
Diffusion Models
Yihua Zhang1 , Chongyu Fan1 , Yimeng Zhang1 , Yuguang Yao1 , Jinghan Jia1 , Jiancheng Liu1 ,
Gaoyuan Zhang2 , Gaowen Liu3 , Ramana Kompella3 , Xiaoming Liu1 , Sijia Liu1,2
1
Michigan State University, 2 IBM Research, 3 Cisco Research

Abstract
The technological advancements in diffusion models (DMs) have demonstrated unprecedented capabilities in text-to-image generation and are widely used in diverse
applications. However, they have also raised significant societal concerns, such
as the generation of harmful content and copyright disputes. Machine unlearning
(MU) has emerged as a promising solution, capable of removing undesired generative capabilities from DMs. However, existing MU evaluation systems present
several key challenges that can result in incomplete and inaccurate assessments.
To address these issues, we propose U NLEARN C ANVAS, a comprehensive highresolution stylized image dataset that facilitates the evaluation of the unlearning of
artistic styles and associated objects. This dataset enables the establishment of a
standardized, automated evaluation framework with 7 quantitative metrics assessing
various aspects of the unlearning performance for DMs. Through extensive experiments, we benchmark 9 state-of-the-art MU methods for DMs, revealing novel
insights into their strengths, weaknesses, and underlying mechanisms. Additionally, we explore challenging unlearning scenarios for DMs to evaluate worst-case
performance against adversarial prompts, the unlearning of finer-scale concepts,
and sequential unlearning. We hope that this study can pave the way for developing
more effective, accurate, and robust DM unlearning methods, ensuring safer and
more ethical applications of DMs in the future. The dataset, benchmark, and codes
are publicly available at https://unlearn-canvas.netlify.app/.

1

Introduction

The recent technological breakthroughs in text-to-image generation, driven by diffusion models
(DMs), have shown an unprecedented capability to produce high-resolution, high-quality images
across a diverse range of subjects [1–10]. These models have become widely accessible to the public
and are applied across various sectors, including advertising, the creative arts [11], and forensic
sketching [12]. One reason for DMs being able to generate a broad spectrum of content is their
reliance on diverse internet-sourced data [13]. However, this inclusiveness comes with risks, such as
harmful generation [14], copyright issues [15], and biases or stereotypes [16, 17].
To alleviate the negative social impacts associated with DMs, machine unlearning (MU) techniques
are catching increasing attention and have been studied in the field of text-to-image generation via
DMs [18–33]. MU for DMs, also referred to as DM unlearning [27], aims to prevent the model from
generating images when conditioned on an undesired concept (typically specified by a text prompt to
be forgotten). Therefore, the problem of DM unlearning is also known as concept erasing [18–26].
Based on the types of unlearning requests, the targeted concept to be erased can be diverse, including
not-safe-for-work (NSFW) prompts [14, 23], concrete object entities [18–33], and copyrighted
information like artistic styles [23–26, 28–30, 32]. In Fig. 1 (a), we provide an illustration of DM
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

