Overcoming Common Flaws in the Evaluation of
Selective Classification Systems

Jeremias Traub1,2 Till J. Bungert1,2,6 Carsten T. Lüth1,2 Michael Baumgartner2,3,6
Klaus H. Maier-Hein2,3,5,6,7 Lena Maier-Hein2,4,6,7 Paul F. Jäger1,2
1
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Interactive Machine Learning Group, Germany
2
Helmholtz Imaging, DKFZ Heidelberg, Germany
3
DKFZ Heidelberg, Division of Medical Image Computing (MIC), Germany
4
DKFZ Heidelberg, Division of Intelligent Medical Systems (IMSY), Germany
5
Pattern Analysis and Learning Group, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Heidelberg University Hospital, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
6
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Heidelberg, Germany
7
National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) Heidelberg
jeremias.traub@dkfz-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Selective Classification, wherein models can reject low-confidence predictions,
promises reliable translation of machine-learning based classification systems to
real-world scenarios such as clinical diagnostics. While current evaluation of these
systems typically assumes fixed working points based on pre-defined rejection
thresholds, methodological progress requires benchmarking the general performance of systems akin to the AUROC in standard classification. In this work,
we define 5 requirements for multi-threshold metrics in selective classification
regarding task alignment, interpretability, and flexibility, and show how current
approaches fail to meet them. We propose the Area under the Generalized Risk
Coverage curve (AUGRC), which meets all requirements and can be directly interpreted as the average risk of undetected failures. We empirically demonstrate
the relevance of AUGRC on a comprehensive benchmark spanning 6 data sets and
13 confidence scoring functions. We find that the proposed metric substantially
changes metric rankings on 5 out of the 6 data sets.

1

Introduction

Selective Classification (SC) is increasingly recognized as a crucial component for the reliable deployment of machine learning-based classification systems in real-world scenarios, such as clinical
diagnostics [Dvijotham et al., 2023, Leibig et al., 2022, Dembrower et al., 2020, Yala et al., 2019].
The core idea of SC is to equip models with the ability to reject low-confidence predictions, thereby
enhancing the overall reliability and safety of the system [Geifman and El-Yaniv, 2017, Chow,
1957, El-Yaniv et al., 2010]. This is typically achieved through three key components: a classifier
that makes the predictions, a confidence scoring function (CSF) that assesses the reliability of these
predictions, and a rejection threshold τ that determines when to reject a prediction based on its
confidence score.
In evaluating SC systems, two primary concepts are essential: risk and coverage. Risk expresses
the classifier’s error potential and is typically measured by its misclassification rate. Coverage, on
the other hand, indicates the proportion of instances where the model makes a prediction rather
than rejecting it. An effective SC system aims to minimize risk while maintaining high coverage,
ensuring that the model provides accurate predictions for as many instances as possible.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

