Prospective Representation Learning for
Non-Exemplar Class-Incremental Learning

Wuxuan Shi1 , Mang Ye1,2∗
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Taikang Center for Life and Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{wuxuanshi, yemang}@whu.edu.cn
https://github.com/ShiWuxuan/NeurIPS2024-PRL
1

Abstract
Non-exemplar class-incremental learning (NECIL) is a challenging task that requires recognizing both old and new classes without retaining any old class samples.
Current works mainly deal with the conflicts between old and new classes retrospectively as a new task comes in. However, the lack of old task data makes balancing
old and new classes difficult. Instead, we propose a Prospective Representation
Learning (PRL) approach to prepare the model for handling conflicts in advance.
In the base phase, we squeeze the embedding distribution of the current classes
to reserve space for forward compatibility with future classes. In the incremental
phase, we make the new class features away from the saved prototypes of old
classes in a latent space while aligning the current embedding space with the latent
space when updating the model. Thereby, the new class features are clustered in the
reserved space to minimize the shock of the new classes on the former classes. Our
approach can help existing NECIL baselines to balance old and new classes in a
plug-and-play manner. Extensive experiments on several benchmarks demonstrate
that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in static scenarios.
Research attention is increasingly turning to extending the learning capability of DNNs to open and
dynamic environments. An important aspect is to enable the network to accumulate knowledge from
new tasks as the input stream is updated (i.e., incremental learning [1; 2; 3]).
Whenever a new task arrives, it is costly to retrain the model with current and old data. Not to mention
that the old data is not fully available. A typical alternative is to fine-tune the network with new data
directly. However, this can lead to drastic performance degradation on previously learned tasks, a
phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting [4; 5]. While storing exemplars of each class is a
simple approach to mitigate forgetting, it relies on the quality of saved exemplars and faces challenges
in storage and privacy, especially for sensitive domains such as medical imaging. Hence, this paper
focuses on coping with catastrophic forgetting during incremental learning without storing any old
samples, which is called non-exemplar class-incremental learning (NECIL) [6; 7].
In NECIL, a serious challenge is to discriminate between old and new classes without access to
old data. Most methods usually start considering handling conflicts between old and new classes
only when new tasks arrive. While some methods use stored prototypes to model the distribution
of old classes [8; 6; 9; 10], others extend the network structure to accommodate new classes [7; 11].
However, in the base phase (i.e., training on the first task), traditional training allows different classes
∗

Corresponding Author: Mang Ye

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

