The Unmet Promise of Synthetic Training Images:
Using Retrieved Real Images Performs Better

Scott Geng♣ Cheng-Yu Hsieh♣ Vivek Ramanujan♣ Matthew Wallingford♣
Chun-Liang Li♣
Pang Wei Koh∗ ♣♠
Ranjay Krishna∗ ♣♠
♣

University of Washington ♠ Allen Institute for AI
sgeng@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Generative text-to-image models enable us to synthesize unlimited amounts of
images in a controllable manner, spurring many recent efforts to train vision models
with synthetic data. However, every synthetic image ultimately originates from the
upstream data used to train the generator. Does the intermediate generator provide
additional information over directly training on relevant parts of the upstream data?
Grounding this question in the setting of image classification, we compare finetuning on task-relevant, targeted synthetic data generated by Stable Diffusion—a
generative model trained on the LAION-2B dataset—against finetuning on targeted
real images retrieved directly from LAION-2B. We show that while synthetic data
can benefit some downstream tasks, it is universally matched or outperformed
by real data from the simple retrieval baseline. Our analysis suggests that this
underperformance is partially due to generator artifacts and inaccurate task-relevant
visual details in the synthetic images. Overall, we argue that targeted retrieval
is a critical baseline to consider when training with synthetic data—a baseline
that current methods do not yet surpass. We release code, data, and models at
https://github.com/scottgeng00/unmet-promise.

1

Introduction

The success of modern machine learning systems fundamentally relies on the quantity [33, 10, 28,
57, 51, 65], quality [20, 72, 45, 44, 36], and distribution [17, 22, 62, 70, 9] of the data they are
trained on. However, acquiring large amounts of quality data remains challenging, due to the sheer
cost of data collection and annotation. As demand for training data continues to rise, the field is
actively exploring approaches to automatically curate data at scale [20, 2, 18]. One burgeoning
approach is to source synthetic training data from conditional generative models. Generative models
enable data to be tailored to specific requirements and generated at scale, presenting a promising
alternative to the challenges of real data curation. Recent work highlights this potential: for example,
in natural language processing (NLP), researchers prompt strong proprietary language models to
cheaply synthesize large-scale datasets for instruction tuning [68, 29, 61].
Analogously, in computer vision—the focus of our research—many recent works train models on
synthetic images from modern text-to-image generators, aiming to achieve state-of-the-art visual
recognition performance [56, 63, 3, 23, 24]. For example, SynCLR [62] cleverly prompts Stable
Diffusion for synthetic images tailored to pre-specified downstream image recognition domains;
they find that a CLIP-like model trained from scratch on the resulting targeted synthetic images can
outperform CLIP trained on LAION-2B, a significantly larger untargeted dataset of real images. This
result is quite surprising. Stable Diffusion is also trained on LAION-2B, so by the data processing
inequality, the synthetic images it generates cannot contain any additional information about LAION∗

Equal advising.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

