Achieving Õ(1/ε) Sample Complexity for Constrained
Markov Decision Process
Jiashuo Jiang
Department of Industrial Engineering & Decision Analytics
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong, China
jsjiang@ust.hk
Yinyu Ye
Department of Management Science & Engineering
Institue of Computational Mathematics and Engineering
Stanford University
California, US
yyye@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the reinforcement learning problem for the constrained Markov decision process (CMDP), which plays a central role in satisfying safety or resource
constraints in sequential learning and decision-making. In this problem, we are
given finite resources and a MDP with unknown transition probabilities. At each
stage, we take an action, collecting a reward and consuming some resources, all
assumed to be unknown and need to be learned over time. In this work, we
take the first step towards deriving optimal problem-dependent guarantees for the
CMDP problems. We derive a logarithmic regret bound, which translates into a
1
· log2 (1/ε)) sample complexity bound, with ∆ being a problem-dependent
O( ∆·ε
parameter, yet independent of ε. Our sample complexity bound improves upon
the state-of-art O(1/ε2 ) sample complexity for CMDP problems established in
the previous literature, in terms of the dependency on ε. To achieve this advance,
we develop a new framework for analyzing CMDP problems. To be specific, our
algorithm operates in the primal space and we resolve the primal LP for the CMDP
problem at each period in an online manner, with adaptive remaining resource
capacities. The key elements of our algorithm are: i) a characterization of the
instance hardness via LP basis, ii) an eliminating procedure that identifies one
optimal basis of the primal LP, and; iii) a resolving procedure that is adaptive to
the remaining resources and sticks to the characterized optimal basis.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is pivotal in the realm of dynamic decision-making under uncertainty,
where the objective is to maximize total reward through ongoing interaction with and learning from
an enigmatic environment. Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are a prevalent framework for
encapsulating environmental dynamics. MDPs have been instrumental in various domains, such as
video gaming [52], robotics [41], recommender systems [57], inventory control [11], and beyond.
Yet, they fall short in accommodating additional constraints that may influence the formulation of
the optimal policy and the decision-maker’s engagement with the uncertain environment. Often, in
MDP applications, there are stringent constraints on utilities or costs, emanating from areas like safe
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

