: A Million-scale Real Prompt-Gallery
Dataset for Text-to-Video Diffusion Models
Wenhao Wang
University of Technology Sydney
wangwenhao0716@gmail.com

Yi Yang∗
Zhejiang University
yangyics@zju.edu.cn

1.67 Million Unique Text-to-Video Prompts from Real Users
Create a vivid 3D village scene in the midst of a journey, where quaint cottages dot the landscape,
surrounded by lush greenery
Take the viewers on a captivating cinematic journey in 8K ultra HD, following a group of chicks in
Disney style as they explore a magical forest. They play until the sun sets, and the lush, enchanting
environment enchants the audience. Convey the idea that time ceases to exist as they immerse
themselves in their playful adventures.
a Chinese dragon flying in the city sky, large scene

6.69 Million Generated Videos by Diffusion Models

Figure 1: VidProM is the first dataset featuring 1.67 million unique text-to-video prompts and 6.69
million videos generated from 4 different state-of-the-art diffusion models. It inspires many exciting
new research areas, such as Text-to-Video Prompt Engineering, Efficient Video Generation, Fake
Video Detection, and Video Copy Detection for Diffusion Models.

Abstract
The arrival of Sora marks a new era for text-to-video diffusion models, bringing
significant advancements in video generation and potential applications. However,
Sora, along with other text-to-video diffusion models, is highly reliant on prompts,
and there is no publicly available dataset that features a study of text-to-video
prompts. In this paper, we introduce VidProM, the first large-scale dataset comprising 1.67 Million unique text-to-Video Prompts from real users. Additionally,
this dataset includes 6.69 million videos generated by four state-of-the-art diffusion models, alongside some related data. We initially discuss the curation of
this large-scale dataset, a process that is both time-consuming and costly. Subsequently, we underscore the need for a new prompt dataset specifically designed for
text-to-video generation by illustrating how VidProM differs from DiffusionDB, a
large-scale prompt-gallery dataset for image generation. Our extensive and diverse
dataset also opens up many exciting new research areas. For instance, we suggest
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

