SHMT: Self-supervised Hierarchical Makeup Transfer
via Latent Diffusion Models
Zhaoyang Sun1,3∗
Weihua Chen3,4
1

Shengwu Xiong1,2,5

Yaxiong Chen1

Fan Wang3,4

Fei Du3,4

Yi Rong1,2†

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology
2
Sanya Science and Education Innovation Park, Wuhan University of Technology
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 4 Hupan Laboratory 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
This paper studies the challenging task of makeup transfer, which aims to apply
diverse makeup styles precisely and naturally to a given facial image. Due to the
absence of paired data, current methods typically synthesize sub-optimal pseudo
ground truths to guide the model training, resulting in low makeup fidelity. Additionally, different makeup styles generally have varying effects on the person face,
but existing methods struggle to deal with this diversity. To address these issues, we
propose a novel Self-supervised Hierarchical Makeup Transfer (SHMT) method via
latent diffusion models. Following a "decoupling-and-reconstruction" paradigm,
SHMT works in a self-supervised manner, freeing itself from the misguidance of
imprecise pseudo-paired data. Furthermore, to accommodate a variety of makeup
styles, hierarchical texture details are decomposed via a Laplacian pyramid and
selectively introduced to the content representation. Finally, we design a novel
Iterative Dual Alignment (IDA) module that dynamically adjusts the injection
condition of the diffusion model, allowing the alignment errors caused by the domain gap between content and makeup representations to be corrected. Extensive
quantitative and qualitative analyses demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Snowfallingplum/SHMT.

1

Introduction

Recently, makeup transfer has become a popular application in social media and the virtual world.
With its significant economic potential in e-commerce and entertainment, this technique is attracting
widespread attention from the computer vision and artificial intelligence communities. Given a pair
of source and reference face images, makeup transfer involves simultaneously focusing on the realism
of the transferred result, the content preservation of the source image, and the makeup fidelity of the
reference image. Although previous approaches [21, 3, 11, 4, 17, 24, 7, 29, 27, 16, 26, 41, 36, 47, 46]
have made significant advances in image realism and content preservation , the challenge of achieving
high-fidelity transfer of various makeup styles still remains unsolved.
The difficulties of makeup transfer mainly stem from two aspects. On the one hand, makeup transfer
is essentially an unsupervised task, which means that there are no real transferred images that can be
used as labeled targets for model training. To address this issue, previous methods typically synthesize
a "pseudo" ground truth from each input source-reference image pair, as an alternative supervision
∗
†

Work done during internship of Zhaoyang Sun at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.
Corresponding author: Yi Rong (yrong@whut.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

