Croissant: A Metadata Format for ML-Ready Datasets
Mubashara Akhtar1* , Omar Benjelloun2* , Costanza Conforti2* , Luca Foschini3* ,
Pieter Gijsbers4 , Joan Giner-Miguelez5,22* , Sujata Goswami6 , Nitisha Jain1* ,
Michalis Karamousadakis7 , Satyapriya Krishna8 , Michael Kuchnik9* , Sylvain Lesage10* ,
Quentin Lhoest10* , Pierre Marcenac2* , Manil Maskey11 , Peter Mattson2 , Luis Oala12* ,
Hamidah Oderinwale13 , Pierre Ruyssen2* , Tim Santos14 , Rajat Shinde15* , Elena Simperl1,16* ,
Arjun Suresh17 , Goeffry Thomas2,18* , Slava Tykhonov19* , Joaquin Vanschoren4* ,
Susheel Varma3 , Jos van der Velde4* , Steffen Vogler20 , Carole-Jean Wu9 , Luyao Zhang21
Authors in alphabetical order
*

Core contributors 1 King’s College London, 2 Google, 3 Sage Bionetworks, 4 Eindhoven University of Technology, 5 Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, 6 Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 7 Plaixus
Ltd, 8 Harvard University, 9 Meta, 10 Hugging Face, 11 NASA, 12 Dotphoton, 13 McGill University,
14
Graphcore, 15 NASA IMPACT & UAH, 16 Open Data Institute, 17 GATE Overflow, India, 18 Kaggle,
19
DANS-KNAW, 20 Bayer, 21 Duke Kunshan University, 22 Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC)

Abstract
Data is a critical resource for machine learning (ML), yet working with data remains
a key friction point. This paper introduces Croissant, a metadata format for datasets
that creates a shared representation across ML tools, frameworks, and platforms.
Croissant makes datasets more discoverable, portable, and interoperable, thereby
addressing significant challenges in ML data management. Croissant is already
supported by several popular dataset repositories, spanning hundreds of thousands
of datasets, enabling easy loading into the most commonly-used ML frameworks,
regardless of where the data is stored. Our initial evaluation by human raters shows
that Croissant metadata is readable, understandable, complete, yet concise.

1

Introduction

Recent machine learning (ML) advances highlight the critical role of data management in achieving
technological breakthroughs. Yet, working with data remains time-consuming and painful due
to a wide variety of data formats, the lack of interoperability between tools, and the difficulty of
discovering and combining datasets [1, 2]. Data’s prominent role in ML also leads to questions about
its responsible use for training and evaluating ML models in areas such as licensing, privacy, or
fairness, among others [3]. New approaches are needed to make datasets easier to work with, while
also addressing concerns around their responsible use.
This paper1 presents Croissant, a metadata format designed to improve ML datasets’ discoverability,
portability, reproducibility, and interoperability. Croissant makes datasets “ML-ready” by recording
ML-specific metadata that enables them to be loaded directly into ML frameworks and tools (see
Figure 2 for sample code). Croissant describes datasets’ attributes, the resources they contain, and
their structure and semantics. This uniform description streamlines their usage and sharing within
the ML community and between ML platforms and tools while fostering responsible ML practices.
Figure 1 gives an overview of the Croissant lifecycle and ecosystem.
Croissant can describe most types of data commonly used in ML workflows, such as images,
text, audio, or tabular. While datasets come in a variety of data formats and layouts, Croissant
exposes a unified “view” over these resources. It lets users add semantic descriptions and MLspecific information. The Croissant vocabulary [5] does not require changing the underlying data
representation, and can thus be easily added to existing datasets, and adopted by dataset repositories.
1 A shorter preliminary introduction to Croissant was presented at the DEEM 2024 workshop [4].

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

