Batched Energy-Entropy acquisition for
Bayesian Optimization

1

Felix Teufel12 Carsten Stahlhut1 Jesper Ferkinghoff-Borg1
Machine Intelligence, Novo Nordisk A/S 2 Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen
{fegt,ctqs,jfgb}@novonordisk.com

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is an attractive machine learning framework for performing sample-efficient global optimization of black-box functions. The optimization process is guided by an acquisition function that selects points to acquire in
each round of BO. In batched BO, when multiple points are acquired in parallel,
commonly used acquisition functions are often high-dimensional and intractable,
leading to the use of sampling-based alternatives. We propose a statistical physics
inspired acquisition function for BO with Gaussian processes that can natively
handle batches. Batched Energy-Entropy acquisition for BO (BEEBO) enables
tight control of the explore-exploit trade-off of the optimization process and generalizes to heteroskedastic black-box problems. We demonstrate the applicability
of BEEBO on a range of problems, showing competitive performance to existing
methods.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization (BO) has since its inception [1, 2] made a profound contribution to
the realm of global optimization of black-box
functions through the usage of Bayesian statistics. For global optimization problems pursuing
x∗ = argmaxx∈X ftrue (x), BO has surfaced as
a premier strategy for efficiently handling especially complex and costly unknown functions,
ftrue (x). While BO is traditionally formulated in
a single-point scenario, where individual points
are queried and results are observed sequentially,
there are situations where batched acquisition
is needed. Such situations arise when ftrue (x)
is expensive to evaluate in either time or cost,
but can be effectively evaluated in parallel by
dispatching multiple experiments, reducing the
overall optimization time. This is often the case
in e.g. drug discovery, materials design or hyperparameter tuning for deep models [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Figure 1: q-UCB does not allow for controlling its
The realization that BO could be employed for explore-exploit trade-off with large batches. A GP
the training of deep neural networks, as sug- surrogate (background) was initialized with 100
gested by [3], sparked renewed research interest, random points of the Ackley function. q-UCB was
′
with advancements encompassing a variety of run with κ = 0.1 and κ = 100, BEEBO with T =
′
areas, including the generalization to accommo- 0.05 and T =50. Batch size Q=100.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

