Excluding the Irrelevant: Focusing Reinforcement
Learning through Continuous Action Masking
Roland Stolz1,∗
Jakob Thumm1
1

Hanna Krasowski1,2,∗

Michael Eichelbeck1

Philipp Gassert1,3

Matthias Althoff1

Technical University of Munich, 2 University of California, Berkeley,
3
Munich Center for Machine Learning
{roland.stolz, hanna.krasowski}@tum.de

Abstract
Continuous action spaces in reinforcement learning (RL) are commonly defined as
multidimensional intervals. While intervals usually reflect the action boundaries
for tasks well, they can be challenging for learning because the typically large
global action space leads to frequent exploration of irrelevant actions. Yet, little
task knowledge can be sufficient to identify significantly smaller state-specific sets
of relevant actions. Focusing learning on these relevant actions can significantly
improve training efficiency and effectiveness. In this paper, we propose to focus
learning on the set of relevant actions and introduce three continuous action masking methods for exactly mapping the action space to the state-dependent set of
relevant actions. Thus, our methods ensure that only relevant actions are executed,
enhancing the predictability of the RL agent and enabling its use in safety-critical
applications. We further derive the implications of the proposed methods on the
policy gradient. Using proximal policy optimization (PPO), we evaluate our methods on four control tasks, where the relevant action set is computed based on the
system dynamics and a relevant state set. Our experiments show that the three
action masking methods achieve higher final rewards and converge faster than the
baseline without action masking.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) can solve complex tasks in areas such as robotics [13], games [35],
and large language models [26]. Yet, training RL agents is often sample-inefficient due to frequent
exploration of actions, which are irrelevant to learning a good policy. Irrelevant actions are actions
that are either physically impossible, forbidden due to some formal specification, or evidently
counterproductive for solving the task. Since the global action space is typically large in relation to
the relevant actions in each state, exploring these actions frequently can introduce unnecessary costs,
lead to slow convergence, or even prevent the agent from learning a suitable policy.
Action masking mitigates this problem by constraining the exploration to the set of relevant statespecific actions, which can be obtained based on task knowledge. For example, when there is
no opponent within reach in video games, attack actions are masked from the action space [43].
Leveraging task knowledge through action masking usually leads to faster convergence and also
improves the predictability of the RL agent, especially when the set of relevant actions has a specific
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

