PertEval: Unveiling Real Knowledge Capacity of
LLMs with Knowledge-Invariant Perturbations

Jiatong Li1† , Renjun Hu2 , Kunzhe Huang2 , Yan Zhuang1 ,
Qi Liu1∗ , Mengxiao Zhu1 , Xing Shi2 , Wei Lin2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Alibaba Cloud Computing, China
{cslijt, zykb}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qiliuql, mxzhu}@ustc.edu.cn,
{renjun.hrj, huangkunzhe.hkz, shubao.sx, weilin.lw}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Expert-designed close-ended benchmarks are indispensable in assessing the knowledge capacity of large language models (LLMs). Despite their widespread use,
concerns have mounted regarding their reliability due to limited test scenarios
and an unavoidable risk of data contamination. To rectify this, we present PertEval, a toolkit devised for in-depth probing of LLMs’ knowledge capacity through
knowledge-invariant perturbations. These perturbations employ human-like
restatement techniques to generate on-the-fly test samples from static benchmarks,
meticulously retaining knowledge-critical content while altering irrelevant details. Our toolkit further includes a suite of response consistency analyses
that compare performance on raw vs. perturbed test sets to precisely assess
LLMs’ genuine knowledge capacity. Six representative LLMs are re-evaluated
using PertEval. Results reveal significantly inflated performance of the LLMs
on raw benchmarks, including an absolute 25.8% overestimation for GPT-4. Additionally, through a nuanced response pattern analysis, we discover that PertEval retains LLMs’ uncertainty to specious knowledge, and reveals their potential rote memorization to correct options which leads to overestimated performance. We also find that the detailed response consistency analyses by PertEval
could illuminate various weaknesses in existing LLMs’ knowledge mastery and
guide the development of refinement. Our findings provide insights for advancing more robust and genuinely knowledgeable LLMs. Our code is available at
https://github.com/aigc-apps/PertEval.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are developing rapidly, and have shown excellent basic capabilities,
such as reasoning [1, 2], planning [3] and world knowledge [4], in real-world tasks. Given the
widespread deployment of LLMs across an increasing number of scenarios, including those that are
safety-critical [5], evaluating the real capability of LLMs becomes a necessary and significant task.
Knowledge capacity, i.e., the ability to retrieve and utilize acquired knowledge to solve professional
problems, is one of the core capabilities of LLMs [4]. Existing knowledge capacity evaluation
largely rely on standardized tests using close-ended benchmarks [6–11]. These benchmarks consist of
multiple-choice questions that include question descriptions, goals, options, and correct answers. They
encapsulate valuable domain-specific knowledge that LLMs need to comprehend. The knowledge
capacity of LLMs can then be directly gauged by the performance on these test datasets.
†
∗

Work done during Li’s internship at Alibaba Cloud Computing, under the guidance of Hu.
Qi Liu is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

