Where does In-context Learning
Happen in Large Language Models?

Suzanna Sia ∗
Johns Hopkins University
ssia1@jh.edu

David Mueller
Johns Hopkins University
dam@cs.jhu.edu

Kevin Duh
Johns Hopkins University
kevinduh@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised large language models have demonstrated the ability to perform
various tasks via in-context learning, but little is known about where the model
locates the task with respect to prompt instructions and demonstration examples. In this work, we attempt to characterize the region where large language
models transition from recognizing the task to performing the task. Through a
series of layer-wise context-masking experiments on GPTN EO 2.7B, B LOOM 3B,
and S TARCODER 2-7B, L LAMA 3.1-8B, L LAMA 3.1-8B-I NSTRUCT, on Machine
Translation and Code generation, we demonstrate evidence of a "task recognition"
point where the task is encoded into the input representations and attention to
context is no longer necessary. Taking advantage of this redundancy results in
45% computational savings when prompting with 5 examples, and task recognition
achieved at layer 14 / 32 using an example with Machine Translation. Our findings
also have implication for resource and parameter efficient fine-tuning; we observe
a correspondence between fine-tuning performance of individual LoRA layers and
the task recognition layers.

1

Introduction

In-context learning (ICL) refers to the phenomenon in which large generative pretrained transformers
(GPTs) perform tasks with no gradient updates when shown task examples or descriptions in their
context [13, 12]. Recent work on in-context learning has focused on prompt-engineering, treating
GPT models as black boxes and focusing on which examples to provide in-context [53, 14, 21, 22, 57].
However, many of these works apply surface level interventions leaving the internal mechanism of
task recognition in GPT models largely not understood.
In this work, we ask where does in-context Learning occur in GPT models? Our view of In-context
Learning is that of “task recognition" not “task learning" [69, 47]. While in-context learning in GPT
models appears to be generally applicable to any natural language task, to study task location, we
focus on two tasks, Machine Translation (MT) and Code generation, as there is little to no ambiguity
in evaluating whether the model has recognized the task. For MT, the model must generate tokens in
a different language. For Code generation, the model must produce a working program in the correct
programming language. These two tasks are unlikely to be “learnt" from following patterns, and are
more complex than a lookup in associative memory for simple Question-Answer tasks.
We focus on multi-head attention layers as a unit of study, as the self-attention mechanism is designed
to allow the model to attend to it’s context during generation of the target sentence [59]. Using causal
masking over different parts of the context we demonstrate that there exists a "task-recognition" point
after which attention to the context is no longer necessary (Section 4). Concurrent and previous
∗
Corresponding Author, suzyahyah@gmail.com and Code Repository https://github.com/
suzyahyah/where_does_in-context-learning_happen_in_LLMs

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

