DA-Ada: Learning Domain-Aware Adapter for
Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Haochen Li1, 4 Rui Zhang2∗ Hantao Yao3 Xin Zhang2 Yifan Hao2
Xinkai Song2 Xiaqing Li2 Yongwei Zhao2 Ling Li1, 4∗ Yunji Chen2, 4
1
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, CAS,
Beijing, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2

haochen2021@iscas.ac.cn, zhangrui@ict.ac.cn, hantao.yao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {zhangxin,
haoyifan, songxinkai, lixiaqing, zhaoyongwei}@ict.ac.cn, liling@iscas.ac.cn,
cyj@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) aims to generalize detectors trained on
an annotated source domain to an unlabelled target domain. As the visual-language
models (VLMs) can provide essential general knowledge on unseen images, freezing the visual encoder and inserting a domain-agnostic adapter can learn domaininvariant knowledge for DAOD. However, the domain-agnostic adapter is inevitably
biased to the source domain. It discards some beneficial knowledge discriminative
on the unlabelled domain, i.e.domain-specific knowledge of the target domain. To
solve the issue, we propose a novel Domain-Aware Adapter (DA-Ada) tailored for
the DAOD task. The key point is exploiting domain-specific knowledge between the
essential general knowledge and domain-invariant knowledge. DA-Ada consists of
the Domain-Invariant Adapter (DIA) for learning domain-invariant knowledge and
the Domain-Specific Adapter (DSA) for injecting the domain-specific knowledge
from the information discarded by the visual encoder. Comprehensive experiments
over multiple DAOD tasks show that DA-Ada can efficiently infer a domain-aware
visual encoder for boosting domain adaptive object detection. Our code is available
at https://github.com/Therock90421/DA-Ada.

1

Introduction

Object detection [52, 51, 41, 12] have achieved remarkable performance, but suffer severe performance drop when dealing with unseen data due to domain discrepancy. To alleviate this problem,
domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) [7] is explored to transfer a detector trained on the labelled
source domain to a unlabelled target domain. Traditional DAOD works [7, 68, 82, 65, 78, 37, 71, 25]
generate the domain-aligned feature via fine-tuning the backbone, as depicted in Fig. 1(a). Nevertheless, it is easily biased towards the source domain since a considerable number of parameters need to
be updated with the annotations only from the source domain.
Recently, applying prompt tuning [81, 80, 73] on visual-language models (VLMs) is widely used for
two reasons: 1) few parameters need to be learned; 2) VLMs trained on large-scale image-text pairs
can extract highly generalized features. Recent works [31, 57] have explored using prompt tuning to
generate the domain-aware detection head for DAOD. However, they all extract the visual feature
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

