Neural Residual Diffusion Models for Deep
Scalable Vision Generation

1

Zhiyuan Ma1 , Liangliang Zhao1,2 , Biqing Qi3 , Bowen Zhou1,3∗
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Frontis.AI, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{mzyth,zhoubowen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The most advanced diffusion models have recently adopted increasingly deep
stacked networks (e.g., U-Net or Transformer) to promote the generative emergence capabilities of vision generation models similar to large language models
(LLMs). However, progressively deeper stacked networks will intuitively cause
numerical propagation errors and reduce noisy prediction capabilities on generative
data, which hinders massively deep scalable training of vision generation models.
In this paper, we first uncover the nature that neural networks being able to effectively perform generative denoising lies in the fact that the intrinsic residual unit has
consistent dynamic property with the input signal’s reverse diffusion process, thus
supporting excellent generative abilities. Afterwards, we stand on the shoulders of
two common types of deep stacked networks to propose a unified and massively
scalable Neural Residual Diffusion Models framework (Neural-RDM for short),
which is a simple yet meaningful change to the common architecture of deep
generative networks by introducing a series of learnable gated residual parameters
that conform to the generative dynamics. Experimental results on various generative tasks show that the proposed neural residual models obtain state-of-the-art
scores on image’s and video’s generative benchmarks. Rigorous theoretical proofs
and extensive experiments also demonstrate the advantages of this simple gated
residual mechanism consistent with dynamic modeling in improving the fidelity
and consistency of generated content and supporting large-scale scalable training.1

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) [1, 2, 3, 4] have emerged as a class of powerful generative models and have
recently exhibited high quality samples in a wide variety of vision generation tasks such as image
synthesis [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11], video generation [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19] and 3D rendering
and generation [20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. Relying on the advantage of iterative denoising and high-fidelity
generation, DMs have gained enormous attention from the community and have been significantly
improved in terms of sampling procedure [25, 26, 27, 28], conditional guidance [29, 30, 31, 32],
likelihood maximization [33, 34, 35, 36] and generalization ability [37, 38, 39, 10] in previous efforts.
However, current diffusion models still face a scalability dilemma, which will play an important
role in determining whether could support scalable deep generative training on large-scale vision
data and give rise to emergent abilities [40] similar to large language models (LLMs) [41, 42].
Representatively, the recent emergence of Sora [43] has pushed the intelligent emergence capabilities
of generative models to a climax by treating video models as world simulators. While unfortunately,
∗
1

Corresponding Author.
Code is available at https://github.com/ponyzym/Neural-RDM.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

