Towards Estimating Bounds on the Effect of Policies
under Unobserved Confounding

Alexis Bellot˚ Silvia Chiappa
Google DeepMind
London, UK

Abstract
As many practical fields transition to provide personalized decisions, data is increasingly relevant to support the evaluation of candidate plans and policies (e.g.,
guidelines for the treatment of disease, government directives, etc.). In the machine
learning literature, significant efforts have been put into developing machinery to
predict the effectiveness of policies efficiently. The challenge is that, in practice,
the effectiveness of a candidate policy is not always identifiable, i.e., not uniquely
estimable from the combination of the available data and assumptions about the domain at hand (e.g., encoded in a causal graph). In this paper, we develop graphical
characterizations and estimation tools to bound the effect of policies given a causal
graph and observational data collected in non-identifiable settings. Specifically,
our contributions are two-fold: (1) we derive analytical bounds for general probabilistic and conditional policies that are tighter than existing results, (2) we develop
an estimation framework to estimate bounds from finite samples, applicable in
higher-dimensional spaces and continuously-valued data. We further show that the
resulting estimators have favourable statistical properties such as fast convergence
and robustness to model misspecification.

1

Introduction

Understanding how to act upon the world around us requires humans and artificial systems to
thoughtfully evaluate the effect of different plans, policies, and interventions one might consider.
Data and methods that facilitate this process are increasingly relevant for high-stakes decision-making,
notably in medical care with the rise of precision medicine [41], but also in education [25], law
enforcement [13], public policy [44], and economics [2]. The interventions that a practitioner
might consider, could consist of complex policies where a variable is set to follow a conditional or
stochastic relationship depending on other variables in the system. For example, policy-makers might
contemplate higher taxes on processed foods and stronger campaigns on its health risks targeted to
overweight individuals. A sensible question in this context could be “what is the effect of a policy
that reduces the consumption of processed foods by 50% in people with a body mass index above
30?”. Contrary to atomic (also called hard) interventions that force a particular value, this policy
suggests a softer intervention.
The identifiability and estimation of policies from data is a widely studied problem in the reinforcement learning [37, 39] and causal inference [2, 12, 15, 31, 32, 40] literatures. Despite the generality
entailed by many common approaches in these fields, they often rely on an impractical condition: the
assumption that the effectiveness of the policy is uniquely computable from the observed data and
˚

Correspondence to Alexis Bellot: abellot@google.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

