Video Diffusion Models are Training-free
Motion Interpreter and Controller

Zeqi Xiao1 , Yifan Zhou1 , Shuai Yang2 , Xingang Pan1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University,
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
{zeqi001, yifan006}@e.ntu.edu.sg
williamyang@pku.edu.cn, xingang.pan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Video generation primarily aims to model authentic and customized motion across
frames, making understanding and controlling the motion a crucial topic. Most
diffusion-based studies on video motion focus on motion customization with
training-based paradigms, which, however, demands substantial training resources
and necessitates retraining for diverse models. Crucially, these approaches do
not explore how video diffusion models encode cross-frame motion information
in their features, lacking interpretability and transparency in their effectiveness.
To answer this question, this paper introduces a novel perspective to understand,
localize, and manipulate motion-aware features in video diffusion models. Through
analysis using Principal Component Analysis (PCA), our work discloses that robust
motion-aware feature already exists in video diffusion models. We present a new
MOtion FeaTure (MOFT) by eliminating content correlation information and filtering motion channels. MOFT provides a distinct set of benefits, including the ability
to encode comprehensive motion information with clear interpretability, extraction
without the need for training, and generalizability across diverse architectures.
Leveraging MOFT, we propose a novel training-free video motion control framework. Our method demonstrates competitive performance in generating natural
and faithful motion, providing architecture-agnostic insights and applicability in a
variety of downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Video generation has experienced notable advancements in recent years, particularly in the realm
of video diffusion models, such as text-to-video (T2V) generation [15; 5; 45; 43] and image-tovideo (I2V) generation [2; 14; 6]. Apart from producing high-quality content in individual frames,
capturing authentic and customized motion across frames is a crucial feature of video generation.
Thus, understanding and controlling the motion play pivotal roles in video generation.
Most methods [46; 50; 42; 15; 44] that study video motion focus on motion customization, i.e.
allowing users to specify a moving direction [46] or a point-drag command [50]. These methods
typically adopt training-based paradigms [46; 50; 42; 15] that introduce motion conditions and
train additional modules to ensure that the output videos adhere to these conditions. Despite their
progress, these approaches require significant training resources and need retraining for different
models, and their effectiveness often remains black-box. More critically, they do not address a
fundamental question: How do video diffusion models encode cross-frame motion information within
their features?
Project page at this URL.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

