Customized Multiple Clustering via Multi-Modal
Subspace Proxy Learning

1

Jiawei Yao1 Qi Qian2∗ Juhua Hu1†
School of Engineering and Technology, University of Washington, Tacoma, WA 98402, USA
2
Zoom Video Communications
{jwyao, juhuah}@uw.edu, qi.qian@zoom.us

Abstract
Multiple clustering aims to discover various latent structures of data from different
aspects. Deep multiple clustering methods have achieved remarkable performance
by exploiting complex patterns and relationships in data. However, existing works
struggle to flexibly adapt to diverse user-specific needs in data grouping, which
may require manual understanding of each clustering. To address these limitations,
we introduce Multi-Sub, a novel end-to-end multiple clustering approach that incorporates a multi-modal subspace proxy learning framework in this work. Utilizing
the synergistic capabilities of CLIP and GPT-4, Multi-Sub aligns textual prompts
expressing user preferences with their corresponding visual representations. This is
achieved by automatically generating proxy words from large language models that
act as subspace bases, thus allowing for the customized representation of data in
terms specific to the user’s interests. Our method consistently outperforms existing
baselines across a broad set of datasets in visual multiple clustering tasks. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Alexander-Yao/Multi-Sub.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental technique for analyzing
data based on certain similarities, attracting extensive
attention due to the abundance of unlabeled data. TraMulti-Sub
Which aspect would you like to group?
ditional clustering methods [MacQueen et al., 1967,
User
I would like to group by color.
Ng et al., 2001, Bishop and Nasrabadi, 2006] rely on
general-purpose handcrafted features that may not
Common colors of fruit include red, yellow,
Expert
green, orange, purple, and blue.
suit specific tasks well. Deep clustering algorithms
have improved clustering performance by employing
I have learned the embedding of each image in
Multi-Sub
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [Xie et al., 2016,
the subspace spanned by the reference words.
Guérin and Boots, 2018, Qian et al., 2022, Qian,
2023] to learn task-specific features. However, most
of these algorithms assume a single partition of the
data, while real data can be clustered differently according to different aspects, e.g., fruits in Fig. 1 can Figure 1: The workflow of Multi-Sub that
be grouped differently by color or by species.
obtains a desired clustering based on the subMultiple clustering algorithms [Bae and Bailey, 2006, space spanned by reference words obtained
Hu et al., 2017] address this challenge by producing from GPT-4 using users’ high-level interest.
multiple partitions of the data for various applications,
∗
†

Work done while at Alibaba Group.
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

