Fourier Amplitude and Correlation Loss: Beyond
Using L2 Loss for Skillful Precipitation Nowcasting

Chiu-Wai Yan
Shi Quan Foo
Van Hoan Trinh
Dit-Yan Yeung
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{cwyan, sqfoo, vhtrinh}@connect.ust.hk

dyyeung@cse.ust.hk

Ka-Hing Wong
Wai-Kin Wong
Hong Kong Observatory
{khwong, wkwong}@hko.gov.hk

Abstract
Deep learning approaches have been widely adopted for precipitation nowcasting in
recent years. Previous studies mainly focus on proposing new model architectures
to improve pixel-wise metrics. However, they frequently result in blurry predictions
which provide limited utility to forecasting operations. In this work, we propose a
new Fourier Amplitude and Correlation Loss (FACL) which consists of two novel
loss terms: Fourier Amplitude Loss (FAL) and Fourier Correlation Loss (FCL). FAL
regularizes the Fourier amplitude of the model prediction and FCL complements
the missing phase information. The two loss terms work together to replace
the traditional L2 losses such as MSE and weighted MSE for the spatiotemporal
prediction problem on signal-based data. Our method is generic, parameter-free and
efficient. Extensive experiments using one synthetic dataset and three radar echo
datasets demonstrate that our method improves perceptual metrics and meteorology
skill scores, with a small trade-off to pixel-wise accuracy and structural similarity.
Moreover, to improve the error margin in meteorological skill scores such as
Critical Success Index (CSI) and Fractions Skill Score (FSS), we propose and
adopt the Regional Histogram Divergence (RHD), a distance metric that considers
the patch-wise similarity between signal-based imagery patterns with tolerance to
local transforms. Code is available at https://github.com/argenycw/FACL.

1

Introduction

Precipitation nowcasting refers to the task of predicting the rainfall intensity for the next few
hours based on meteorological observations from remote sensing instruments such as weather radars,
satellites and numerical weather prediction (NWP) models. The development of a precise precipitation
nowcast algorithm is crucial to support weather forecasters and public safety, as it could facilitate
timely alerts or warnings on severe precipitation and mitigate their impact on the community through
early preventive actions. Sharp precipitation nowcast imagery that is perceptually similar to the actual
observations (such as radar images) is equally important for weather forecasters to comprehend how
the severity of precipitation will evolve in space and time, as well as to diagnose the rapid evolution
of the underlying weather systems in real-time forecasting operations.
Besides the traditional optical-flow and NWP models, deep learning models have also been widely
explored and adopted for precipitation nowcasting in recent years. The research community generally
formulates the task as a spatiotemporal prediction problem, where a sequence of input radar or
satellite maps is given, and the future sequence needs to be predicted or generated. Although multiple
previous attempts proposed solid improvements to the model to grasp the spatiotemporal dynamics,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

