Private Geometric Median
Mahdi Haghifam∗

Thomas Steinke†

Jonathan Ullman‡

Abstract
In this paper, we study differentially private (DP) algorithms for computing the
geometric median (GM) of a dataset: Given n points, x1 , . . . , xn in Rd , the goal is
to find
Pan point θ that minimizes the sum of the Euclidean distances to these points,
i.e., i=1 ∥θ − xi ∥2 . Off-the-shelf methods, such as DP-GD, require strong a
priori knowledge locating the data within a ball of radius R, and the excess risk
of the algorithm depends linearly on R. In this paper, we ask: can we design an
efficient and private algorithm with an excess error guarantee that scales with the
(unknown) radius containing the majority of the datapoints? Our main contribution
is a pair of polynomial-time DP algorithms for the task of private GM with an
excess error guarantee that scales with the effective diameter of the datapoints.
Additionally, we propose an inefficient algorithm based on the inverse smooth
sensitivity mechanism, which satisfies the more restrictive notion of pure DP. We
complement our results with a lower bound and demonstrate the optimality of our
polynomial-time algorithms in terms of sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Differentially private (DP) convex optimization is a fundamental task where we approximately
minimize a data-dependent convex loss function while limiting what can be learned about individual
data points. The predominant algorithm for DP convex optimization is DP (stochastic) gradient
descent, or DP-(S)GD, for short [SCS13; BST14]. Given a dataset X(n) which contains private
d
information, and a loss function F (θ; X(n) ), DP-(S)GD starts with
 an initial value θ0 ∈ R and
(n)
iteratively updates it using θt+1 = ΠΘ θt −η· ∇θt F (θt ;X )+ξt where η > 0 is the step size, ξt
is noise to ensure DP, Θ ⊆ Rd is a closed convex feasible set, and ΠΘ is the Euclidean projection
operator. In the most general setting of Lipschitz convex functions, the excess error depends linearly
on the radius of the set Θ, and this linear dependence is necessary in the worst-case [BST14]. This
linear dependence is problematic because we can think of the diameter of the set Θ as capturing a
measure of the uncertainty we have about the location of the minimizer, and we want our algorithm
to perform well even with a high degree of uncertainty. This linear dependence can be improved
under certain unrealistically strong assumptions, such as strong convexity, but it is unclear whether
we can improve the dependence on the radius under weaker, more natural conditions. In this paper,
as a step towards answering this question, we identify a simple, optimization task—computing the
geometric median—where we can exponentially improve the dependence on the radius.
We study private algorithms for computing the geometric median (GM) of a dataset: We are given a
set of n data points X(n) ≜ (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ (Rd )n , where xi represents the private information of
∗
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University. Supported by a Khoury College of
Computer Sciences Distinguished Postdoctoral Fellowship. m.haghifam@northeastern.edu
†
Google DeepMind.
‡
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University. Supported by NSF awards CNS-2232692
and CNS-2247484.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

