Understanding Generalizability of Diffusion Models
Requires Rethinking the Hidden Gaussian Structure

Xiang Li1 , Yixiang Dai1 , Qing Qu1
Department of EECS, University of Michigan,
forkobe@umich.edu, yixiang@umich.edu, qingqu@umich.edu
1

Abstract
In this work, we study the generalizability of diffusion models by looking into
the hidden properties of the learned score functions, which are essentially a series
of deep denoisers trained on various noise levels. We observe that as diffusion
models transition from memorization to generalization, their corresponding nonlinear diffusion denoisers exhibit increasing linearity. This discovery leads us to
investigate the linear counterparts of the nonlinear diffusion models, which are a
series of linear models trained to match the function mappings of the nonlinear
diffusion denoisers. Interestingly, these linear denoisers are approximately the
optimal denoisers for a multivariate Gaussian distribution characterized by the
empirical mean and covariance of the training dataset. This finding implies that diffusion models have the inductive bias towards capturing and utilizing the Gaussian
structure (covariance information) of the training dataset for data generation. We
empirically demonstrate that this inductive bias is a unique property of diffusion
models in the generalization regime, which becomes increasingly evident when
the model’s capacity is relatively small compared to the training dataset size. In
the case where the model is highly overparameterized, this inductive bias emerges
during the initial training phases before the model fully memorizes its training
data. Our study provides crucial insights into understanding the notable strong
generalization phenomenon recently observed in real-world diffusion models.

1

Introduction

In recent years, diffusion models [1–4] have become one of the leading generative models, powering
the state-of-the-art image generation systems such as Stable Diffusion [5]. To understand the empirical
success of diffusion models, several works [6–12] have focused on their sampling behavior, showing
that the data distribution can be effectively estimated in the reverse sampling process, assuming that
the score function is learned accurately. Meanwhile, other works [13–18] investigate the learning
of score functions, showing that effective approximation can be achieved with score matching loss
under certain assumptions. However, these theoretical insights, grounded in simplified assumptions
about data distribution and neural network architectures, do not fully capture the complex dynamics
of diffusion models in practical scenarios. One significant discrepancy between theory and practice
is that real-world diffusion models are trained only on a finite number of data points. As argued
in [19], theoretically a perfectly learned score function over the empirical data distribution can only
replicate the training data. In contrast, diffusion models trained on finite samples exhibit remarkable
generalizability, producing high-quality images that significantly differ from the training examples.
Therefore, a good understanding of the remarkable generative power of diffusion models is still
lacking.
In this work, we aim to deepen the understanding of generalizability in diffusion models by analyzing
the inherent properties of the learned score functions. Essentially, the score functions can be
interpreted as a series of deep denoisers trained on various noise levels. These denoisers are then
chained together to progressively denoise a randomly sampled Gaussian noise into its corresponding
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

