Persistent Test-time Adaptation in
Recurring Testing Scenarios

1

Trung-Hieu Hoang1
Duc Minh Vo2
Minh N. Do1,3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
The University of Tokyo
3
VinUni-Illinois Smart Health Center, VinUniversity
{hthieu, minhdo}@illinois.edu
vmduc@nlab.ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Current test-time adaptation (TTA) approaches aim to adapt a machine learning model to environments that change continuously. Yet, it is unclear whether
TTA methods can maintain their adaptability over prolonged periods. To answer
this question, we introduce a diagnostic setting - recurring TTA where environments not only change but also recur over time, creating an extensive data
stream. This setting allows us to examine the error accumulation of TTA models,
in the most basic scenario, when they are regularly exposed to previous testing
environments. Furthermore, we simulate a TTA process on a simple yet representative ϵ-perturbed Gaussian Mixture Model Classifier, deriving theoretical
insights into the dataset- and algorithm-dependent factors contributing to gradual
performance degradation. Our investigation leads us to propose persistent TTA
(PeTTA), which senses when the model is diverging towards collapse and adjusts
the adaptation strategy, striking a balance between the dual objectives of adaptation
and model collapse prevention. The supreme stability of PeTTA over existing
approaches, in the face of lifelong TTA scenarios, has been demonstrated over
comprehensive experiments on various benchmarks. Our project page is available
at https://hthieu166.github.io/petta.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models have demonstrated significant achievements in various areas [18, 38,
47, 23]. Still, they are inherently susceptible to distribution-shift [46, 13, 48, 21, 6] (also known as
the divergence between the training and testing environments), leading to a significant degradation in
model performance. The ability to deviate from the conventional testing setting appears as a crucial
aspect in boosting ML models’ adaptability when confronted with a new testing environment that
has been investigated [30, 53, 14]. Among common domain generalization methods [58, 24, 1],
test-time adaptation (TTA) takes the most challenging yet rewarding path that leverages unlabeled
data available at test time for self-supervised adaptation prior to the final inference [57, 39, 8, 41, 59].
Early TTA studies have concentrated on a simply ideal adaptation scenario where the test samples
come from a fixed single domain [57, 39, 41]. As a result, such an assumption is far from the everchanging and complex testing environments. To confront continually changing environments [59, 12],
Yuan et al. [61] proposed a practical TTA scenario where distribution changing and correlative
sampling occur [15] simultaneously. Though practical TTA is more realistic than what the previous
assumptions have made, it still assumes that any environment only appears once in the data stream, a
condition which does not hold true. Taking a surveillance camera as an example, it might accommodate varying lighting conditions recurringly day after day (Fig. 1-left). Based on this reality, we
hypothesize that the recurring of those conditions may reveal the error accumulation phenomenon in
TTA, resulting in performance degradation over a long period. To verify our hypothesis, we simulate a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

