A Separation in Heavy-Tailed Sampling:
Gaussian vs. Stable Oracles for Proximal Samplers

Ye He
Georgia Institute of Technology
yhe367@gatech.edu

Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini
University of Toronto, and Vector Institute
mousavi@cs.toronto.edu

Krishnakumar Balasubramanian
University of California, Davis
kbala@ucdavis.edu

Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto, and Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We study the complexity of heavy-tailed sampling and present a separation result
in terms of obtaining high-accuracy versus low-accuracy guarantees i.e., samplers
that require only O(log(1/ε)) versus Ω(poly(1/ε)) iterations to output a sample
which is ε-close to the target in χ2 -divergence. Our results are presented for
proximal samplers that are based on Gaussian versus stable oracles. We show that
proximal samplers based on the Gaussian oracle have a fundamental barrier in
that they necessarily achieve only low-accuracy guarantees when sampling from a
class of heavy-tailed targets. In contrast, proximal samplers based on the stable
oracle exhibit high-accuracy guarantees, thereby overcoming the aforementioned
limitation. We also prove lower bounds for samplers under the stable oracle and
show that our upper bounds cannot be fundamentally improved.

1

Introduction

The task of sampling from heavy-tailed targets arises in various domains such as Bayesian statistics [GJPS08, GLM18], machine learning [CDV09, BZ17, NŞR19, ŞZTG20, DKTZ20], robust
statistics [KN04, JR07, Kam18, YŁR22], multiple comparison procedures [GBH04, GB09], and
study of geophysical systems [SP15, QM16, PBEM23]. This problem is particularly challenging
when using gradient-based Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms due to diminishing
gradients, which occurs when the tails of the target density decay at a slow (e.g. polynomial) rate.
Indeed, canonical algorithms like Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC) have been empirically observed to
perform poorly [LWME19, HMW21, HFBE24] when sampling from such heavy-tailed targets.
Several approaches have been proposed in the literature to overcome these limitations of LMC and
related algorithms. The predominant ones include (i) transformation-based approaches, where a
diffeomorphic (invertible) transformation is used to first map the heavy-tailed density to a light-tailed
one so that a light-tailed sampling algorithm can be used [JG12, YŁR22, HBE24], (ii) discretizing
general Itô diffusions with non-standard Brownian motion that have heavy-tailed densities as their
equilibrium density [EMS18, LWME19, HFBE24], and (iii) discretizing stable-driven stochastic
differential equations [ZZ23]. However, the few theoretical results available on the analysis of
algorithms based on approaches (i) and (ii) provide only low-accuracy heavy-tailed samplers; such
algorithms require poly(1/ε) iterations to obtain a sample that is ε-close to the target in a reasonable
metric of choice. Furthermore, quantitative complexity guarantees for the sampling approach used in
(iii) are not yet available; thus, existing comparisons are mainly based on empirical studies.
In stark contrast, when the target density is light-tailed it is well-known that algorithms like proximal
samplers based on Gaussian oracles and the Metropolis Adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA) have
high-accuracy guarantees; these algorithms require only polylog(1/ε) iterations to obtain a sample
which is ε-close to the target in some metric. See, for example, the works by [DCWY19, LST21b,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

