Inflationary Flows: Calibrated Bayesian Inference
with Diffusion-Based Models
Daniela de Albuquerque
Department of Electrical &
Computer Engineering
School of Medicine
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
daniela.de.albuquerque@duke.edu

John Pearson
Department of Neurobiology
Department of Electrical &
Computer Engineering
Center for Cognitive Neuroscience
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
john.pearson@duke.edu

Abstract
Beyond estimating parameters of interest from data, one of the key goals of statistical inference is to properly quantify uncertainty in these estimates. In Bayesian
inference, this uncertainty is provided by the posterior distribution, the computation
of which typically involves an intractable high-dimensional integral. Among available approximation methods, sampling-based approaches come with strong theoretical guarantees but scale poorly to large problems, while variational approaches
scale well but offer few theoretical guarantees. In particular, variational methods are
known to produce overconfident estimates of posterior uncertainty and are typically
non-identifiable, with many latent variable configurations generating equivalent
predictions. Here, we address these challenges by showing how diffusion-based
models (DBMs), which have recently produced state-of-the-art performance in
generative modeling tasks, can be repurposed for performing calibrated, identifiable
Bayesian inference. By exploiting a previously established connection between the
stochastic and probability flow ordinary differential equations (pfODEs) underlying
DBMs, we derive a class of models, inflationary flows, that uniquely and deterministically map high-dimensional data to a lower-dimensional Gaussian distribution
via ODE integration. This map is both invertible and neighborhood-preserving,
with controllable numerical error, with the result that uncertainties in the data are
correctly propagated to the latent space. We demonstrate how such maps can be
learned via standard DBM training using a novel noise schedule and are effective
at both preserving and reducing intrinsic data dimensionality. The result is a class
of highly expressive generative models, uniquely defined on a low-dimensional
latent space, that afford principled Bayesian inference.

1

Introduction

In many fields of science, the aim of statistical inference is not only to estimate model parameters
of interest from data but to quantify the uncertainty in these estimates. In Bayesian inference, for
data x generated from latent parameters z via a model p(x|z), this information is encapsulated in
the posterior distribution p(z|x),
R computation of which requires evaluation of the often intractable
normalizing integral p(x) = p(x, z) dz. Where accurate uncertainty estimation is required, the
gold standard remains sampling-based Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, which are
guaranteed (asymptotically) to produce exact samples from the posterior distribution [1]. However,
MCMC methods can be computationally costly and do not readily scale either to large or highdimensional data sets.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

