ODGS: 3D Scene Reconstruction from
Omnidirectional Images with 3D Gaussian Splatting

Suyoung Lee∗ 1
Jaeyoung Chung∗ 1
Jaeyoo Huh 2
Kyoung Mu Lee 1,2
1
2
Dept. of ECE & ASRI, IPAI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{esw0116, robot0321}@snu.ac.kr
jaeyoo900@gmail.com
kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Omnidirectional (or 360-degree) images are increasingly being used for 3D applications since they allow the rendering of an entire scene with a single image. Existing
works based on neural radiance fields demonstrate successful 3D reconstruction
quality on egocentric videos, yet they suffer from long training and rendering
times. Recently, 3D Gaussian splatting has gained attention for its fast optimization and real-time rendering. However, directly using a perspective rasterizer to
omnidirectional images results in severe distortion due to the different optical properties between the two image domains. In this work, we present ODGS, a novel
rasterization pipeline for omnidirectional images with geometric interpretation.
For each Gaussian, we define a tangent plane that touches the unit sphere and is
perpendicular to the ray headed toward the Gaussian center. We then leverage
a perspective camera rasterizer to project the Gaussian onto the corresponding
tangent plane. The projected Gaussians are transformed and combined into the
omnidirectional image, finalizing the omnidirectional rasterization process. This
interpretation reveals the implicit assumptions within the proposed pipeline, which
we verify through mathematical proofs. The entire rasterization process is parallelized using CUDA, achieving optimization and rendering speeds 100 times
faster than NeRF-based methods. Our comprehensive experiments highlight the
superiority of ODGS by delivering the best reconstruction and perceptual quality
across various datasets. Additionally, results on roaming datasets demonstrate that
ODGS effectively restores fine details, even when reconstructing large 3D scenes.
The source code is available on our project page.1

1

Introduction

With the development of VR/MR devices and robotics technologies and the increasing demands of
such applications, 3D scene reconstruction has become one of the crucial tasks in computer vision.
Traditional works have employed a structure-from-motion algorithm that estimates camera motion
and scene geometry from multiview 2D images by finding the correspondences between images.
As target 3D scenes become broader and more complex, accurate reconstruction demands a larger
volume of images and increases the computational burden required for identifying correspondences.
Recently, some approaches have tried to alleviate these challenges by utilizing wide-angle cameras
to capture wide field-of-view images. Omnidirectional images, which provide a 360-degree field
of view, are gaining increased interest because they encompass whole scenes within a single image,
thereby reducing the cost of inter-image feature matching. The growing popularity of 360-degree
cameras for personal video recording and the concurrent release of related datasets further facilitate
the research on 3D content reconstruction from omnidirectional images.
∗
1

indicates equal contribution.
https://github.com/esw0116/ODGS

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

