Stochastic Concept Bottleneck Models

Moritz Vandenhirtz∗, Sonia Laguna∗, Ričards Marcinkevičs, Julia E. Vogt
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
Switzerland

Abstract
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) have emerged as a promising interpretable
method whose final prediction is based on intermediate, human-understandable
concepts rather than the raw input. Through time-consuming manual interventions,
a user can correct wrongly predicted concept values to enhance the model’s downstream performance. We propose Stochastic Concept Bottleneck Models (SCBMs),
a novel approach that models concept dependencies. In SCBMs, a single-concept
intervention affects all correlated concepts, thereby improving intervention effectiveness. Unlike previous approaches that model the concept relations via an
autoregressive structure, we introduce an explicit, distributional parameterization
that allows SCBMs to retain the CBMs’ efficient training and inference procedure.
Additionally, we leverage the parameterization to derive an effective intervention
strategy based on the confidence region. We show empirically on synthetic tabular
and natural image datasets that our approach improves intervention effectiveness
significantly. Notably, we showcase the versatility and usability of SCBMs by
examining a setting with CLIP-inferred concepts, alleviating the need for manual
concept annotations.

1

Introduction

In today’s world, machine learning plays a crucial role in making important decisions, from healthcare
to finance and law. However, as these algorithms become more complex, understanding how
they arrive at their decisions becomes increasingly challenging. This lack of interpretability is a
significant concern, especially in situations where trustworthiness, transparency, and accountability
are paramount (Lipton, 2016; Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017). Recent studies have focused on Concept
Bottleneck Models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020; Havasi et al., 2022; Shin et al., 2023), a class of models
that predict human-understandable concepts upon which the final target prediction is based. CBMs
offer interpretability since a user can inspect the predicted concept values to understand how the
model arrives at its final target prediction. Moreover, if they disagree with a concept prediction, they
can intervene by adjusting it to the right value, which in turn affects the target prediction.
For example, consider the yellow warbler in Figure 1 (a), where a user might notice that the binary
concept ‘yellow primary color’ is mispredicted. Upon this realization, they can intervene on the CBM
by setting its value to 1, which increases the probability of the class yellow warbler. This way of
interacting allows any untrained user to engage with the model to increase its predictive performance.
However, if the user input is that the primary color is yellow, should not the likelihood of a yellow
crown increase too? This adaptation would increase the predicted likelihood of the correct class even
more, as yellow warblers are characterized by their fully yellow body. Currently, vanilla CBMs do
not exhibit this behavior as they do not use the intervened-on concepts to update their remaining
concept predictions. This indicates that they suboptimally adapt to the additional knowledge gained.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to {moritz.vandenhirtz,slaguna}@inf.ethz.ch

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

