PowerGraph: A power grid benchmark dataset for
graph neural networks

Anna Varbella∗
D-MAVT
ETHZ
Zurich, Switzerland
avarbella@ethz.ch

Kenza Amara∗
D-INFK
ETHZ
Zurich, Switzerland
kenza.amara@ai.ethz.ch

Mennatallah El-Assady
D-INFK
ETHZ
Zurich, Switzerland
menna.elassady@ai.ethz.ch

Blazhe Gjorgiev
D-MAVT
ETHZ
Zurich, Switzerland
gblazhe@ethz.ch

Giovanni Sansavini
D-MAVT
ETHZ
Zurich, Switzerland
sansavig@ethz.ch

Abstract
Power grids are critical infrastructures of paramount importance to modern society
and, therefore, engineered to operate under diverse conditions and failures. The
ongoing energy transition poses new challenges for the decision-makers and system
operators. Therefore, developing grid analysis algorithms is important for supporting reliable operations. These key tools include power flow analysis and system
security analysis, both needed for effective operational and strategic planning. The
literature review shows a growing trend of machine learning (ML) models that perform these analyses effectively. In particular, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) stand
out in such applications because of the graph-based structure of power grids. However, there is a lack of publicly available graph datasets for training and benchmarking ML models in electrical power grid applications. First, we present PowerGraph,
which comprises GNN-tailored datasets for i) power flows, ii) optimal power flows,
and iii) cascading failure analyses of power grids. Second, we provide ground-truth
explanations for the cascading failure analysis. Finally, we perform a complete
benchmarking of GNN methods for node-level and graph-level tasks and explainability. Overall, PowerGraph is a multifaceted GNN dataset for diverse tasks that
includes power flow and fault scenarios with real-world explanations, providing a
valuable resource for developing improved GNN models for node-level, graph-level
tasks and explainability methods in power system modeling. The dataset is available
at https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/PowerGraph/22820534 and the
code at https://github.com/PowerGraph-Datasets

1

Introduction

Our modern society depends on a reliable power system [1], essential for daily life and economic
activities. Power systems are engineered to operate under diverse conditions and failures. However,
the increasing complexity of power systems, driven by electrification and the rise of intermittent
energy sources, is posing new challenges. Transmission system operators (TSOs) require online
tools for effective power systems monitoring, but the current methods for grid analyses, hindered
by their computational speed, cannot fully meet this need. Additionally, the failure of critical
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

