Text-Aware Diffusion for Policy Learning

Mandy He∗ Zilai Zeng∗ Chen Sun
Brown University
{calvin_luo,mandy_he,zilai_zeng,chensun}@brown.edu
Calvin Luo

Abstract
Training an agent to achieve particular goals or perform desired behaviors is often accomplished through reinforcement learning, especially in the absence of
expert demonstrations. However, supporting novel goals or behaviors through
reinforcement learning requires the ad-hoc design of appropriate reward functions, which quickly becomes intractable. To address this challenge, we propose
Text-Aware Diffusion for Policy Learning (TADPoLe), which uses a pretrained,
frozen text-conditioned diffusion model to compute dense zero-shot reward signals for text-aligned policy learning. We hypothesize that large-scale pretrained
generative models encode rich priors that can supervise a policy to behave not
only in a text-aligned manner, but also in alignment with a notion of naturalness
summarized from internet-scale training data. In our experiments, we demonstrate
that TADPoLe is able to learn policies for novel goal-achievement and continuous
locomotion behaviors specified by natural language, in both Humanoid and Dog
environments. The behaviors are learned zero-shot without ground-truth rewards
or expert demonstrations, and are qualitatively more natural according to human
evaluation. We further show that TADPoLe performs competitively when applied
to robotic manipulation tasks in the Meta-World environment, without having
access to any in-domain demonstrations.

1

Introduction

Can we train reinforcement learning agents that drive humanoids in a virtual environment [39] to
stably stand? How about standing with hands on hips, kneeling, or doing splits? While state-ofthe-art algorithms have shown success on the former scenario (e.g. [14]), the latter (illustrated in
Figure 1) remains challenging due to the need for carefully (and often manually) crafted reward
functions to specify the desired behaviors. The dependence on ad-hoc designed reward functions
renders inscalable the learning of ever-increasing amounts of novel behaviors, which are required in
applications ranging from character animation [2] to robotic manipulation [42].
Our work looks towards natural language as a powerful interface through which humans can flexibly
specify desired goals or behaviors of interest. We therefore investigate how to construct a zero-shot
text-conditioned reward signal, replacing the need for ad-hoc designs, through which text-aligned
policies can be learned. We present Text-Aware Diffusion for Policy Learning (TADPoLe), which
utilizes a large-scale pretrained, frozen text-conditioned diffusion model to generate a dense reward
signal for policy learning. We hypothesize that generative diffusion models, which are pretrained on
internet-scale datasets to produce text-aligned, natural-looking images [32, 29] and videos [3, 10, 15],
can be utilized to automatically craft a multimodal reward signal that encourages an agent to behave
both faithfully with respect to text conditioning and naturally with respect to human perception. Our
method is novel in its reward computation, as well as its utilization of a domain-agnostic generative
model, rather than one trained from environment-specific or task-specific video demonstrations, as
used in prior work [9, 24, 6, 8, 20, 19].
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

