When to Act and When to Ask: Policy Learning With
Deferral Under Hidden Confounding

Marah Ghoummaid

Uri Shalit

Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences, Technion
marahghoummaid@gmail.com

Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences, Technion
urishalit@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the task of learning how to act in collaboration with a human expert
based on observational data. The task is motivated by high-stake scenarios such as
healthcare and welfare, where algorithmic action recommendations are made to
a human expert, opening the option of deferring recommendation in cases where
the human might act better on their own. This task is especially challenging
when dealing with observational data, as using such data runs the risk of hidden
confounders whose existence can lead to biased and harmful policies. However,
unlike standard policy learning, the presence of a human expert can mitigate some
of these risks. We build on the work of Mozannar and Sontag [2020] on consistent
surrogate loss for learning with the option of deferral to an expert, where they
solve a cost-sensitive supervised classification problem. Since we are solving a
causal problem, where labels do not exist, we use a causal model to learn costs
which are robust to a bounded degree of hidden confounding. We prove that our
approach can take advantage of the strengths of both the model and the expert
to obtain a better policy than either. We demonstrate our results by conducting
experiments on synthetic and semi-synthetic data and show the advantages of our
method compared to baselines.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are increasingly being developed to perform tasks performed by human
decision-makers in high-stakes settings such as clinical decision making [Adams et al., 2022, Rajpurkar et al., 2022], criminal justice [Stevenson and Doleac, 2022] and social services [Behncke
et al., 2009, McBrien et al., 2022]. Some of these tasks involve recommending actions such as
medical treatment, releasing on bail, or receiving benefits. Typically the data used to train such
action-recommendation models is based on past human decisions and their outcomes. For example,
we might observe how patients were treated for diabetes and their subsequent health outcomes.
Learning to act better in the future based on past observed actions is a causal problem. For such
problems we face the fundamental problem of causal inference [Holland, 1986], i.e. the unknowability
of counterfactual outcomes: “Would this patient have been better had they been treated differently?”.
Estimating causal quantities based on observational data such as hospital records is risky, as there is
always the possibility of hidden confounding. Roughly speaking, this means there exist factors that
affected the human decision maker and the outcome, but are unavailable to the model during training.
Learning models from data which has hidden confounding can lead to biased and harmful treatment
assignment policies. However, human experts’ decisions can also be biased, sub-optimal, or wrong.
Thus, a setting in which both the human expert and the model can complement each other might be
the best choice, mitigating the potential weaknesses and leveraging the strengths of both the model
and the human expert [Bansal et al., 2020, Charusaie et al., 2022]. We believe this is especially
pertinent in causal inference, as the human expert typically has access to the hidden confounders.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

