Learning Identifiable Factorized Causal
Representations of Cellular Responses

Haiyi Mao∗1, 2
Romain Lopez1, 3
Kai Liu 1
Jan-Christian Huetter 1
1
2, 4
David Richmond
Panayiotis V. Benos
Lin Qiu †1
1
3
4
Genentech 2 University of Pittsburgh
Stanford University
University of Florida

Abstract
The study of cells and their responses to genetic or chemical perturbations promises
to accelerate the discovery of therapeutic targets. However, designing adequate
and insightful models for such data is difficult because the response of a cell
to perturbations essentially depends on its biological context (e.g., genetic background or cell type). For example, while discovering therapeutic targets, one
may want to enrich for drugs that specifically target a certain cell type. This
challenge emphasizes the need for methods that explicitly take into account potential interactions between drugs and contexts. Towards this goal, we propose
a novel Factorized Causal Representation (FCR) learning method that reveals
causal structure in single-cell perturbation data from several cell lines. Based
on the framework of identifiable deep generative models, FCR learns multiple
cellular representations that are disentangled, comprised of covariate-specific (zx ),
treatment-specific (zt ), and interaction-specific (ztx ) blocks. Based on recent advances in non-linear ICA theory, we prove the component-wise identifiability of ztx
and block-wise identifiability of zt and zx . Then, we present our implementation
of FCR, and empirically demonstrate that it outperforms state-of-the-art baselines
in various tasks across four single-cell datasets. The code is available on GitHub
(https://github.com/Genentech/fcr).

1

Introduction

The recent experimental capabilities reached by single-cell perturbation technologies open up new
opportunities for characterizing cellular behaviors (Dixit et al., 2016). For example, high-throughput
screening of chemical and genetic perturbations highlighted vulnerabilities in numerous cancer cell
lines (McFarland et al., 2020). Identifying these vulnerabilities is crucial for pinpointing therapeutic
targets, facilitating drug discovery, and furthering our understanding of gene functions (Srivatsan
et al., 2020).
The analysis of perturbation data involves modeling how cells respond to diverse treatments across
biological contexts. This task is challenging for two main reasons. First, outcomes of perturbation
experiments are quantified using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technologies, whose
measurements are noisy as well as high-dimensional (Grün et al., 2014). Second, cellular contexts
are difficult to comprehensively model because they are extremely variable, encompassing cell types,
tissue of origin, and genetic background (Wagner et al., 2016). This highlights the need to consider
interaction effects between treatments and contextual covariates while modeling gene expression
outcomes (Zapatero et al., 2023).
∗
†

This work was conducted during an internship at Genentech.
Corresponding author. Email: lin.qiu.stats@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

