Guiding Neural Collapse: Optimising Towards the
Nearest Simplex Equiangular Tight Frame

Evan Markou
Australian National University
evan.markou@anu.edu.au

Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan
Australian National University & Amazon
thalaiyasingam.ajanthan@anu.edu.au

Stephen Gould
Australian National University
stephen.gould@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Neural Collapse (NC) is a recently observed phenomenon in neural networks that
characterises the solution space of the final classifier layer when trained until zero
training loss. Specifically, NC suggests that the final classifier layer converges to a
Simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF), which maximally separates the weights
corresponding to each class. By duality, the penultimate layer feature means also
converge to the same simplex ETF. Since this simple symmetric structure is optimal,
our idea is to utilise this property to improve convergence speed. Specifically,
we introduce the notion of nearest simplex ETF geometry for the penultimate
layer features at any given training iteration, by formulating it as a Riemannian
optimisation. Then, at each iteration, the classifier weights are implicitly set to
the nearest simplex ETF by solving this inner-optimisation, which is encapsulated
within a declarative node to allow backpropagation. Our experiments on synthetic
and real-world architectures for classification tasks demonstrate that our approach
accelerates convergence and enhances training stability1 .

1

Introduction

While modern deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable success in solving
diverse machine learning problems [22, 34, 38], the fundamental mechanisms underlying their
training process remain elusive. In recent years, considerable research efforts have focused on
delineating the optimisation trajectory and characterising the solution space resulting from the
optimisation process in training neural networks [72, 17, 49, 41]. One such finding is that gradient
descent algorithms, when combined with certain loss functions, introduce an implicit bias that often
favours max-margin solutions, influencing the learned representations and decision boundaries. [44,
57, 33, 27, 21, 54, 70, 31, 49].
In this vein, Neural Collapse (NC) is a recently observed phenomenon in neural networks that
characterises the solution space of the final classifier layer in both balanced [50, 76, 74, 28, 48, 63,
43, 32] and imbalanced dataset settings [19, 59, 5]. Specifically, NC suggests that the final classifier
layer converges to a Simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF), which maximally separates the weights
corresponding to each class, and by duality, the penultimate layer feature means converge to the
classifier weights, i.e., to the simplex ETF (formal definitions are provided in Appendix A). This
simple, symmetric structure is shown to be the only set of optimal solutions for a variety of loss
functions when the features are also assumed to be free parameters, i.e., Unconstrained Feature
1

Code available at https://github.com/evanmarkou/Guiding-Neural-Collapse.git.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

