Analysis of Hand Segmentation in the Wild
Aisha Urooj Khan and Ali Borji
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
{aishaurooj,aliborji}@gmail.com

Abstract
A large number of works in egocentric vision have concentrated on action and object recognition. Detection and
segmentation of hands in first-person videos, however, has
less been explored. For many applications in this domain,
it is necessary to accurately segment not only hands of the
camera wearer but also the hands of others with whom he
is interacting. Here, we take an in-depth look at the hand
segmentation problem. In the quest for robust hand segmentation methods, we evaluated the performance of the state
of the art semantic segmentation methods, off the shelf and
fine-tuned, on existing datasets. We fine-tune RefineNet, a
leading semantic segmentation method, for hand segmentation and find that it does much better than the best contenders. Existing hand segmentation datasets are collected
in the laboratory settings. To overcome this limitation, we
contribute by collecting two new datasets: a) EgoYouTubeHands including egocentric videos containing hands in the
wild, and b) HandOverFace to analyze the performance of
our models in presence of similar appearance occlusions.
We further explore whether conditional random fields can
help refine generated hand segmentations. To demonstrate
the benefit of accurate hand maps, we train a CNN for
hand-based activity recognition and achieve higher accuracy when a CNN was trained using hand maps produced
by the fine-tuned RefineNet. Finally, we annotate a subset
of the EgoHands dataset for fine-grained action recognition
and show that an accuracy of 58.6% can be achieved by just
looking at a single hand pose which is much better than the
chance level (12.5%).

1. Introduction
Growing usage of wearable devices such as Google
Glass, GoPro, and Narrative Clip has made egocentric research in computer vision a rapidly growing area. These
cameras generate huge volumes of data which makes automatic analysis of their recorded content (e.g., for browsing,
searching, and visualizing) a need, for applications such as
summarizing videos, describing events in life-logging photo
data, and recognizing activities of daily living. Most of the
work in egocentric vision deals with understanding camera

wearer’s activities and behavior. In this work, instead, we
focus on a very crucial entity in egocentric videos: hands.
Hands are ubiquitous in our daily life. We see them more
than any other object in our life time. Their pose and configuration tell a lot about what we plan to do or what we pay
attention to. Due to these, hand detection, segmentation and
tracking are fundamental problems in egocentric vision with
a myriad of applications in robotics, human-machine interaction, computer vision, augmented reality, etc. Extracting
hand regions in egocentric videos is a critical step for understanding fine motor skills such as hand-object manipulation
and hand-eye coordination.
We address the task of egocentric pixel-level hand detection and segmentation in realistic daily settings. A large
number of works have addressed this problem in thirdperson or surveillance videos. Relatively less effort, however, has been devoted to this problem in first-person videos.
Although few works exist (e.g., [3], [23] and [2]), the last
analysis of hand segmentation in egocentric videos dates
back to pre deep learning era [23]. Here, we plan to renovate this topic by conducting an exhaustive analysis of hand
segmentation in egocentric videos using state of the art semantic segmentation methods.
In contrast to third-person point-of-view videos – e.g.,
from a mounted surveillance camera or a laptop camera – egocentric videos contain rapid changes in illumination, highly dynamic and unpredictable camera motion, unusual composition and viewpoints, significant motion blur,
and complex hand-object manipulations. Further, camera
wearer is not captured in egocentric videos, thus other cues
that can localize hands might be missing (e.g., person’s face
or shoulders). Thus, hand segmentation models developed
over third-person videos may not be adequate for egocentric
hand detection.
We base our analysis on Bambach et al. [2], where they
introduced a new hand dataset and a deep learning model
for hand detection and segmentation. Their dataset, EgoHands, has pixel-level annotations for hands with two participants in each video interacting with each other [2]. We
chose this dataset for two main reasons: 1) To the best of
our knowledge, it is the only egocentric dataset with focus
14710

