Deep Parametric Continuous Convolutional Neural Networks
Shenlong Wang1,3, Simon Suo2,3, Wei-Chiu Ma3 Andrei Pokrovsky3 Raquel Urtasun1,3
1
University of Toronto, 2 University of Waterloo, 3 Uber Advanced Technologies Group
∗

∗

{slwang, suo, weichiu, andrei, urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
Standard convolutional neural networks assume a grid
structured input is available and exploit discrete convolutions as their fundamental building blocks. This limits their
applicability to many real-world applications. In this paper we propose Parametric Continuous Convolution, a new
learnable operator that operates over non-grid structured
data. The key idea is to exploit parameterized kernel functions that span the full continuous vector space. This generalization allows us to learn over arbitrary data structures
as long as their support relationship is computable. Our
experiments show significant improvement over the state-ofthe-art in point cloud segmentation of indoor and outdoor
scenes, and lidar motion estimation of driving scenes.

1. Introduction
Discrete convolutions are the most fundamental building
block of modern deep learning architectures. Its efficiency
and effectiveness relies on the fact that the data appears naturally in a dense grid structure (e.g., 2D grid for images,
3D grid for videos). However, many real world applications
such as visual perception from 3D point clouds, mesh registration and non-rigid shape correspondences rely on making
statistical predictions from non-grid structured data. Unfortunately, standard convolutional operators cannot be directly applied in these cases.
Multiple approaches have been proposed to handle nongrid structured data. The simplest approach is to voxelize
the space to form a grid where standard discrete convolutions can be performed [29, 24]. However, most of the
volume is typically empty, and thus this results in both
memory inefficiency and wasted computation. Geometric
deep learning [3, 15] and graph neural network approaches
[25, 16] exploit the graph structure of the data and model the
relationship between nodes. Information is then propagated
through the graph edges. However, they either have difficulties generalizing well or require strong feature representations as input to perform competitively. End-to-end learning
is typically performed via back-propagation through time,

but it is difficult to learn very deep networks due to the
memory limitations of modern GPUs.
In contrast to the aforementioned approaches, in this paper we propose a new learnable operator, which we call
parametric continuous convolution. The key idea is a parameterized kernel function that spans the full continuous
vector space. In this way, it can handle arbitrary data structures as long as its support relationship is computable. This
is a natural extension since objects in the real-world such as
point clouds captured from 3D sensors are distributed unevenly in continuous domain. Based upon this we build a
new family of deep neural networks that can be applied on
generic non-grid structured data. The proposed networks
are both expressive and memory efficient.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in both
semantic labeling and motion estimation of point clouds.
Most importantly, we show that very deep networks can be
learned over raw point clouds in an end-to-end manner. Our
experiments show that the proposed approach outperforms
the state-of-the-art by a large margin in both outdoor and
indoor 3D point cloud segmentation tasks, as well as lidar
motion estimation in driving scenes. Importantly, our outdoor semantic labeling and lidar flow experiments are conducted on a very large scale dataset, containing 223 billion
points captured by a 3D sensor mounted on the roof of a
self-driving car. To our knowledge, this is 2 orders of magnitude larger than any existing benchmark.

2. Related Work
Deep Learning for 3D Geometry: Deep learning approaches that exploit 3D geometric data have recently become populer in the computer vision community. Early approaches convert the 3D data into a two-dimensional RGB
+ depth image [17, 10] and exploit conventional convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Unfortunately, this representation does not capture the true geometric relationships
between 3D points (i.e. neighboring pixels could be potentially far away geometrically). Another popular approach
is to conduct 3D convolutions over volumetric representations [29, 21, 24, 9, 18]. Voxelization is employed to
convert point clouds into a 3D grid that encodes the geo12589

