Discriminability objective for training descriptive captions
Ruotian Luo
TTI-Chicago

Brian Price
Adobe Research

Scott Cohen
Adobe Research

Gregory Shakhnarovich
TTI-Chicago

rluo@ttic.edu

bprice@adobe.com

scohen@adobe.com

greg@ttic.edu

Abstract
One property that remains lacking in image captions
generated by contemporary methods is discriminability: being able to tell two images apart given the caption for one of
them. We propose a way to improve this aspect of caption
generation. By incorporating into the captioning training
objective a loss component directly related to ability (by a
machine) to disambiguate image/caption matches, we obtain systems that produce much more discriminative caption, according to human evaluation. Remarkably, our approach leads to improvement in other aspects of generated
captions, reflected by a battery of standard scores such as
BLEU, SPICE etc. Our approach is modular and can be
applied to a variety of model/loss combinations commonly
proposed for image captioning.

1. Introduction
Image captioning is a task of mapping images to text for
human consumption. Broadly speaking, in order for a caption to be good it must satisfy two requirements: it should
be a fluent, well-formed phrase or sentence in the target language; and it should be informative, or descriptive, conveying meaningful non-trivial information about the visual
scene it describes. Our goal in the work presented here is to
improve captioning on both of these fronts.
Because these properties are somewhat vaguely defined,
objective evaluation of caption quality remains a challenge,
more so than evaluation of earlier established tasks like object detection or depth estimation. However, a number of
metrics have emerged as preferred, if imperfect, evaluation
measures. Comparison to human (“gold standard”) captions
collected for test images is done by means of metrics borrowed from machine translation, such as BLEU[1], as well
as new metrics introduced for the captioning task, such as
CIDEr[2] and SPICE[3].
In contrast, to assess how informative a caption is, we
may design an explicitly discriminative task the success
of which would depend on how accurately the caption describes the visual input. One approach to this is to con-

Human: a large jetliner taking
off from an airport runway
ATTN+CIDER: a large airplane
is flying in the sky
Ours: a large airplane taking off
from runway

Human: a jet airplane flying
above the clouds in the distance
ATTN+CIDER: a large airplane
is flying in the sky
Ours: a plane flying in the sky
with a cloudy sky

Figure 1. Example captions generated by human, an existing automatic system (ATTN+CIDER[6]), and a model trained with our
proposed method (ATTN+CIDER+DISC(1), see Section 5)

sider referring expressions [4]: captions for an image region, produced with the goal of unambiguously identifying
the region within the image to the recipient. We can also
consider the ability of a recipient to identify an entire image
that matches the caption, out of two (or more) images [5].
This – caption discriminability – is the focus of our work
presented here.
Traditionally used training objectives, such as maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) or CIDEr, tend to encourage
the model to “play it safe”, often yielding overly general
captions as illustrated in Fig. 1. Despite the visual differences in the image, a top captioning system [6] produces the
same caption for both images. In contrast, humans appear
to notice “interesting” details that are likely to distinguish
the image from other potentially similar images, even without explicitly being requested to do so. (We confirm this
assertion empirically in Sec. 5.)
To reduce this gap, we propose to incorporate an explicit
measure for discriminability into learning a caption generator, as part of the training loss. Our discriminability loss is
derived from the ability of a (pre-trained) retrieval model to
match the correct image to its caption significantly stronger
than any other image in a set, and vice versa (caption to
correct image above other captions).
Language-based measures like BLEU reward machine
captions for mimicking human captions, and so since, as we
state above, human captions are discriminative, one could
16964

