Geometric robustness of deep networks: analysis and improvement
Can Kanbak, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Pascal Frossard
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
{can.kanbak, seyed.moosavi, pascal.frossard} @epfl.ch

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks have been shown to
be vulnerable to arbitrary geometric transformations. However, there is no systematic method to measure the invariance properties of deep networks to such transformations.
We propose ManiFool as a simple yet scalable algorithm to
measure the invariance of deep networks. In particular, our
algorithm measures the robustness of deep networks to geometric transformations in a worst-case regime as they can
be problematic for sensitive applications. Our extensive experimental results show that ManiFool can be used to measure the invariance of fairly complex networks on high dimensional datasets and these values can be used for analyzing the reasons for it. Furthermore, we build on ManiFool
to propose a new adversarial training scheme and we show
its effectiveness on improving the invariance properties of
deep neural networks.1

1. Introduction
Although convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been largely successful in various applications, they have
been shown to be quite vulnerable to additive adversarial
perturbations [25, 10, 18] which can negatively affect their
applicability in sensitive applications such as autonomous
driving [6]. Deep networks have also been shown to be vulnerable to rigid geometric transformations [7, 9], which are
more natural than additive perturbations: they can simply
represent the change of the viewpoint of an image. Therefore, invariance to such transformations is certainly a key
feature in practical vision systems. In this paper, we focus
on studying the robustness of deep networks to geometric
transformations in the worst-case regime as these can be
quite problematic for sensitive applications. We approach
this problem by searching for minimal ’fooling’ transformations, i.e., transformations that change the decision of image
classifiers, and we use these transformed examples to measure the invariance of a deep network. We further show that

Figure 1: An example of a worst-case ’fooling’ affine transform
for AlexNet [15]. While the image on top is correctly classified
as sorrel (a type of horse), a small transformation in the bottom
image can cause it to be classified as basset (a type of dog), even
though the change in the image is imperceptible.

fine-tuning on such worst-case transformed examples can
improve the invariance properties of deep image classifiers.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose a scalable algorithm, ManiFool, for finding small worst-case transformations and define a measure to compare the invariance properties of different
networks.
• As far as we know, we perform the first quantitative
study on the robustness of deep networks to geometric transformations that are trained on a large scale
dataset, i.e., ImageNet, and show that these networks
are susceptible to small and sometimes imperceptible
transformations.
• We use the ManiFool algorithm to perform adversarial training using geometric transformations and show
that it actually improves the invariance of deep networks.

1 To encourage reproducible research, the code of our method will be
later published.

4441

