Self-Supervised Adversarial Hashing Networks for Cross-Modal Retrieval
Chao Li1 , Cheng Deng∗1 , Ning Li1 , Wei Liu∗2 , Xinbo Gao1 , and Dacheng Tao3
1

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia,
li chao@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {chdeng.xd, ningli2017}@gmail.com, wliu@ee.columbia.edu,
xbgao@mail.xidian.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Thanks to the success of deep learning, cross-modal retrieval has made significant progress recently. However,
there still remains a crucial bottleneck: how to bridge the
modality gap to further enhance the retrieval accuracy. In
this paper, we propose a self-supervised adversarial hashing (SSAH) approach, which lies among the early attempts
to incorporate adversarial learning into cross-modal hashing in a self-supervised fashion. The primary contribution
of this work is that two adversarial networks are leveraged
to maximize the semantic correlation and consistency of the
representations between different modalities. In addition,
we harness a self-supervised semantic network to discover
high-level semantic information in the form of multi-label
annotations. Such information guides the feature learning
process and preserves the modality relationships in both the
common semantic space and the Hamming space. Extensive
experiments carried out on three benchmark datasets validate that the proposed SSAH surpasses the state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
Owing to the explosive increase in multimedia data from
a great variety of search engines and social media, crossmodal retrieval has become a compelling topic in recent years [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 35, 36, 41, 42, 45].
Cross-modal retrieval aims to search semantically similar
instances in one modality (e.g., image) by using a query
from another modality (e.g., text). In order to satisfy the requirements of low storage cost and high query speed in realworld applications, hashing has been of considerable interest in the field of cross-modal retrieval, which maps highdimensional multi-modal data into a common hash code s∗ Corresponding authors

pace in such a way that gives similar cross-modal items similar hash codes. Since the instances from different modalities are hetrogeneous in terms of their feature representation
and distribution, i.e., their modality gap, it is necessary to
explore their semantic relevance in sufficient detail to bridge
this modality gap. Most existing shallow cross-modal hashing methods (in both unsupervised [2, 10, 14, 18] and supervised settings [7, 17, 19, 26, 30, 40, 33]), always capture the semantic relevance in a common Hamming space.
Compared with their unsupervised counterparts, supervised
cross-modal hashing methods can achieve superior performance by exploiting semantic labels or information concerning relevance, thereby distilling a cross-modal correlation. However, almost all these existing shallow crossmodal hashing methods are based on hand-crafted features,
which may limit the discriminative representation of instances and thus degrade the accuracy of the learned binary
hash codes.
In recent years, deep learning has become very successful at learning highly discriminative features for various applications [1][13]. However, only a few works have performed deep learning for cross-modal hashing [3, 9, 12,
31, 43], which can capture nonlinear correlations among
cross-modal instances more effectively. It is worth noting
that there are still some common disadvantages hindering
the current deep cross-modal hashing methods. First, these
methods simply and directly adopt single-class labels to
measure the semantic relevance across modalities [9][12].
In fact, in standard cross-modal benchmark datasets such
as NUS-WIDE [6] and Microsoft COCO [15], an image
instance can be assigned to multiple category labels [27],
which is beneficial as it permits semantic relevance to be
described more accurately across different modalities. Second, these methods enforce a narrowing of the modality gap
by constraining the corresponding hash codes with certain
pre-defined loss functions [4]. The code length is usually

4242

