Label Denoising Adversarial Network (LDAN) for Inverse Lighting of Faces
Hao Zhou ∗
Jin Sun∗
Yaser Yacoob
David W. Jacobs
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
{hzhou, jinsun, yaser, djacobs}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Lighting estimation from faces is an important task and
has applications in many areas such as image editing, intrinsic image decomposition, and image forgery detection.
We propose to train a deep Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) to regress lighting parameters from a single face
image. Lacking massive ground truth lighting labels for
face images in the wild, we use an existing method to estimate lighting parameters, which are treated as ground truth
with noise. To alleviate the effect of such noise, we utilize
the idea of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) and
propose a Label Denoising Adversarial Network (LDAN).
LDAN makes use of synthetic data with accurate ground
truth to help train a deep CNN for lighting regression on
real face images. Experiments show that our network outperforms existing methods in producing consistent lighting
parameters of different faces under similar lighting conditions. To further evaluate the proposed method, we also
apply it to regress object 2D key points where ground truth
labels are available. Our experiments demonstrate its effectiveness on this application.

1. Introduction
Estimating lighting sources from an image is a fundamental problem in computer vision. In general, this is a particularly difficult task when the scene has unknown shape
and reflectance properties. On the other hand, estimating the lighting of a human face, one of the most popular
and well studied objects, is easier due to its approximately
known geometry and near Lambertian reflectance. Lighting
estimation can be used in applications such as image editing, 3D structure estimation, and image forgery detection.
This paper focuses on estimating lighting from a single face
image. We consider the most common face image type:
near frontal pose. The same idea can be applied to face images with other poses.
There exist many approaches for lighting estimation
∗ means equal contribution.

Figure 1. Training of a LDAN model has two steps: 1) Train the
feature net and lighting net for synthetic data with two losses:
Faces with similar lighting should have similar lighting related features (||s1 − s2 ||2 ); Estimated lighting should be close to ground
truth lighting (||l1 − l∗ ||2 and ||l2 − l∗ ||2 ). 2) Train the feature
net for real data while fixing both the feature net and lighting net
trained in step 1. We use two losses in this step: The distribution
of synthetic features and real features should be close (||Ps −Pr ||);
Estimated lighting should be close to noisy ground truth lighting
(||lr − ˆ
lr ||).

from a single face image [6, 35, 19, 30], however they are
not learning-based and rely on complicated optimization
during testing, making the process inefficient. Moreover,
the performance of these methods (e.g., [6]) depends on the
resolution of face images, and cannot give accurate predictions for low resolution images.
Witnessing the dominant success of neural network models in other computer vision problems such as image classification, we are interested in a supervised learning approach
that directly regresses lighting parameters from a single face
image. Given an input face image, the approach outputs low
dimensional Spherical Harmonics (SH) coefficients [8, 32]
16238

