Wasserstein Introspective Neural Networks
Kwonjoon Lee
Weijian Xu
Fan Fan
Zhuowen Tu
University of California San Diego
{kwl042, wex041, f1fan, ztu}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We present Wasserstein introspective neural networks
(WINN) that are both a generator and a discriminator
within a single model. WINN provides a significant improvement over the recent introspective neural networks
(INN) method by enhancing INN’s generative modeling capability. WINN has three interesting properties: (1) A mathematical connection between the formulation of the INN algorithm and that of Wasserstein generative adversarial networks (WGAN) is made. (2) The explicit adoption of the
Wasserstein distance into INN results in a large enhancement to INN, achieving compelling results even with a single
classifier — e.g., providing nearly a 20 times reduction in
model size over INN for unsupervised generative modeling.
(3) When applied to supervised classification, WINN also
gives rise to improved robustness against adversarial examples in terms of the error reduction. In the experiments, we
report encouraging results on unsupervised learning problems including texture, face, and object modeling, as well as
a supervised classification task against adversarial attacks.
Our code is available online1 .

1. Introduction
Performance within the task of supervised image classification has been vastly improved in the era of deep learning using modern convolutional neural network (CNN) [30]
based discriminative classifiers [26, 43, 31, 42, 16, 52, 18].
On the other hand, unsupervised generative models in deep
learning were previously attained using methods under the
umbrella of graphical models — e.g., the Boltzmann machine [17] or autoencoder [4, 24] architectures. However,
the rich representational power seen within convolutionbased (discriminative) models is not being directly enjoyed
in these generative models. Later, inverting convolutional
neural networks in order to convert internal representations
into a real image was investigated in [6, 27]. Recently,
generative adversarial networks (GAN) [11] and followup
1 https://github.com/kjunelee/WINN

Classification
Wasserstein Introspective Neural Networks

training examples

Learned Model

Synthesize

synthesis (pseudo-negative samples)

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of Wasserstein introspective neural networks for unsupervised learning. The left figure shows the input examples;
the bottom figures show the pseudo-negatives (purple crosses) being progressively synthesized; the top figures show the classification between the
given examples (positives) and synthesized pseudo-negatives (negatives).
The right figure shows the model learned to approach the target distribution
based on the given data.

works [38, 2, 14] have attracted a tremendous amount of
attention in machine learning and computer vision by producing high quality synthesized images by training a pair
of competing models against one another in an adversarial manner. While a generator tries to create “fake” images
to fool the discriminator, the discriminator attempts to discern between these “real” (given training) and “fake” images. After convergence, the generator is able to produce
images faithful to the underlying data distribution.
Before the deep learning era [17], generative modeling had been an area with a steady pace of development
[1, 5, 54, 36, 49, 53]. These models were guided by rigorous statistical theories which, although nice in theory, did
not succeed in producing synthesized images with practical
quality.
In terms of building generative models from discriminative classifiers, there have been early attempts in [48, 44].

3702

