Viewpoint-aware Attentive Multi-view Inference for Vehicle Re-identification
Yi Zhou
Ling Shao
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
School of Computing Sciences, University of East Anglia
y.zhou1@uea.ac.uk

ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Vehicle re-identification (re-ID) has the huge potential to
contribute to the intelligent video surveillance. However, it
suffers from challenges that different vehicle identities with
a similar appearance have little inter-instance discrepancy
while one vehicle usually has large intra-instance differences under viewpoint and illumination variations. Previous methods address vehicle re-ID by simply using visual
features from originally captured views and usually exploit
the spatial-temporal information of the vehicles to refine
the results. In this paper, we propose a Viewpoint-aware
Attentive Multi-view Inference (VAMI) model that only requires visual information to solve the multi-view vehicle reID problem. Given vehicle images of arbitrary viewpoints,
the VAMI extracts the single-view feature for each input image and aims to transform the features into a global multiview feature representation so that pairwise distance metric learning can be better optimized in such a viewpointinvariant feature space. The VAMI adopts a viewpointaware attention model to select core regions at different
viewpoints and implement effective multi-view feature inference by an adversarial training architecture. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of each proposed component and illustrate that our approach achieves consistent
improvements over state-of-the-art vehicle re-ID methods
on two public datasets: VeRi and VehicleID.

1. Introduction
Vehicle re-identification (re-ID) aims to spot a vehicle of
interest from multiple non-overlapping cameras in surveillance systems. It can be applied to practical scenarios in
intelligent transportation systems such as urban surveillance
and security. However, compared with a similar topic called
person re-ID [5, 19, 27, 37, 12, 35] which has been extensively explored, vehicle re-ID encounters more challenges.
The top-left part of Fig. 1 reveals the two main obstacles
of vehicle re-ID. One inherent difficulty is that a vehicle
captured in different viewpoints usually has dramatically

Viewpoint-aware attentive
region selection

Rear

Rear-side
(whole image)

Side

Rear-side viewpoint

Front-side

Front

Same ID but visually different.

Distance metric learning on single-view
feature space (Previous works)

Multi-view
feature inference

Distance metric learning on
multi-view feature space

Figure 1. The left part shows the challenges of vehicle re-ID and a
general framework of previous works. The right part illustrates the
motivation of our proposed method that infers a multi-view feature
representation from a single-view input, thus distance metrics can
be optimized in the viewpoint-invariant multi-view feature space.

varied visual appearances. In contrast, two different vehicles of the same color and type have a similar appearance
from the same viewpoint. The subtle inter-instance discrepancy between images of different vehicles and the large
intra-instance difference between images of the same vehicle make the matching problem unsatisfactorily addressed
by existing vision models. Recent re-ID methods are mainly
proposed for persons, which can be categorized into three
groups including feature learning [33, 10, 32, 40, 28], distance metric learning [30, 39, 24, 2] and subspace learning
[38, 1, 31, 34]. All these methods utilize features of originally captured views to train models and compute distances
between vehicle pairs, in which multi-view processing was
not sufficiently considered. Directly deploying person re-ID
models for vehicles does not achieve expected performance
since features such as color and texture of clothes and pants
can be used for humans even with large viewpoint variations but not for vehicles. Many vehicle re-ID researchers
also noticed the challenges, thus preferred to make use of
license plate or spatial-temporal information [15, 26, 23] to

6489

