PPFNet: Global Context Aware Local Features for Robust 3D Point Matching
Haowen Deng✝,*,✣
✝

Tolga Birdal✝,*

Slobodan Ilic✝,*

Technische Universitat München, Germany, * Siemens AG, München, Germany
✣
National University of Defense Technology, China,
haowen.deng@tum.de , tolga.birdal@tum.de , slobodan.ilic@siemens.com

Abstract
We present PPFNet - Point Pair Feature NETwork
for deeply learning a globally informed 3D local feature
descriptor to find correspondences in unorganized point
clouds. PPFNet learns local descriptors on pure geometry and is highly aware of the global context, an important cue in deep learning. Our 3D representation is computed as a collection of point-pair-features combined with
the points and normals within a local vicinity. Our permutation invariant network design is inspired by PointNet and
sets PPFNet to be ordering-free. As opposed to voxelization, our method is able to consume raw point clouds to
exploit the full sparsity. PPFNet uses a novel N-tuple loss
and architecture injecting the global information naturally
into the local descriptor. It shows that context awareness
also boosts the local feature representation. Qualitative and
quantitative evaluations of our network suggest increased
recall, improved robustness and invariance as well as a vital step in the 3D descriptor extraction performance.

1. Introduction
Local description of 3D geometry plays a key role in
3D vision as it precedes fundamental tasks such as correspondence estimation, matching, registration, object detection or shape retrieval. Such wide application makes
the local features amenable for use in robotics [6], navigation (SLAM) [36] and scene reconstruction for creation of
VR contents and digitalization. Developing such a generalpurpose tool motivated scholars to hand-craft their 3D feature descriptors/signatures for decades [37, 35, 34]. Unfortunately, we now notice that this quest has not been very
fruitful in generating the desired repeatable and discriminative local descriptors for 3D point cloud data, especially
when the input is partial or noisy [11, 24].
The recent trends carefully follow the paradigm shift to

Figure 1. PPFNet generates repeatable, discriminative descriptors
and can discover the correspondences simultaneously given a pair
of fragments. Point sets are colored by a low dimensional embedding of the local feature for visualization. 3D data and the
illustrative image are taken from 7-scenes dataset [38].

deep neural networks, but the latest works either base the
representation on a hand-crafted input encoding [23] or try
to naively extend the networks from 2D domain to 3D [48].
Both approaches are sub-optimal, as they do not address an
end-to-end learning of the raw data, point sets.
In this paper, we present PPFNet network for deep learning of fast and discriminative 3D local patch descriptor with
increased tolerance to rotations. To satisfy its desirable
properties, we first represent the local geometry with an
augmented set of simple geometric relationships: points,
normals and point pair features (PPF) [34, 8]. We then
design a novel loss function, which we term as N-tuple
loss, to simultaneously embed multiple matching and nonmatching pairs into a Euclidean domain. Our loss resembles the contrastive loss [14], but instead of pairs, we consider an N-combination of the input points within two scene
1195

