Video Person Re-identification with Competitive Snippet-similarity Aggregation
and Co-attentive Snippet Embedding
Dapeng Chen1,3 Hongsheng Li1† , Tong Xiao1 Shuai Yi2 Xiaogang Wang1†
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research, 3 School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{dpchen, hsli, xiaotong, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

yishuai@sensetime.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is a useful technology
for intelligent video surveillance systems. Previous approaches mostly focus on image-based setting, where the
trajectories of one person captured by different cameras
are associated by comparing his/her still images. With the
emergence of video-based benchmarks [27, 8, 34] and the
growth of computational resource, researchers have started
to utilize video data for the task. Video data contain much
richer information about pedestrian appearance and also
† H. Li and X. Wang are the co-corresponding authors.

PROBE SEQUENCE

SNIPPET SET

SNIPPET PAIRS

In this paper, we address video-based person reidentification with competitive snippet-similarity aggregation and co-attentive snippet embedding. Our approach
divides long person sequences into multiple short video
snippets and aggregates the top-ranked snippet similarities for sequence-similarity estimation. With this strategy,
the intra-person visual variation of each sample could be
minimized for similarity estimation, while the diverse appearance and temporal information are maintained. The
snippet similarities are estimated by a deep neural network
with a novel temporal co-attention for snippet embedding.
The attention weights are obtained based on a query feature, which is learned from the whole probe snippet by an
LSTM network, making the resulting embeddings less affected by noisy frames. The gallery snippet shares the same
query feature with the probe snippet. Thus the embedding of
gallery snippet can present more relevant features to compare with the probe snippet, yielding more accurate snippet
similarity. Extensive ablation studies verify the effectiveness of competitive snippet-similarity aggregation as well
as the temporal co-attentive embedding. Our method significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art approaches
on multiple datasets.

SNIPPET

R
FO
K
Y
OR
IT
AR
TW
L
E
I
N
IM
EP
N
T-S
E
O
E
I
D
P
AT
IP
M
SN
TI
ES

VE
TI
Y
TI
IT
PE
AR
M
IL
IM
CO
N
S
IO
TT
E
A
P
IP
EG
SN
GR
AG

SNIPPET SIMILARITIES

SNIPPET

SNIPPET SET

GALLERY SEQUENCE

Figure 1: Illustration of the overall framework of our proposed
approach. The long person sequences are divided into short snippets. Snippet similarities are robustly estimated by a deep neural
network with a co-attentive mechanism. The sequence similarity
competitively aggregates snippet-similarity scores.

convey motion clues that implicitly reflect persons’ body
layouts. Both are beneficial and should be exploited for
more robust re-identification.
For efficient Re-ID over a large-scale dataset, it requires
learning a non-linear function to convert images/videos
into a lower dimensional feature space. For video data, a
straightforward solution is to embed the whole sequence
into a single vector. However, as a person in one sequence may show great visual variation, a single vector
cannot represent the diverse appearance of the person and
will inevitably lose important details for identification. To
solve this problem, we divide the sequence into multiple
video snippets, embed each snippet separately, and perform
snippet-similarity estimation and aggregation as in Fig. 1.
To obtain the similarity between two long sequences,
the proposed competitive snippet-similarity aggregation
11169

