Augmented Skeleton Space Transfer for Depth-based Hand Pose Estimation
Seungryul Baek
Imperial College London

Kwang In Kim
University of Bath

Tae-Kyun Kim
Imperial College London

s.baek15@imperial.ac.uk

k.kim@bath.ac.uk

tk.kim@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Crucial to the success of training a depth-based 3D hand pose
estimator (HPE) is the availability of comprehensive datasets
covering diverse camera perspectives, shapes, and pose variations. However, collecting such annotated datasets is challenging.
We propose to complete existing databases by generating new
database entries. The key idea is to synthesize data in the skeleton
space (instead of doing so in the depth-map space) which enables
an easy and intuitive way of manipulating data entries. Since the
skeleton entries generated in this way do not have the corresponding depth map entries, we exploit them by training a separate hand
pose generator (HPG) which synthesizes the depth map from the
skeleton entries. By training the HPG and HPE in a single unified
optimization framework enforcing that 1) the HPE agrees with the
paired depth and skeleton entries; and 2) the HPG-HPE combination satisfies the cyclic consistency (both the input and the output
of HPG-HPE are skeletons) observed via the newly generated unpaired skeletons, our algorithm constructs a HPE which is robust
to variations that go beyond the coverage of the existing database.
Our training algorithm adopts the generative adversarial
networks (GAN) training process. As a by-product, we obtain
a hand pose discriminator (HPD) that is capable of picking out
realistic hand poses. Our algorithm exploits this capability to
refine the initial skeleton estimates in testing, further improving
the accuracy. We test our algorithm on four challenging
benchmark datasets (ICVL, MSRA, NYU and Big Hand 2.2M
datasets) and demonstrate that our approach outperforms or is on
par with state-of-the-art methods quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D pose of a hand from a single depth map finds
numerous applications in human-computer interaction, computer
graphics, and virtual & augmented reality and it has emerged as a
key problem in computer vision [44, 32, 51, 59, 11, 53, 30, 4, 13,
57, 37, 52, 26, 60, 48, 46, 10, 33, 19, 41, 20, 14, 18, 22, 9, 58].
Hand pose estimation is a challenging problem. Typical
application scenarios of hand pose estimation require identifying
almost the same number of parameters (≈ 100; see Fig. 2)
as human body pose. However, in contrast with body pose
estimation where subjects are typically isolated and in the upright
position, hands exhibit frequent and severe self-occlusions, and

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Similar hand skeletons overlaid with the corresponding
depth maps in (a) camera perspective and (b) shape (subject)
variations: Note that slight variations in hand skeletons are
instantiated to significantly different depth maps. It is much easier
to edit hands in the skeleton spaces as directly manipulating depth
values is challenging. Further, as the original depth map can
exhibit self-occlusions, naïve 3D rotations introduce holes for
large rotation angles (c): The occluded (empty) thumb region
is highlighted with a red circle (60-degree rotation from (a) left).

furthermore, it is not straightforward to define canonical views
as hands are captured in a wide range of equally likely camera
perspectives. Therefore, the ability to operate reliably under
varying camera perspectives, poses, and shapes (subject identities)
is crucial to successful hand pose estimation.
A straightforward approach to construct such a robust hand
pose estimator (HPE) might be to train it on a large dataset that
covers such variations. However, as far as we are aware, existing
datasets are limited in the coverage of camera viewpoint, shape,
and/or pose variations (see Sec. 3).
When the data space is visualized using the ground-truth annotations of hand poses, shapes, and camera perspectives in such
databases, one can identify the missing regions in the space, e.g.
camera perspectives that are not covered by the database (see
Fig. 4). This motivates a study to complete the dataset by synthesizing new skeleton and depth map pairs. Using synthetic data as
one such approach, typically requires physical or statistical hand
models. Furthermore, even with advances in graphics, synthetic
depth maps exhibit observable differences from real data [31]. An
alternative is simple depth map and skeleton pair manipulation,
e.g. by in-plane rotations and translations. As shown in our experiments, while this way of augmenting data helps, the resulting
database coverage, however, is limited. Extending this data manipulation approach to non-trivial variations in shape and 3D camera
view is challenging: Directly changing the depth values can easily
generate unrealistic hand shapes as data entries in depth maps are

8330

