2D/3D Pose Estimation and Action Recognition using Multitask Deep Learning
Diogo C. Luvizon1 , David Picard1,2 , Hedi Tabia1
1
ETIS UMR 8051, Paris Seine University, ENSEA, CNRS, F-95000, Cergy, France
2
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris 6, LIP6, F-75005 Paris, France
{diogo.luvizon, picard, hedi.tabia}@ensea.fr

RGB images

Abstract
Action recognition and human pose estimation are
closely related but both problems are generally handled
as distinct tasks in the literature. In this work, we propose a multitask framework for jointly 2D and 3D pose
estimation from still images and human action recognition from video sequences. We show that a single architecture can be used to solve the two problems in an efficient way and still achieves state-of-the-art results. Additionally, we demonstrate that optimization from end-toend leads to significantly higher accuracy than separated
learning. The proposed architecture can be trained with
data from different categories simultaneously in a seamlessly way. The reported results on four datasets (MPII,
Human3.6M, Penn Action and NTU) demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on the targeted tasks.

...
t=1

t=0

t=T

Multitask CNN
Visual
features

Probability
maps

...

...

...
t=0 t=1

2D/3D estimated poses

t=T

t=0 t=1

t=T

×
Appearence
recognition

Pose
recognition

Aggregation
Action: "Baseball pitch"

1. Introduction
Human action recognition and pose estimation have received an important attention in the last years, not only because of their many applications, such as video surveillance
and human-computer interfaces, but also because they are
still challenging tasks. Pose estimation and action recognition are usually handled as distinct problems [14] or the
last is used as a prior for the first [57, 22]. Despite the fact
that pose is of extreme relevance for action recognition, to
the best of our knowledge, there is no method in the literature that solves both problems in a joint way to the benefit
of action recognition. In that direction, our work proposes
unique end-to-end trainable multitask framework to handle
2D and 3D human pose estimation and action recognition
jointly, as presented in Figure 1.
One of the major advantages of deep learning is its capability to perform end-to-end optimization. As suggested by
Kokkinos [24], this is all the more true for multitask problems, where related tasks can benefit from one another. Recent methods based on deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have achieved impressive results on both 2D and

Figure 1. The proposed multitask approach for pose estimation
and action recognition. Our method provides 2D/3D pose estimation from single images or frame sequences. Pose and visual
information are used to predict actions in a unified framework.

3D pose estimation tasks thanks to the rise of new architectures and the availability of large amounts of data [33, 35].
Similarly, action recognition has recently been improved by
using deep neural networks relying on human pose [3]. We
believe both tasks have not yet been stitched together to
perform a beneficial joint optimization because most pose
estimation methods perform heat map prediction. These
detection based approaches require the non-differentiable
argmax function to recover the joint coordinates as a post
processing stage, which breaks the backpropagation chain
needed for end-to-end learning.
We propose to solve this problem by extending the differentiable Soft-argmax [28, 58] for joint 2D and 3D pose
estimation. This allows us to stack action recognition on top
of pose estimation, resulting in a multitask framework trainable from end-to-end. We present our contributions as follows: First, the proposed pose estimation method achieves
15137

