Weakly-supervised Deep Convolutional Neural Network Learning
for Facial Action Unit Intensity Estimation
Yong Zhang1,2 , Weiming Dong1 , Bao-Gang Hu1 , and Qiang Ji3∗
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
zhangyong201303@gmail.com, weiming.dong@ia.ac.cn, hubg@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Facial action unit (AU) intensity estimation plays an important role in affective computing and human-computer
interaction. Recent works have introduced deep neural
networks for AU intensity estimation, but they require a
large amount of intensity annotations. AU annotation needs
strong domain expertise and it is expensive to construct a
large database to learn deep models. We propose a novel
knowledge-based semi-supervised deep convolutional neural network for AU intensity estimation with extremely limited AU annotations. Only the intensity annotations of peak
and valley frames in training sequences are needed. To
provide additional supervision for model learning, we exploit naturally existing constraints on AUs, including relative appearance similarity, temporal intensity ordering, facial symmetry, and contrastive appearance difference. Experimental evaluations are performed on two public benchmark databases. With around 2% of intensity annotations
in FERA 2015 and around 1% in DISFA for training, our
method can achieve comparable or even better performance
than the state-of-the-art methods which use 100% of intensity annotations in the training set.

1. Introduction
Expressions are conveyed through facial appearance
which is produced by the movements of facial muscles under the skin. Facial Action Coding System (FACS) was developed by Ekman and Friesen [5] to depict these muscle
movements. It defines AUs as a contraction or relaxation
of one or a group of muscles (see Fig. 1a). Nearly any
anatomically possible facial expression can be coded by a
combination of AUs. FACS also divides AU intensity into 6
discrete ordinal levels and provides rules to annotate the intensity from neutral to maximum, i.e., Neutral (0) < Trace
∗ Corresponding author.

(A) < Slight (B) < Pronounced (C) < Extreme (D) < Maximum (E). The goal of AU intensity estimation is to predict
the AU intensity for an unseen image.
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
breakthroughs in a variety of computer vision tasks, including image classification [14], image segmentation [18], action recognition [37], etc. The millions of parameters are
learned through the end-to-end strategy with raw images
as the input and targets as the output. DNNs have also
been applied to facial behavior analysis, including expression recognition [13, 4], AU recognition [52, 16, 39], and
AU intensity estimation [6, 42]. Since DNNs contain a huge
number of parameters, a large set of training samples are
required for model learning to avoid overfitting. However,
AU annotation needs strong domain expertise and is timeconsuming. Hence, it requires great effort to construct a
large database with AU intensity annotations to meet the requirement of fully supervised DNNs.
Instead of requiring a large set of annotations, we propose a knowledge-based semi-supervised deep convolutional neural network (CNN) for AU intensity estimation.
Prior knowledge can be used to facilitate the model learning and reduce the dependence on data [9, 8, 26]. In emotional sequences, only the AU intensity annotations of peak
and valley frames are needed. Since peak and valley frames
account for a rather small proportion of whole sequences,
using semi-supervised learning can save great effort for intensity annotation. To leverage unlabeled frames, we exploit four types of domain knowledge on AU intensity to
provide additional supervision for model learning, including relative appearance similarity, temporal intensity ordering, facial symmetry, and contrastive appearance difference.
They come from the observation on AU intensity in emotional sequences. Fig. 1b shows the annotated peak and valley frames of AU12 in a sequence. Firstly, local appearance
of AU changes smoothly since the physical movements of
muscles are smooth. AU intensity gradually increases from
12314

