Art of singular vectors and universal adversarial perturbations
Valentin Khrulkov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
valentin.khrulkov@skolkovotech.ru

Ivan Oseledets
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Institute of Numerical Mathematics RAS
i.oseledets@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Vulnerability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to adversarial attacks has been attracting a lot of attention in
recent studies. It has been shown that for many state of the
art DNNs performing image classification there exist universal adversarial perturbations — image-agnostic perturbations mere addition of which to natural images with high
probability leads to their misclassification. In this work we
propose a new algorithm for constructing such universal
perturbations. Our approach is based on computing the socalled (p, q)-singular vectors of the Jacobian matrices of
hidden layers of a network. Resulting perturbations present
interesting visual patterns, and by using only 64 images we
were able to construct universal perturbations with more
than 60 % fooling rate on the dataset consisting of 50000
images. We also investigate a correlation between the maximal singular value of the Jacobian matrix and the fooling
rate of the corresponding singular vector, and show that the
constructed perturbations generalize across networks.

there exist universal adversarial perturbations — imageagnostic perturbations that cause most natural images to be
misclassified. They were constructed by iterating over a
dataset and recomputing the ”worst” direction in the space
of images by solving an optimization problem related to geometry of the decision boundary. Universal adversarial perturbations exhibit many interesting properties such as their
universality across networks, which means that a perturbation constructed using one DNN will perform relatively well
for other DNNs.
We present a new algorithm for constructing universal
perturbations based on solving simple optimization problems which correspond to finding the so-called (p, q)singular vector of the Jacobian matrices of feature maps of
a DNN. Our idea as based on the observation that since the
norm of adversarial perturbations is typically very small,
perturbations in the non-linear maps computed by the DNN
can be reasonably well approximated by the Jacobian matrix. The (p, q)-singular vector of a matrix A is defined as
the solution of the following optimization problem
kAvkq → max,

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) with great success have
been applied to many practical problems in computer vision
[11, 20, 9] and in audio and text processing [7, 13, 4]. However, it was discovered that many state-of-the-art DNNs
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [6, 14, 21], based on
adding a perturbation of a small magnitude to the image.
Such perturbations are carefully constructed in order to
lead to misclassification of the perturbed image and moreover may attempt to force a specific predicted class (targeted attacks), as opposed to just any class different from
the ground truth (untargeted attacks). Potential undesirable
usage of adversarial perturbations in practical applications
such as autonomous driving systems and malware detection has been studied in [10, 8]. This also motivated the
research on defenses against various kinds of attack strategies [16, 5].
In the recent work Moosavi et al. [14] have shown that

kvkp = 1,

(1)

and if we desire kvkp = L instead, it is sufficient to multiply
the solution of (1) by L. Universal adversarial perturbations
are typically generated with a bound in the ∞-norm, which
motivates the usage of such general construction. To obtain
the (p, q)-singular vectors we use a modification of the standard power method, which is adapted to arbitrary p-norms.
The main contributions of our paper are
• We propose an algorithm for generating universal adversarial perturbation, using the generalized power
method for computing the (p, q)-singular vectors of the
Jacobian matrices of the feature maps.
• Our method is able to produce relatively good universal adversarial examples from a relatively small number of images from a dataset.
• We investigate a correlation between the largest (p, q)singular value and the fooling rate of the generated

8562

