Joint Pose and Expression Modeling for Facial Expression Recognition
Feifei Zhang1,2 , Tianzhu Zhang2,3∗, Qirong Mao1 , Changsheng Xu2,3
1
2

School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, China

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{susanzhang, mao qr}@ujs.edu.cn, {tzzhang, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Facial expression recognition (FER) is a challenging
task due to different expressions under arbitrary poses.
Most conventional approaches either perform face frontalization on a non-frontal facial image or learn separate classifiers for each pose. Different from existing methods, in
this paper, we propose an end-to-end deep learning model
by exploiting different poses and expressions jointly for simultaneous facial image synthesis and pose-invariant facial
expression recognition. The proposed model is based on
generative adversarial network (GAN) and enjoys several
merits. First, the encoder-decoder structure of the generator can learn a generative and discriminative identity representation for face images. Second, the identity representation is explicitly disentangled from both expression and pose
variations through the expression and pose codes. Third,
our model can automatically generate face images with different expressions under arbitrary poses to enlarge and
enrich the training set for FER. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations on both controlled and in-the-wild datasets
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Facial expression recognition (FER) is one of the most
important tasks in computer vision which plays a crucial
role in numerous applications in psychology, medicine, security, digital entertainment, and driver monitoring, to name
a few [41, 5, 14, 6, 3]. The main challenge of the FER is
to account for large appearance changes of human faces.
Despite of significant progress in recent years, it remains a
difficult task for developing robust algorithms to recognize
facial expression in scenarios with challenging factors such
as pose variations, unconstrained facial expressions, illumination changes, and insufficient training data.
The facial expression recognition aims to analyze and
classify a given facial image into several emotion types,
∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Facial expression recognition is a challenging task due
to different expressions under arbitrary poses.

such as, angry, disgust, fear, happy, sad and surprise [9]. To
achieve this goal, numerous algorithms of FER [28, 21, 27]
have been proposed in the literatures during the past several years. Among the existing methods, most of them are
based on frontal or nearly frontal view facial images and
the non-frontal or the in-the-wild facial expression recognition problem is largely unexplored. In contrast to the frontal
FER, expression recognition from non-frontal facial images
is challenging because it needs to deal with the issues of
face occlusions, accurate non-frontal face alignment, and
accurate non-frontal facial points location as shown in Figure 1. As a result, only a small part of algorithms among
the proposed various methods address this challenging issue [62, 10, 58]. Different from the existing methods, we
focus on the pose-invariant FER, which is to perform FER
by identifying or authorizing individuals’ expressions with
facial images captured under arbitrary poses. Therefore, it
is more challenging and more applicable in real scenarios.
However, it is not easy to perform the pose-invariant
FER as shown in Figure 1. The main challenge here is to
perform decoupling of the rigid facial changes due to the
head-pose and non-rigid facial changes due to the expression, as they are non-linearly coupled in 2D images [66].
In details, the rigid rotation of the head results in selfocclusion, which means there is loss of information for facial expression recognition. Besides, the shape of facial
texture is warped nonlinearly along with the pose change,
which causes serious confusion with the inter-personal texture difference. This calls for a joint analysis of head-pose
4321
3359

