Improving Landmark Localization with Semi-Supervised Learning
Sina Honari1∗ , Pavlo Molchanov2 , Stephen Tyree2 , Pascal Vincent1,4,5 , Christopher Pal1,3 , Jan Kautz2
1

MILA-University of Montreal, 2 NVIDIA, 3 Ecole Polytechnique of Montreal, 4 CIFAR, 5 Facebook AI Research.
1
2

{honaris, vincentp}@iro.umontreal.ca,

{pmolchanov, styree, jkautz}@nvidia.com, 3 christopher.pal@polymtl.ca

Abstract
We present two techniques to improve landmark localization in images from partially annotated datasets. Our
primary goal is to leverage the common situation where precise landmark locations are only provided for a small data
subset, but where class labels for classification or regression tasks related to the landmarks are more abundantly
available. First, we propose the framework of sequential
multitasking and explore it here through an architecture for
landmark localization where training with class labels acts
as an auxiliary signal to guide the landmark localization on
unlabeled data. A key aspect of our approach is that errors
can be backpropagated through a complete landmark localization model. Second, we propose and explore an unsupervised learning technique for landmark localization based on
having a model predict equivariant landmarks with respect
to transformations applied to the image. We show that these
techniques, improve landmark prediction considerably and
can learn effective detectors even when only a small fraction of the dataset has landmark labels. We present results
on two toy datasets and four real datasets, with hands and
faces, and report new state-of-the-art on two datasets in the
wild, e.g. with only 5% of labeled images we outperform
previous state-of-the-art trained on the AFLW dataset.

1. Introduction
Landmark localization – finding the precise location of
specific parts in an image – is a central step in many complex vision problems. Examples include hand tracking
[14, 8], gesture recognition [7], facial expression recognition [15], face identity verification [33, 32], and eye gaze
tracking [49, 22]. Reliable landmark estimation is often
part of the pipeline for sophisticated, robust vision tools.
Neural networks have yielded state-of-the art results on numerous landmark estimation problems [36, 13, 41, 45, 39].
However, neural networks generally need to be trained on
∗ Part of this work was done when author was at NVIDIA Research

S

M

N

Figure 1: In our approach three sources of gradients are used for
learning a landmark localization network, from top to bottom: 1)
The gradient from S labeled image-landmark pairs. 2) The gradient from M attribute examples, obtained through sequential multitasking. The first part of the network (a CNN) predicts landmarks with a soft-argmax output layer to make the entire network
fully differentiable. The predicted landmarks (as x, y pairs) are
then fed into a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) for attribute regression/classification. 3) The gradient received from an unsupervised
component of the composite loss which we refer to as an equivariant landmark transformation (ELT) (applied to N images). This
loss encourages the model to output landmarks that are equivariant to transformations applied to the image. Importantly, MLP
regression and the ELT are applied to the model’s predictions and
not the ground truth (GT) landmarks, so they can be applied on images that are not labelled with landmarks. Our proposed approach
allows efficient training even when S ≪ M ≤ N .

a large set of labeled data to be robust to the variations
in natural images. Landmark labeling is a tedious manual
work where precision is important; as a result, few landmark datasets are large enough to train reliable deep neural
networks. On the other hand it is much easier to label an
image with a single class label rather than the entire set of
precise landmarks, and datasets with labels related to—but
distinct from—landmark detection are far more abundant.

1546

