Benchmarking 6DOF Outdoor Visual Localization in Changing Conditions
Torsten Sattler1 Will Maddern2 Carl Toft3 Akihiko Torii4 Lars Hammarstrand3
Erik Stenborg3 Daniel Safari4,5 Masatoshi Okutomi4 Marc Pollefeys1,6
Josef Sivic7,8 Fredrik Kahl3,9 Tomas Pajdla8
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich 2 Oxford Robotics Institute, University of Oxford
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology 6 Microsoft
4
Tokyo Institute of Technology 5 Technical University of Denmark 7 Inria∗
8
CIIRC, CTU in Prague† 9 Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University

Abstract
Visual localization enables autonomous vehicles to navigate in their surroundings and augmented reality applications to link virtual to real worlds. Practical visual localization approaches need to be robust to a wide variety of
viewing condition, including day-night changes, as well as
weather and seasonal variations, while providing highly accurate 6 degree-of-freedom (6DOF) camera pose estimates.
In this paper, we introduce the first benchmark datasets
specifically designed for analyzing the impact of such factors on visual localization. Using carefully created ground
truth poses for query images taken under a wide variety
of conditions, we evaluate the impact of various factors on
6DOF camera pose estimation accuracy through extensive
experiments with state-of-the-art localization approaches.
Based on our results, we draw conclusions about the difficulty of different conditions, showing that long-term localization is far from solved, and propose promising avenues
for future work, including sequence-based localization approaches and the need for better local features. Our benchmark is available at visuallocalization.net.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 6DOF camera pose of an image with respect to a 3D scene model is key for visual navigation of
autonomous vehicles and augmented/mixed reality devices.
Solutions to this visual localization problem can also be
used to “close loops” in the context of SLAM or to register
images to Structure-from-Motion (SfM) reconstructions.
Work on 3D structure-based visual localization has focused on increasing efficiency [30, 33, 39, 52, 66], improving scalability and robustness to ambiguous structures [32,
∗ WILLOW project, Departement d’Informatique de l’École Normale
Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, PSL Research University.
† CIIRC - Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics, and Cybernetics,
Czech Technical University in Prague

Figure 1. Visual localization in changing urban conditions. We
present three new datasets, Aachen Day-Night, RobotCar Seasons (shown) and CMU Seasons for evaluating 6DOF localization
against a prior 3D map (top) using registered query images taken
from a wide variety of conditions (bottom), including day-night
variation, weather, and seasonal changes over long periods of time.

50, 65, 73], reducing memory requirements [12, 33, 50], and
more flexible scene representations [54]. All these methods
utilize local features to establish 2D-3D matches. These
correspondences are in turn used to estimate the camera
pose. This data association stage is critical as pose estimation fails without sufficiently many correct matches. There
is a well-known trade-off between discriminative power and
invariance for local descriptors. Thus, existing localization
approaches will only find enough matches if both the query
images and the images used to construct the 3D scene model
are taken under similar viewing conditions.
Capturing a scene under all viewing conditions is prohibitive. Thus, the assumption that all relevant conditions
are covered is too restrictive in practice. It is more realistic to expect that images of a scene are taken under a single or a few conditions. To be practically relevant, e.g., for

8601

