Quantization of Fully Convolutional Networks for Accurate Biomedical
Image Segmentation
Xiaowei Xu1,2 , Qing Lu2 , Lin Yang2 , Xiaobo Sharon Hu2 , Danny Chen2 , Yu Hu1 , Yiyu Shi2
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Univerity of Notre Dame
{xuxiaowei,bryanhu}@hust.edu.cn; {xxu8, qlu2, lyang5, shu, dchen, yshi4}@nd.edu

Abstract
With pervasive applications of medical imaging in
health-care, biomedical image segmentation plays a central role in quantitative analysis, clinical diagnosis, and
medical intervention. Since manual annotation suffers limited reproducibility, arduous efforts, and excessive time,
automatic segmentation is desired to process increasingly
larger scale histopathological data. Recently, deep neural
networks (DNNs), particularly fully convolutional networks (FCNs), have been widely applied to biomedical image
segmentation, attaining much improved performance. At
the same time, quantization of DNNs has become an active research topic, which aims to represent weights with
less memory (precision) to considerably reduce memory
and computation requirements of DNNs while maintaining
acceptable accuracy. In this paper, we apply quantization
techniques to FCNs for accurate biomedical image segmentation. Unlike existing literatures on quantization which
primarily targets memory and computation complexity reduction, we apply quantization as a method to reduce overfitting in FCNs for better accuracy. Specifically, we focus
on a state-of-the-art segmentation framework, suggestive
annotation [26], which judiciously extracts representative
annotation samples from the original training dataset, obtaining an effective small-sized balanced training dataset.
We develop two new quantization processes for this framework: (1) suggestive annotation with quantization for highly representative training samples, and (2) network training
with quantization for high accuracy. Extensive experiments
on the MICCAI Gland dataset show that both quantization
processes can improve the segmentation performance, and
our proposed method exceeds the current state-of-the-art
performance by up to 1%. In addition, our method has a
reduction of up to 6.4x on memory usage.

1. Introduction
With pervasive applications of medical imaging in
health-care, biomedical image segmentation has always
Corresponding author: bryanhu@hust.edu.cn; yshi4@nd.edu

been one of the most important tasks in biomedical imaging research. Biomedical image segmentation extracts different tissues, organs, pathologies, and biological structures, to support medical diagnosis, surgical planning and
treatments. In common practice, segmentation is performed
manually by pathologists, which is time-consuming and tedious. However, the ever-increasing quantity and variety of
medical images make manual segmentation impracticable
in terms of cost and reproducibility. Therefore, automatic biomedical image segmentation is highly desirable. But,
this task is very challenging, because of high variability in
medical images due to complex variations in biomedical objects and structures and because of low contrast, noise, and
other imaging artifacts caused by various medical imaging
modalities and techniques.
In the past years, substantial progress has been made on
biomedical image segmentation with pixel based methods
[8, 14, 21, 18] and structure based methods [1, 10, 9, 19].
These methods achieve promising results on nonmalignant
objects using hand-crafted features and prior knowledge of
structures. However, they suffer considerable degradation
when applied to malignant objects with serious deformation. Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs), particularly
fully convolutional networks (FCNs), have been highly effective for biomedical image segmentation, which require
little hand-crafted features or prior knowledge. Ronneberger et al. [16] proposed U-Net, a U-shaped deep convolutional network that adds a symmetric expanding path to enable
precise localization. With strong use of data augmentation,
this segmentation model achieves significant improvement over previous methods. The DCAN model by Chen et
al. [2, 3] added a unified multi-task object to the U-Net
learning framework, which won the 2015 MICCAI Gland
Segmentation Challenge [17]. Based on DCAN, Yang et al.
[26] proposed suggestive annotation which extracts representative samples as a training dataset, by adopting active
learning into their network design. With the refined training
samples and optimized structure for DNNs, suggestive annotation achieves state-of-the-art performance on the MICCAI Gland segmentation dataset [17].
18300

