Translating and Segmenting Multimodal Medical Volumes with Cycle- and
Shape-Consistency Generative Adversarial Network
Zizhao Zhang+∗ , Lin Yang+ , Yefeng Zheng∗
+
University of Florida
∗
Medical Imaging Technologies, Siemens Healthcare

Abstract
Synthesized medical images have several important applications, e.g., as an intermedium in cross-modality image
registration and as supplementary training samples to boost
the generalization capability of a classifier. Especially, synthesized computed tomography (CT) data can provide Xray attenuation map for radiation therapy planning. In
this work, we propose a generic cross-modality synthesis
approach with the following targets: 1) synthesizing realistic looking 3D images using unpaired training data, 2)
ensuring consistent anatomical structures, which could be
changed by geometric distortion in cross-modality synthesis
and 3) improving volume segmentation by using synthetic
data for modalities with limited training samples. We show
that these goals can be achieved with an end-to-end 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) composed of mutuallybeneficial generators and segmentors for image synthesis
and segmentation tasks. The generators are trained with an
adversarial loss, a cycle-consistency loss, and also a shapeconsistency loss, which is supervised by segmentors, to reduce the geometric distortion. From the segmentation view,
the segmentors are boosted by synthetic data from generators in an online manner. Generators and segmentors
prompt each other alternatively in an end-to-end training
fashion. With extensive experiments on a dataset including
a total of 4,496 CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
cardiovascular volumes, we show both tasks are beneficial
to each other and coupling these two tasks results in better
performance than solving them exclusively.

1. Introduction
In current clinical practice, multiple imaging modalities
may be available for disease diagnosis and surgical planning
[5]. For a specific patient group, a certain imaging modality
might be more popular than others. Due to the proliferation of multiple imaging modalities, there is a strong clinical need to develop a cross-modality image transfer analysis
system to assist clinical treatment, such as radiation therapy

CT

MRI

MRI

CT

Figure 1: Our method learns two parallel sets of generators GA/B and segmentors SA/B for two modalities A and
B to translate and segment holistic 3D volumes. Here we
illustrate using CT and MRI cardiovascular 3D images.
planning [4].
Machine learning (ML) based methods have been widely
used for medical image analysis [41, 40], including detection, segmentation, and tracking of an anatomical structure.
Such methods are often generic and can be extended from
one imaging modality to the other by re-training on the target imaging modality. However, a sufficient number of representative training images are required to achieve enough
robustness. In practice, it is often difficult to collect enough
training images, especially for a new imaging modality not
well established in clinical practice yet. Synthesized data
are often used to as supplementary training data in hope that
they can boost the generalization capability of a trained ML
model. This paper presents a novel method to address the
above-mentioned two demanding tasks (Figure 1). The first
is cross-modality translation and the second is improving
segmentation models by making use of synthesized data.
To synthesize medical images, recent advances [24, 6]
have used generative adversarial networks (GANs) [10] to
formulate it as an image-to-image translation task. These
methods require pixel-to-pixel correspondence between two
domain data to build direct cross-modality reconstruction.
19242

