SGPN: Similarity Group Proposal Network for 3D Point Cloud Instance
Segmentation

1

Weiyue Wang1
Ronald Yu2
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California

Qiangui Huang1
Ulrich Neumann1
2
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, California

{weiyuewa,qianguih,uneumann}@usc.edu

ronaldiscool@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce Similarity Group Proposal Network
(SGPN), a simple and intuitive deep learning framework for
3D object instance segmentation on point clouds. SGPN
uses a single network to predict point grouping proposals
and a corresponding semantic class for each proposal, from
which we can directly extract instance segmentation results.
Important to the effectiveness of SGPN is its novel representation of 3D instance segmentation results in the form of a
similarity matrix that indicates the similarity between each
pair of points in embedded feature space, thus producing
an accurate grouping proposal for each point. Experimental results on various 3D scenes show the effectiveness of
our method on 3D instance segmentation, and we also evaluate the capability of SGPN to improve 3D object detection
and semantic segmentation results. We also demonstrate
its flexibility by seamlessly incorporating 2D CNN features
into the framework to boost performance.

(a)

1. Introduction

(b)
(c)
Figure 1: Instance segmentation for point clouds using
SGPN. Different colors represent different instances. (a)
Instance segmentation on complete real scenes. (b) Single
object part instance segmentation. (c) Instance segmentation on point clouds obtained from partial scans.

Instance segmentation on 2D images have achieved
promising results recently [18, 10, 31, 23]. With the rise of
autonomous driving and robotics applications, the demand
for 3D scene understanding and the availability of 3D scene
data has rapidly increased in recently. Unfortunately, the
literature for 3D instance segmentation and object detection lags far behind its 2D counterpart; scene understanding
with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [44, 45, 11]
on 3D volumetric data is limited by high memory and computation cost. Recently, deep learning frameworks PointNet/Pointnet++ [33, 35] on point clouds open up more efficient and flexible ways to handle 3D data.
Following the pioneering works in 2D scene understanding, our goal is to develop a novel deep learning framework
trained end-to-end for 3D instance-aware semantic segmentation on point clouds that, like established baseline systems
for 2D scene understanding tasks, is intuitive, simple, flexi-

ble, and effective.
An important consideration for instance segmentation on
a point cloud is how to represent output results. Inspired by
the trend of predicting proposals for tasks with a variable
number of outputs, we introduce a Similarity Group Proposal Network (SGPN), which formulates group proposals
of object instances by learning a novel 3D instance segmentation representation in the form of a similarity matrix .
Our pipeline first uses PointNet/PointNet++ to extract a
descriptive feature vector for each point in the point cloud.
As a form of similarity metric learning, we enforce the idea
that points belonging to the same object instance should
have very similar features; hence we measure the distance
between the features of each pair of points in order to form
a similarity matrix that indicates whether any given pair of
12569

