Crowd Counting via Adversarial Cross-Scale Consistency Pursuit
Zan Shen1 , Yi Xu1 , Bingbing Ni1 , Minsi Wang1 , Jianguo Hu2 , Xiaokang Yang1
1
2
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science
Minivision
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
(sz128ve980, xuyi, nibingbing, xkyang)@sjtu.edu.cn, mswang1994@gmail.com, hujianguo@minivision.cn

Abstract

Count_1

2

Merged
feature Density
maps map

Count_2

3

4
Split

U-net structural G
High resolution
and high quality

G

Crowdnet

With the rapid increase of population of major cities,
crowd scene analysis [11, 33] has already become an important security technique in video surveillance [16, 20,
36]. However, generating high-quality crowd density map
(crowd count) is a challenging task due to complex illumination, severe occlusions, perspective distortions and diverse distributions of people sizes. Among them, scale variation problem is the major obstacle.
Recent CNN-based works [20, 37, 25] utilize multi-path
architectures to address the scale variation issue and have
achieved good improvements in crowd density estimation.

At present

Child patches

1

L2
loss

Input
image

Count_3

Count_4

Count_all’

Generated dmap
Ground truth

1. Introduction

Motivation 2:
Low resolution
and blur

7x7

Input image

Crowd counting or density estimation is a challenging
task in computer vision due to large scale variations, perspective distortions and serious occlusions, etc. Existing
methods generally suffer from two issues: 1) the model averaging effects in multi-scale CNNs induced by the widely
adopted ℓ2 regression loss; and 2) inconsistent estimation
across different scaled inputs. To explicitly address these
issues, we propose a novel crowd counting (density estimation) framework called Adversarial Cross-Scale Consistency Pursuit (ACSCP). On one hand, a U-net structured generation network is designed to generate density map from
input patch, and an adversarial loss is directly employed to
shrink the solution onto a realistic subspace, thus attenuating the blurry effects of density map estimation. On the
other hand, we design a novel scale-consistency regularizer which enforces that the sum up of the crowd counts
from local patches (i.e., small scale) is coherent with the
overall count of their region union (i.e., large scale). The
above losses are integrated via a joint training scheme, so
as to help boost density estimation performance by further
exploring the collaboration between both objectives. Extensive experiments on four benchmarks have well demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed innovations as well as
the superior performance over prior art.

Motivation 1:
Traditional

D

No tolerance to
blurry results

Adversarial Loss

Real
or
Fake

Count_all
Parent image

Cross-scale Inconsistency

Figure 1. Two motivations of our proposed algorithm: 1) Adversarial loss to “generate” density map for sharper and higher resolution; 2) Cross-scale consistency constraints.

Namely, different sizes of convolutional kernels are applied
to the input images to deal with different scaled humans, and the convolution maps from multiple-scale paths are
fused to yield the final density estimation. However, most
of these methods suffer inherent algorithmic drawbacks. On
one hand, only traditional Euclidean loss is employed to optimize these models, which is known to have certain disadvantages [10] such as sensitivity to outliers and image
blur. In particular, although different sizes of convolutional
kernels are used to extract multi-scale features, each subnetwork path attempts to minimize the regression loss independently (i.e., multi-scale model competition) and to
predict the correct density map for patches with all human
scales. As shown in Figure 1 Motivation 1, since each scalespecific sub-network can only work well on its corresponding scale and its performance drop drastically on other scales, it is easy to result in low-quality and blurry results.
On the other hand, most existing approaches do not explore
the coherence between the estimated density maps from different scales. Namely, the sum up of the crowd counts
from local patches (i.e., small scale) does NOT necessarily
correspond to the overall count of their region union (i.e.,
large scale) as shown in Figure 1 Motivation 2. Further, as
most algorithms employ sliding window scheme, accumulation of boundary loss of local patches will affect the global
crowd count. It is thus demanding to develop a cross-scale
consistency regularization scheme which is beneficial for
further improving crowd density estimation.
15245

