RoadTracer: Automatic Extraction of Road Networks from Aerial Images
Favyen Bastani1 , Songtao He1 , Sofiane Abbar2 , Mohammad Alizadeh1 , Hari Balakrishnan1 ,
Sanjay Chawla2 , Sam Madden1 , David DeWitt1
1
MIT CSAIL, 2 Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU
1
{fbastani,songtao,alizadeh,hari,madden,dewitt}@csail.mit.edu, 2 {sabbar,schawla}@hbku.edu.qa
Abstract
Mapping road networks is currently both expensive and
labor-intensive. High-resolution aerial imagery provides a
promising avenue to automatically infer a road network.
Prior work uses convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to
detect which pixels belong to a road (segmentation), and
then uses complex post-processing heuristics to infer graph
connectivity. We show that these segmentation methods
have high error rates because noisy CNN outputs are difficult to correct. We propose RoadTracer, a new method to
automatically construct accurate road network maps from
aerial images. RoadTracer uses an iterative search process guided by a CNN-based decision function to derive the
road network graph directly from the output of the CNN.
We compare our approach with a segmentation method on
fifteen cities, and find that at a 5% error rate, RoadTracer
correctly captures 45% more junctions across these cities.

1. Introduction
Creating and updating road maps is a tedious, expensive,
and often manual process today [11]. Accurate and up-todate maps are especially important given the popularity of
location-based mobile services and the impending arrival
of autonomous vehicles. Several companies are investing
hundreds of millions of dollars on mapping the world, but
despite this investment, error rates are not small in practice, with map providers receiving many tens of thousands
of error reports per day.1 In fact, even obtaining “ground
truth” maps in well-traveled areas may be difficult; recent
work [10] reported that the discrepancy between OpenStreetMap (OSM) and the TorontoCity dataset was 14%
(the recall according to a certain metric for OSM was 0.86).
Aerial imagery provides a promising avenue to automatically infer the road network graph. In practice, however, extracting maps from aerial images is difficult because of occlusion by trees, buildings, and shadows (see
1 See, e.g., https://productforums.google.com/forum/
#!topic/maps/dwtCso9owlU for an example of a city (Doha, Qatar)
where maps have been missing entire subdivisions for years.

Figure 1. Occlusions by trees, buildings, and shadows make it hard
even for humans to infer road connectivity from images.

Figure 1). Prior approaches do not handle these problems
well. Almost universally, they begin by segmenting the image, classifying each pixel in the input as either road or
non-road [5, 10]. They then implement a complex postprocessing pipeline to interpret the segmentation output and
extract topological structure to construct a map. As we will
demonstrate, noise frequently appears in the segmentation
output, making it hard for the post-processing steps to produce an accurate result.
The fundamental problem with a segmentation-based approach is that the CNN is trained only to provide local information about the presence of roads. Key decisions on how
road segments are inter-connected to each other are delegated to an error-prone post-processing stage that relies on
heuristics instead of machine learning or principled algorithms. Rather than rely on an intermediate image representation, we seek an approach that produces the road network
directly from the CNN. However, it is not obvious how to
train a CNN to learn to produce a graph from images.
We propose RoadTracer, an approach that uses an iterative graph construction process for extracting graph structures from images. Our approach constructs the road network by adding individual road segments one at a time, using a novel CNN architecture to decide on the next segment
to add given as input the portion of the network constructed
so far. In this way, we eliminate the intermediate image
representation of the road network, and avoid the need for
14720

