Image Super-Resolution via Dual-State Recurrent Networks
Wei Han1∗, Shiyu Chang2∗, Ding Liu1†, Mo Yu2 , Michael Witbrock2 , Thomas S. Huang1†
1 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 IBM Research
{weihan3, dingliu2, t-huang1}@illinois.edu,
shiyu.chang@ibm.com, {yum,witbrock}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Advances in image super-resolution (SR) have recently
benefited significantly from rapid developments in deep
neural networks. Inspired by these recent discoveries, we
note that many state-of-the-art deep SR architectures can
be reformulated as a single-state recurrent neural network
(RNN) with finite unfoldings. In this paper, we explore new
structures for SR based on this compact RNN view, leading
us to a dual-state design, the Dual-State Recurrent Network
(DSRN). Compared to its single-state counterparts that operate at a fixed spatial resolution, DSRN exploits both lowresolution (LR) and high-resolution (HR) signals jointly.
Recurrent signals are exchanged between these states in
both directions (both LR to HR and HR to LR) via delayed feedback. Extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations on benchmark datasets and on a recent challenge
demonstrate that the proposed DSRN performs favorably
against state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of both memory consumption and predictive accuracy. The code for our
method is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
In the problem of single-image super-resolution (SR),
the aim is to recover a high-resolution (HR) image from a
single low-resolution (LR) image. In recent years, SR performance has been significantly improved due to rapid developments in deep neural networks (DNNs). Specifically,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and residual learning [16] have been widely applied in much recent SR work
[10, 12, 20, 21, 22, 25, 35, 38].
In these approaches, two principles have been consistently observed. The first is that increasing the depth of
a CNN model improves SR performance; a deeper model
with more parameters can represent a more complex map∗ Authors contributed equally to this work
† Ding Liu and Thomas Huang’s research works are supported in part
by US Army Research Office grant W911NF-15-1-0317.
1 https://github.com/weihan3/dsrn

ping from LR to HR images. In addition, increasing network depth enlarges the size of receptive fields, providing
more contextual information that can be exploited to reconstruct missing HR components. The second principle is that
adding residual connections (globally [20], locally [21] or
jointly [35]) prevents the problems of vanishing and exploding gradients, facilitating the training of deep models.
While these recent models have demonstrated promising
results, there are also drawbacks. One major issue is that
increasing the depth of models by adding new layers introduces more parameters, and thus raises the likelihood of
model overfitting. At the same time, larger models demand
more storage space, which is a hurdle to deployment in
resource-constrained environments (e.g. mobile systems).
To resolve this issue, the Deep Recursive Residual Network
(DRRN) [35] inspired by the Deeply-Recursive Convolutional Network (DRCN) [21] shares weights across different residual units and achieves state-of-the-art performance
with a small number of parameters.
Separate efforts [6, 24, 39] in neural architectural design
have recently shown that commonly-used deep structures
can be represented more compactly using recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Specifically, Liao and Poggio [24]
demonstrated that a weight-sharing Residual Neural Network (ResNet) [16] is equivalent to a shallow RNN. Inspired by their findings, we first explore the connections
between the neural architectures of existing SR algorithms
and their compact RNN formulations. We note that previous
SR models with recursive computation and weight sharing,
including DRRN and DRCN, work at a single spatial resolution (bicubic interpolation is first applied to upscale LR
images to a desired spatial resolution). This enables their
model structures to be represented as a unified single-state
RNN. Thus, both DRRN and DRCN can be viewed as a finite unfolding in time of the same RNN structure, but with
different transition functions. This is illustrated in Figure 1,
and will be discussed in detail in Section 3. It is worth mentioning that we follow the terminology used in [24], where
a “state” can be considered as corresponding to a “layer” in
the normal RNN setting.
11654

