DeepMVS: Learning Multi-view Stereopsis
Po-Han Huang1

Kevin Matzen2

Johannes Kopf2

Narendra Ahuja1

Jia-Bin Huang3

1 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

2 Facebook

3 Virginia Tech

{phuang17,n-ahuja}@illinois.edu

{matzen,jkopf}@fb.com

jbhuang@vt.edu

(a) Input

(b) Deep multi-view stereo

(c) Sample reconstruction results

Figure 1. (a) Our network takes a set of images with known camera poses and calibration as input; (b) we produce a set of plane-sweep
volumes for a reference view and feed these into a convolutional neural network that predicts a disparity map; (c) our network produces
high-quality disparity maps even for challenging cases containing poorly textured regions and thin structures.

Abstract
We present DeepMVS, a deep convolutional neural network (ConvNet) for multi-view stereo reconstruction. Taking an arbitrary number of posed images as input, we first
produce a set of plane-sweep volumes and use the proposed
DeepMVS network to predict high-quality disparity maps.
The key contributions that enable these results are (1) supervised pretraining on a photorealistic synthetic dataset,
(2) an effective method for aggregating information across a
set of unordered images, and (3) integrating multi-layer feature activations from the pre-trained VGG-19 network. We
validate the efficacy of DeepMVS using the ETH3D Benchmark. Our results show that DeepMVS compares favorably against state-of-the-art conventional MVS algorithms
and other ConvNet based methods, particularly for neartextureless regions and thin structures.

1. Introduction
Multi-view Stereo (MVS) methods aim at reconstructing disparity maps from a collection of images with known
camera poses and calibration, possibly estimated using

Structure from Motion (SFM) algorithms.1 MVS is one of
the fundamental computer vision problems that have seen
decades of research and it is a core component in numerous
important applications, including 3D reconstruction, novel
view synthesis, augmented reality, and medical imaging [9].
Conventional MVS algorithms often estimate the disparity map by computing plane-sweep volumes and optimizing
photometric consistency with handcrafted error functions to
measure similarity between patches [9]. Aside from photometric consistency, other 3D cues such as lighting [39, 24],
shadows [1], color [11], geometric structures [7], and semantic cues [14] have been incorporated into the MVS
pipeline for improving the reconstruction accuracy. However, designing algorithms that make explicit use of all these
cues is a non-trivial task. Despite extensive research, the
results of state-of-the-art MVS algorithms often still contain numerous artifacts, in particular around poorly textured
regions, thin structures, and reflective or transparent surfaces [9].
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) have
shown great success in many visual recognition tasks including image classification [23] and object detection [12],
as well as in dense pixel-level prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation [25] and optical flow [4, 16].
1 Throughout this work, we always refer to “disparities” rather than
“depths”. Disparities are defined as the reciprocal of depths.

2821

