Coding Kendall’s Shape Trajectories for 3D Action Recognition
Amor Ben Tanfous
Hassen Drira
Boulbaba Ben Amor
IMT Lille Douai, Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 9189 – CRIStAL –
Centre de Recherche en Informatique Signal et Automatique de Lille, F-59000 Lille, France
omar.bentanfous@imt-lille-douai.fr

Abstract
Suitable shape representations as well as their temporal
evolution, termed trajectories, often lie to non-linear manifolds. This puts an additional constraint (i.e., non-linearity)
in using conventional machine learning techniques for the
purpose of classification, event detection, prediction, etc.
This paper accommodates the well-known Sparse Coding
and Dictionary Learning to the Kendall’s shape space and
illustrates effective coding of 3D skeletal sequences for action recognition. Grounding on the Riemannian geometry of
the shape space, an intrinsic sparse coding and dictionary
learning formulation is proposed for static skeletal shapes
to overcome the inherent non-linearity of the manifold. As
a main result, initial trajectories give rise to sparse code
functions with suitable computational properties, including
sparsity and vector space representation. To achieve action recognition, two different classification schemes were
adopted. A bi-directional LSTM is directly performed on
sparse code functions, while a linear SVM is applied after
representing sparse code functions using Fourier temporal
pyramid. Experiments conducted on three publicly available datasets show the superiority of the proposed approach
compared to existing Riemannian representations and its
competitiveness with respect to other recently-proposed approaches. When the benefits of invariance are maintained
from the Kendall’s shape representation, our approach not
only overcomes the problem of non-linearity but also yields
to discriminative sparse code functions.

1. Introduction
The availability of cost-effective and real-time human
body skeletal data estimation solutions [33] has pushed researchers to study their shape as well as their temporal evolution. In particular, the problem of action recognition from
3D skeletons has received a particular attention with the
availability of several datasets and end-users applications
as gaming, Human Machine Interaction, and physical performance assessment, to cite a few. However, human ac-

tions observed from visual sensors are often subject to view
variations. Considering this problem, an efficient way for
analyzing 3D skeleton motions takes into account viewinvariance properties, giving rise to shape representations
often lying to non-linear shape spaces [2, 3, 25]. For instance, Kendall [25] defines the shape as the geometric information that remains when location, scale, and rotational
effects are filtered out from an object. Accordingly, we represent 3D skeletons as points in the Kendall’s shape space,
considering skeletal sequences as trajectories [2]. However,
inferencing such a shape representation remains a challenging problem due to the non-linearity of the manifold of interest. For example, the use of standard data coding (e.g.,
sparse coding, PCA, etc.) and machine learning techniques
(e.g., dictionary learning, SVM, deep learning, etc.) is not
straightforward. The problem is even more acute with the
introduction of the temporal dimension, i.e., analyzing trajectories in Kendall’s shape space. In the literature, two
alternatives have been proposed to overcome these problems for different Riemannian manifolds – they are either
Extrinsic [17, 20, 23, 27] or Intrinsic [4, 5, 21, 22]. When
the first family is based on the embedding into high dimensional Hilbert spaces, the second maps points on the manifold to a fixed tangent space attached to the manifold at a
reference point. In the second family, the main issue is that
distortions are introduced when points are not close to the
reference point [1, 2, 35]. In this work, we propose an intrinsic solution to overcome the problem of non-linearity of
the Kendall’s shape space while avoiding mapping points to
a fixed tangent space at a reference point.
Motivated by the success of sparse representations in
several recognition tasks [6, 11, 17, 21], we propose to
represent human actions using an intrinsic formulation of
sparse coding and dictionary learning of skeletal shapes in
the Kendall’s shape space. Specifically, a 3D skeletal shape
is coded on its attached tangent space where the dictionary
of shapes is mapped. Hence, for each trajectory, this representation gives rise to a function of sparse codes lying in
Euclidean space. By doing so, we handle the problem of
non-linearity of the manifold without mapping points to a

2840

