Non-blind Deblurring: Handling Kernel Uncertainty with CNNs
Subeesh Vasu1 , Venkatesh Reddy Maligireddy2 , A. N. Rajagopalan3
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
subeeshvasu@gmail.com1 , venkateshmalgireddy@gmail.com2 raju@ee.iitm.ac.in3

Abstract
Blind motion deblurring methods are primarily responsible for recovering an accurate estimate of the blur kernel.
Non-blind deblurring (NBD) methods, on the other hand,
attempt to faithfully restore the original image, given the
blur estimate. However, NBD is quite susceptible to errors
in blur kernel. In this work, we present a convolutional neural network-based approach to handle kernel uncertainty
in non-blind motion deblurring. We provide multiple latent
image estimates corresponding to different prior strengths
obtained from a given blurry observation in order to exploit
the complementarity of these inputs for improved learning.
To generalize the performance to tackle arbitrary kernel
noise, we train our network with a large number of real
and synthetic noisy blur kernels. Our network mitigates
the effects of kernel noise so as to yield detail-preserving
and artifact-free restoration. Our quantitative and qualitative evaluations on benchmark datasets demonstrate that
the proposed method delivers state-of-the-art results. To
further underscore the benefits that can be achieved from
our network, we propose two adaptations of our method to
improve kernel estimates, and image deblurring quality, respectively.

1. Introduction
Motion blur is a common and unpleasant corruption that
occurs in hand-held photography and is difficult to undo.
Blind image deblurring methods aim to recover the blur kernel as well as the clean image. Since the dimension of the
kernel is much smaller than the image size, one can better
constrain the estimation of the blur kernel rather than the
image [21]. Hence, most existing blind deblurring (BD) approaches [10, 5, 38, 17, 40, 32, 35, 25] try to recover an
accurate motion estimate from the blurred image [19]. This
is eventually used to recover the latent image using an offthe-shelf non-blind deblurring (NBD) method.
The objective of NBD is to recover a sharp latent image from a known blurred image and a given blur estimate.
Over the last decade, there has been significant progress

in this direction. Recent works [21, 16, 44] have come
up with new image priors that can model the statistics of
natural images which helps in suppressing ringing artifacts.
Few works have even attempted to handle outliers such as
noise [6, 7, 39, 14] and saturated regions [6, 39] to improve
the quality of the deblurred result. Most of the existing
non-blind methods are tailored to perform well under the
assumption that the motion is known accurately. Consequently, they tend to underperform when the motion estimate is noisy. Because of the highly ill-posed nature of BD,
an approach that can deliver accurate (close to ground truth)
motion estimate is still far from reality [19]. The blur estimates from BD come with varying degrees of noise which
can introduce unacceptable artifacts in the restored output.
In this paper, our focus is on improving restoration quality in the presence of noisy blur kernel. The approach
that we propose consists of a conventional non-blind deblurring unit followed by a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) to remove undesired artifacts caused by errors
in motion estimate. Recent works on single image restoration ([8, 9, 39]) have already revealed the potential of CNN
based feature learning. The fact that we need discriminatory
feature learning from multiple inputs renders CNN as a natural choice. Our approach is based on the premise that deblurred images obtained with different prior strengths carry
complementary information. The complementarity lies in
the fact that restored images with low prior weight preserve details but suffer from artifacts. On the other hand,
a large prior weight helps in artifact removal but at the cost
of image details. Hence, we are motivated to use multiple
images obtained from the same blurred image-kernel pair,
but with different prior strengths as inputs to our network.
This we believe allows the network to perform better feature discrimination and restoration as compared to the single input image case. To handle arbitrary kernel noise, we
also propose an approach to generate synthetic noisy kernels that can closely mimic the behavior of noise in real
kernel estimates. We employ thousands of such synthetic
noise kernels to improve the performance of our network
and its generalization capability. Finally, as natural benefits
that stem from our framework we advocate two adaptations

3272

