Textbook Question Answering under Instructor Guidance
with Memory Networks
Juzheng Li1
Hang Su1
Jun Zhu1
Siyu Wang2
Bo Zhang1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua Lab of Brain and Intelligence
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, BNRist Lab
1,2
Tsinghua University, 100084 China
lijuzheng09@gmail.com; {suhangss,dcszj,dcszb}@tsinghua.edu.cn; siyuwang19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Lessons in TQA
The Nervous System

Textbook Question Answering (TQA) is a task to choose
the most proper answers by reading a multi-modal context of abundant essays and images. TQA serves as a favorable test bed for visual and textual reasoning. However, most of the current methods are incapable of reasoning over the long contexts and images. To address this issue, we propose a novel approach of Instructor Guidance
with Memory Networks (IGMN) which conducts the TQA
task by finding contradictions between the candidate answers and their corresponding context. We build the Contradiction Entity-Relationship Graph (CERG) to extend the
passage-level multi-modal contradictions to an essay level.
The machine thus performs as an instructor to extract the
essay-level contradictions as the Guidance. Afterwards, we
exploit the memory networks to capture the information in
the Guidance, and use the attention mechanisms to jointly
reason over the global features of the multi-modal input.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-arts on the TQA dataset. The source
code is available at https://github.com/freerailway/igmn.

1. Introduction
Question Answering (QA) has been a significant research branch in natural language processing (NLP) in the
past decades [13], which aims to answer questions given
a specific textual narrative. Thanks to the availability of
large-scale QA datasets with additional visual supporting
information [23, 34, 2], Visual Question Answering (VQA)
has attracted a substantial interest from the community of
computer vision [10, 30, 8]. Recently, a new task of Textbook Question Answering (TQA) is proposed which aims to
answer arbitrary questions by reading a large context [16].
Different from the machine comprehension with languages
or visual question answering with images, TQA consists

Psychoactive drugs
Many drugs affect the brain and influence how
a person feels, thinks, or acts. Such drugs are
called psychoactive drugs. They include legal
drugs such as caffeine and alcohol, as well as
illegal drugs such as cocaine and heroin.

Questions
LSTM

CNN

Deep Neural Networks

Memories

Motor division
Sensory division

Contradictions
The amazing human brain

Instructor
Guidance

Semantic
Rules in
Contradiction
Categories

● ━━━━━━━━
━━━━━━
● ━━━━━━━━
━━━━
● ━━━━━━

Expert Knowledge

The frontal cortex is in front of?
a. Striatum
b. VTA
c. Nucleus accumbens
d. Substantia nigra
Identify the axon
a. V
b. D
c. P
d. S
How do nerve impulses travel across a
synapse?
a. They swim across through synaptic fluid.
b. They are carried across by special
chemicals.
c. They jump across like an electric spark.
d. They move across through interneurons.

TQA under Instructor Guidance

Figure 1: An example for the TQA task. Given a multi-model context (e.g.,
abundant essays and images), the instructor first extracts the local features,
following categories of contradictions to provide the Guidance. Then the
attention-based memory networks jointly reason from the global features
and the Guidance to obtain the most proper choice for each question.

of abundant essays and images and it requires to learn and
comprehend multi-modal sources of information across text
documents and images, as illustrated in Figure 1. TQA
therefore connects computer vision and natural language
processing and pushes forward boundaries of both fields.
The TQA task brings new challenges. As the most distinctive characteristic, TQA uses long essays to describe
concepts. For example, the essays in TQA have an average
length of 1800 words. Most of the previous models for textual machine comprehension (e.g., bidirectional attention
flow mechanism [24], the multi-layer embedding method
with memory networks [21] and the R-Net [28]) can cope
with passages with about 300 words. The existing methods are not eligible for such long essays even if additional
attention, selection or truncation mechanisms are applied,
because the facts to answer a question are often dispersed
in the essay in the TQA task [16].
We notice that recent machine comprehension systems
witness a progress on syntax and semantic analysis for abstracting over the word order differences [27, 4, 31]. How13655

