3D Object Detection with Latent Support Surfaces
Zhile Ren
Brown University

Erik B. Sudderth
University of California, Irvine

ren@cs.brown.edu

sudderth@uci.edu

Abstract
We develop a 3D object detection algorithm that uses
latent support surfaces to capture contextual relationships
in indoor scenes. Existing 3D representations for RGB-D
images capture the local shape and appearance of object
categories, but have limited power to represent objects with
different visual styles. The detection of small objects is also
challenging because the search space is very large in 3D
scenes. However, we observe that much of the shape variation within 3D object categories can be explained by the
location of a latent support surface, and smaller objects
are often supported by larger objects. Therefore, we explicitly use latent support surfaces to better represent the
3D appearance of large objects, and provide contextual
cues to improve the detection of small objects. We evaluate
our model with 19 object categories from the SUN RGB-D
database, and demonstrate state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Object detection, typically formalized as the 2D labeling of image pixels, is one of the most widely studied semantic scene understanding problems [14, 33, 19]. Recent advances in direct depth sensing technologies have
in turn enabled more accurate algorithms for 3D segmentation [29, 30, 1], reconstruction [6], synthesis [41], autonomous driving [12], and 3D object detection [40, 34].
Given an RGB-D image, the goal of 3D object detection is to recover 3D bounding boxes that capture the cubical space that objects occupy in the scene. Such representations are more powerful than 2D bounding boxes.
In indoor scenes, 3D bounding boxes encode the spatial
extent of objects, which can help autonomous robots better interact with their environment. In outdoor scenes,
3D bounding boxes also contain information about object
orientation that is crucial for autonomous driving applications [4]. Previous work has described 3D scenes via a
holistic contextual CRF model [25], or aligned CAD models
to point cloud data [39, 17] in the small-scale NYU Depth
dataset [37]. The larger-scale SUN RGB-D dataset [38] has

enabled more recent methods that use deep neural networks
to efficiently propose and categorize objects [40, 8, 23],
or more accurately categorize objects via the viewpointinvariant cloud of oriented gradient (COG) descriptor [34].
However, existing 3D detection algorithms suffer some
common problems. Given diverse objects in the same category, modeling different visual styles is often very challenging [10], and ground truth annotations of 3D cuboids can
vary among different human annotators (see Fig. 1). Moreover, objects with smaller physical size are hard to detect
because the search space in the whole scene is very big, and
bottom-up proposals typically contain many false positives.
State-of-the-art 3D object features, such as COG [34]
and TSDF [40], are calculated for a grid of voxels within
each hypothesized 3D cuboid. A major cause of feature inconsistency across different object instances is variation in
the location of the supporting surface contained by many
indoor objects. We treat the height of the support surface
as a latent variable, and use it to distinguish different visual
styles of the same object category.
Modeling support surface can also help detect smaller
objects like monitors, lamps, TVs, and pillows. Since small
objects are typically placed on the supporting surfaces of
large objects, we first detect large objects on the ground and
predict their support surface location, and then search for
small objects on top of support surface areas. The reduced
search space for small objects naturally reduces false positives and improves performance.
Building on the cascaded 3D scene understanding framework of Ren et al. [34], the contributions of this paper include the introduction of new 3D view features that improve
3D detection systems, the modeling of support surfaces as
latent variables capturing intra-class variation for large objects, and the use of support surfaces to more accurately detect small objects. We evaluate our algorithm on the SUN
RGB-D dataset [38] and achieve state-of-the-art accuracy in
the 3D detection of 19 object categories.

2. Related Work
2D Object detection We highlight some of the most
related work in the rich literature on object detection.

937

