Neural Kinematic Networks for Unsupervised Motion Retargetting
Ruben Villegas 1,*
1

Jimei Yang 2
Duygu Ceylan 2
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2
Adobe Research
3
Google Brain

Honglak Lee 1,3

Target Character 2

Target Character 1

Input Motion

Time

Figure 1: Our end-to-end method retargets a given input motion (top row), to new characters with different bone lengths and
proportions, (middle and bottom row). The target characters are never seen performing the input motion during training.

Abstract
We propose a recurrent neural network architecture with
a Forward Kinematics layer and cycle consistency based
adversarial training objective for unsupervised motion retargetting. Our network captures the high-level properties
of an input motion by the forward kinematics layer, and
adapts them to a target character with different skeleton
bone lengths (e.g., shorter, longer arms etc.). Collecting
paired motion training sequences from different characters
is expensive. Instead, our network utilizes cycle consistency
to learn to solve the Inverse Kinematics problem in an unsupervised manner. Our method works online, i.e., it adapts
the motion sequence on-the-fly as new frames are received.
In our experiments, we use the Mixamo animation data 1 to
test our method for a variety of motions and characters and
achieve state-of-the-art results. We also demonstrate motion
retargetting from monocular human videos to 3D characters
using an off-the-shelf 3D pose estimator.
* Most of this work was done during Ruben’s internship at Adobe.
1 https://www.mixamo.com. See details in Section 5.

1. Introduction
Imitation is an important learning scheme for agents to
acquire motor control skills [32]. It is often formulated as
learning from expert demonstrations with access to sample
trajectories of state-action pairs [3, 15]. However, this firstperson imitation assumption may not always hold since 1)
the teacher and the learner may have different physical structures, e.g., a human being vs a humanoid robot [4, 33] and
2) the learner may only observe the states of the teacher,
e.g. joint positions, but not the actions that generate these
states [28]. Adapting the motion of the teacher, e.g., a person,
to the learner, e.g., a humanoid robot [2] or an avatar [34, 27],
is often referred as motion retargetting in robotics and computer animation. This paper focuses on retargetting motions
from a source to any target character with a known but different kinematic structure in terms of bone lengths and proportions. Skeletal differences between the source and target
characters create the necessity of disentangling skeletonindependent features of the source motion and automatically
adapting them to a target character in one shot, ideally without any post-processing optimization and hand-tuning steps.

8639

