Seeing Small Faces from Robust Anchor’s Perspective
Chenchen Zhu

Ran Tao
Khoa Luu
Marios Savvides
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

{chenchez, rant, kluu, marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel anchor design principle
to support anchor-based face detection for superior scaleinvariant performance, especially on tiny faces. To achieve
this, we explicitly address the problem that anchor-based
detectors drop performance drastically on faces with tiny
sizes, e.g. less than 16 × 16 pixels. In this paper, we investigate why this is the case. We discover that current anchor design cannot guarantee high overlaps between tiny
faces and anchor boxes, which increases the difficulty of
training. The new Expected Max Overlapping (EMO) score
is proposed which can theoretically explain the low overlapping issue and inspire several effective strategies of new
anchor design leading to higher face overlaps, including
anchor stride reduction with new network architectures, extra shifted anchors, and stochastic face shifting. Comprehensive experiments show that our proposed method significantly outperforms the baseline anchor-based detector,
while consistently achieving state-of-the-art results on challenging face detection datasets with competitive runtime
speed.

1. Introduction
Face detection plays an important role in many facial
analysis tasks [1, 37, 21]. Starting from the traditional face
detectors with hand-crafted features [36, 51, 8, 45, 16], the
modern detectors [42, 17, 27, 47] have been dramatically
improved thanks to the robust and discriminative features
from deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [33, 10].
Current state-of-the-art face detectors are designed using
anchor-based deep CNNs [50, 11, 44, 26, 48], inspired by
the techniques from popular object detectors [20, 30, 4].
Anchor-based detectors quantize the continuous space of
all possible face bounding boxes on the image plane into the
discrete space of a set of pre-defined anchor boxes that serve
as references. The Intersection-over-Union (IoU) overlap is
used for evaluating the similarity between anchor boxes and
face boxes. During training, each face is matched with one

(a) Recall Rate-Face Scale

(b) Average IoU-Face Scale

(c) Baseline anchors (yellow) vs. our anchors (red) with higher face IoUs

Figure 1. Problems of current anchor-based detectors and our
solution. (a): A baseline anchor-based detector, trained and evaluated on the Wider Face dataset (see Section 5.1 for details), has
significantly lower recall rate at IoU of 0.5 on tiny faces (16 × 16)
than larger faces. (b): Maximum IoU with anchors is computed
for each face and averaged in each scale group, showing positive
correlation with the recall rate across the scales. (c): Visualization
of the anchor boxes with highest IoUs for each face. Our anchors
have much higher IoU with faces than the baseline anchor. Right
side shows an enlarged example. (Best viewed in color)

or several close anchors. Matched anchors are trained to
output high confidence scores and then regress to groundtruth boxes. During inference, faces in a testing image are
detected by classifying and regressing anchors.
Although anchor-based detectors have shown success in
handling shape and appearance invariance [6, 19], their capabilities in handling scale invariance is not satisfactory. On
the other hand, faces can be captured at any size in images.
In addition to heavy occlusion, extreme pose and low illumination, very small faces have become one of the most
challenging problems in robust face detection. Figure 1(a)
15127

