Bidirectional Retrieval Made Simple
Jônatas Wehrmann
School of Technology
Pontifı́cia Universidade Católica
do Rio Grande do Sul

Rodrigo C. Barros
School of Technology
Pontifı́cia Universidade Católica
do Rio Grande do Sul

jonatas.wehrmann@acad.pucrs.br

rodrigo.barros@pucrs.br

Abstract
This paper provides a very simple yet effective characterlevel architecture for learning bidirectional retrieval models. Aligning multimodal content is particularly challenging considering the difficulty in finding semantic correspondence between images and descriptions. We introduce an
efficient character-level inception module, designed to learn
textual semantic embeddings by convolving raw characters
in distinct granularity levels. Our approach is capable of
explicitly encoding hierarchical information from distinct
base-level representations (e.g., characters, words, and sentences) into a shared multimodal space, where it maps
the semantic correspondence between images and descriptions via a contrastive pairwise loss function that minimizes
order-violations. Models generated by our approach are far
more robust to input noise than state-of-the-art strategies
based on word-embeddings. Despite being conceptually
much simpler and requiring fewer parameters, our models
outperform the state-of-the-art approaches by 4.8% in the
task of description retrieval and 2.7% (absolute R@1 values) in the task of image retrieval in the popular MS COCO
retrieval dataset. We also show that our models present
solid performance for text classification, specially in multilingual and noisy domains.

1. Introduction
The problem that we address in this paper is bidirectional
retrieval, also regarded as multimodal content retrieval or
image-text alignment. In this scenario, the main target is to
retrieve content from a modality (e.g., image) given some
input content from another modality (e.g., textual description). Several important applications benefit from successful retrieval strategies, such as image and video retrieval,
captioning [23, 30], and navigation for the blind.
State-of-the-art results for bidirectional retrieval [5,
10, 29, 31] are based on networks trained over wordembeddings [20] that encode the sentences with either Re-

current Neural Networks (LSTMs [9], GRUs [3]) or with
handcrafted non-linear transformations such as Fisher vectors [16]. Despite showing promising results, these strategies present several drawbacks. First, they are costly due to
the need of training word-embeddings within a latent space
to capture semantic relationships among words. Second,
it takes a considerable amount of storage and memory for
dealing with these embeddings depending on the size of the
dictionary, in which often larger is better in terms of results.
We address those two problems by proposing an approach that does not rely on RNNs or handcrafted transformations over pre-trained word-embeddings. Our architecture learns from scratch, in a character basis, how to retrieve
descriptions from images and images from descriptions, and
for that it relies exclusively on convolutional layers. It does
not make assumptions on specific templates, guidelines, or
previous knowledge since it learns everything from scratch
using the available training data.
Bearing in mind that bidirectional retrieval can be seen
as a special case of a single visual-semantic hierarchy over
words, sentences, and images, we employ a loss function
based on order embeddings [29], which are designed to
model the partial order structure of the visual-semantic hierarchy existing in image descriptions. While typical strategies for bidirectional retrieval rely on distance-preserving
strategies, our approach performs order-preserving optimization, making the process of relating the naturallyhierarchical concepts within descriptions much easier.
We perform thorough experiments in order to evaluate
multiple aspects of our architecture. In particular, we analyze the impact of using (1) distinct number of filters;
(2) depth-wise convolutions; and (3) distinct latent embedding size. Moreover, we measure the robustness of our approach to input noise. We compare our proposed architecture with the current state-of-the-art approaches in the wellknown MS COCO [17] retrieval dataset, and we show that
it outperforms all other approaches while presenting a much
lighter and simpler retrieval architecture. Finally, we show
that our models perform well for text classification tasks.

7718

