Egocentric Basketball Motion Planning
from a Single First-Person Image
Gedas Bertasius
University of Pennsylvania

Aaron Chan
University of Southern California

Jianbo Shi
University of Pennsylvania

gberta@seas.upenn.edu

chanaaro@usc.edu

jshi@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We present a model that uses a single first-person image to generate an egocentric basketball motion sequence
in the form of a 12D camera configuration trajectory, which
encodes a player’s 3D location and 3D head orientation
throughout the sequence. To do this, we first introduce a
future convolutional neural network (CNN) that predicts an
initial sequence of 12D camera configurations, aiming to
capture how real players move during a one-on-one basketball game. We also introduce a goal verifier network, which
is trained to verify that a given camera configuration is consistent with the final goals of real one-on-one basketball
players. Next, we propose an inverse synthesis procedure
to synthesize a refined sequence of 12D camera configurations that (1) sufficiently matches the initial configurations
predicted by the future CNN, while (2) maximizing the output of the goal verifier network. Finally, by following the
trajectory resulting from the refined camera configuration
sequence, we obtain the complete 12D motion sequence.
Our model generates realistic basketball motion sequences that capture the goals of real players, outperforming standard deep learning approaches such as recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), long short-term memory networks
(LSTMs), and generative adversarial networks (GANs).

1. Introduction
Consider LeBron James, arguably the greatest basketball player in the world today. People often speculate about
which of his traits contributes most to his success as a basketball player. Some may point to his extraordinary athleticism, while others may credit his polished basketball
mechanics (i.e., his ability to accurately pass and shoot
the ball). While both of these characteristics are certainly
important, there seems to be a general consensus, among
sports pundits and casual fans alike, that what makes LeBron truly exceptional is his ability to make the right decision at the right time in almost any basketball situation.
Now, imagine yourself inside the dynamic scene shown
in Figure 1, where, as a basketball player, you need to make

1-on-1 Basketball Game

Input: Initial First-Person View

First-Person
Camera

Sparsely Reconstructed 3D Scene

Basket
Defender

First-Person Camera
on the Player

Basketball Court
Output: Generated 12D Camera Configuration Trajectory

Figure 1: Given a single first-person image from a one-onone basketball game, we aim to generate an egocentric basketball motion sequence in the form of a 12D first-person
camera configuration trajectory, which encodes a player’s
3D location and 3D head orientation. In this example, we
visualize our generated motion sequence within a sparse 3D
reconstruction of an indoor basketball court.
a series of moves to outmaneuver your defender and score a
basket. In doing so, you must evaluate your position on the
court, your defender’s stance, your defender’s court position
relative to the basket, and many other factors, if you want to
maximize your probability of scoring. For instance, if you
observe that your defender is positioned close to you and
leaning more heavily on his right leg, you might exploit this
situation by taking a swift left jab-step followed by a hard
right drive to the basket, throwing your defender off balance
and earning you an easy layup. However, if your defender
is standing farther away from you, you may decide to take
a few dribbles into an area where your defender cannot get
to you quickly, before stopping for a jump-shot. These are
all complex decisions that have to be made within a split
second – doing this consistently well is challenging.
15889

