Generalized Zero-Shot Learning via Synthesized Examples
Vinay Kumar Verma1,∗, Gundeep Arora1,∗, Ashish Mishra† and Piyush Rai∗
∗
†
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
{vkverma,gundeep,piyush}@cse.iitk.ac.in, mishra@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
We present a generative framework for generalized zeroshot learning where the training and test classes are not
necessarily disjoint. Built upon a variational autoencoder
based architecture, consisting of a probabilistic encoder
and a probabilistic conditional decoder, our model can
generate novel exemplars from seen/unseen classes, given
their respective class attributes. These exemplars can subsequently be used to train any off-the-shelf classification
model. One of the key aspects of our encoder-decoder architecture is a feedback-driven mechanism in which a discriminator (a multivariate regressor) learns to map the generated exemplars to the corresponding class attribute vectors, leading to an improved generator. Our model’s ability
to generate and leverage examples from unseen classes to
train the classification model naturally helps to mitigate the
bias towards predicting seen classes in generalized zeroshot learning settings. Through a comprehensive set of
experiments, we show that our model outperforms several
state-of-the-art methods, on several benchmark datasets,
for both standard as well as generalized zero-shot learning.

1. Introduction
The ability to correctly categorize objects from previously unseen classes is a key requirement in any truly autonomous object discovery system. Zero-shot Learning
(ZSL) is a learning paradigm [18, 1, 34] that tries to fulfil
this desideratum by leveraging auxiliary information that
may be available for each seen/unseen class. ZSL models usually assume that this information is given in form
of class attribute vectors or textual descriptions of classes.
Typical approaches taken by existing ZSL models can be
roughly categorized into the following: (1) Learning a mapping from the instance space to the class-attribute space and
predicting the class of an unseen class test instance by finding its closest class-attribute vector [18, 1]; (2) Defining the
classifier for each unseen class as a weighted combination
of the classifiers for the seen classes, where the combination weights are typically defined using similarity scores of
1 Equal contributions from both authors.

unseen and seen class [22, 4], and (3) Learning a probability distribution for each seen class and extrapolating to
unseen class distributions using the class-attribute information [30, 10, 31]. A more detailed discussion of the related
work on ZSL is provided in the Related Work section. Although the aforementioned ZSL models have shown considerable promise on various benchmark datasets, a key limitation of most of these models is that, at test time, these are
highly biased towards predicting the seen classes [5]. This
is because the ZSL model is learned using labeled data only
from the seen classes. Due to this issue, the ZSL models
are usually evaluated in a restricted setting where the training and test classes are assumed to be disjoint, i.e., the test
examples only come from the unseen classes and the search
space is limited to the unseen classes only. The more challenging setting where the training and test classes are not
disjoint is known as generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL),
and is considered a more formidable problem setting. Recent work [5, 34] has shown that the accuracies of most ZSL
approaches drops significantly in this setting.
In this work, we take a generative approach to the ZSL
problem, which naturally helps address the generalized ZSL
problem. Our approach is based on a generative model to
synthesize exemplars from the unseen classes (and, optionally, also from the seen classes), and subsequently training an off-the-shelf classification model using these synthesized exemplars. Our approach is motivated by, and is similar in spirit to, recent work on synthesizing exemplars for
ZSL [3, 10, 19, 20], which has shown to lead to improved
performance, especially in the GZSL setting.
For exemplar generation, we develop a generative model
based on a conditional variational autoencoder (VAE) architecture, in which the latent code of any instance is augmented with the class-attribute vector. This architecture
is further coupled with a discriminator (a multivariate regressor) that learns a mapping from the VAE generator’s
output to the class-attribute. This feedback helps to improve the generator by encouraging it to generate exemplars
that are of highly discriminative nature. Moreover, the discriminator also allows us to operate in semi-supervised settings by incorporating unlabeled examples for which we do
14281

