Improving Color Reproduction Accuracy on Cameras
Hakki Can Karaimer Michael S. Brown
York University, Toronto
{karaimer, mbrown}@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract
One of the key operations performed on a digital camera is to map the sensor-specific color space to a standard
perceptual color space. This procedure involves the application of a white-balance correction followed by a color
space transform. The current approach for this colorimetric mapping is based on an interpolation of pre-calibrated
color space transforms computed for two fixed illuminations (i.e., two white-balance settings). Images captured
under different illuminations are subject to less color accuracy due to the use of this interpolation process. In this
paper, we discuss the limitations of the current colorimetric mapping approach and propose two methods that are
able to improve color accuracy. We evaluate our approach
on seven different cameras and show improvements of up to
30% (DSLR cameras) and 59% (mobile phone cameras) in
terms of color reproduction error.

1. Introduction
Digital cameras have a number of processing steps that
convert the camera’s raw RGB responses to standard RGB
outputs. One of the most critical steps in this processing
chain is the mapping from the sensor-specific color space to
a standard perceptual color space based on CIE XYZ. This
conversion involves two steps: (1) a white-balance correction that attempts to remove the effects of scene illumination and (2) a color space transform (CST) that maps the
white-balanced raw color values to a perceptual color space.
These combined steps allow the camera act as a color reproduction, or colorimetric, device.
The colorimetric mapping procedure currently used on
cameras involves pre-computing two CSTs that correspond
to two fixed illuminations. The calibration needed to compute these CSTs is performed in the factory and the transform parameters are part of the camera’s firmware. The
illuminations that correspond to these calibrated CSTs are
selected to be “far apart” in terms of correlated color temperature so that they represent sufficiently different illuminations. When an image is captured that is not one of the

Proposed method 1
improved CST interpolation minimal modification to pipeline

Current approach
uses white-balance correction
and interpolated CST

B

A

Proposed method 2
uses full color-balance over
traditional white-balance correction

C
°

Mean angular error: 3.10°
Mean angular
error on color
chart: 2.52°

Mean angular error: 0.30 °
Mean angular
error on color
chart: 0.58°

Mean angular error: 0.29°
Mean angular
error on color
chart: 0.37°

Figure 1: (A) Angular color reproduction error using the
current method based on white balance and CST interpolation using two pre-calibrated illuminations. (B) Improvements by our first method using white balance and CST interpolation with three pre-calibrated illuminations. (C) Improvements by our second method using a full color balance
and a fixed CST.

two illuminations, an image-specific CST is interpolated by
linearly blending the two pre-calibrated CSTs. This reliance
on an interpolated CST can result in lower overall perceptual color reproduction accuracy as shown in Figure 1.
Contributions This paper describes two methods to improve color reproduction on digital cameras. Toward this
goal, we first overview the current colorimetric mapping
process and discuss why limitations in white balance create
the need for per-illumination CSTs. Next, two methods for
improving the colorimetric mapping are described. The first
is to extend the current interpolation method to include an
additional pre-calibrated illumination. This simple modification provides improved results and can be easily incorporated into the existing in-camera pipeline. Our second strategy requires no interpolation and uses a single fixed CST.
This second method relies on true color constancy (i.e., full
color balance) instead of traditional white balance and is
currently suitable for use in an off-camera platform. Our experiments show that both proposed strategies offer notable
improvements in the color reproduction accuracy for both
DSLR and mobile phone cameras. As part of this work,

6440

