Revisiting Salient Object Detection:
Simultaneous Detection, Ranking, and Subitizing of Multiple Salient Objects
Md Amirul Islam*
University of Manitoba

Mahmoud Kalash*
University of Manitoba

Neil D. B. Bruce
Ryerson University

amirul@cs.umanitoba.ca

kalashm@cs.umanitoba.ca

bruce@ryerson.ca

Abstract
Salient object detection is a problem that has been considered in detail and many solutions proposed. In this paper,
we argue that work to date has addressed a problem that is
relatively ill-posed. Specifically, there is not universal agreement about what constitutes a salient object when multiple
observers are queried. This implies that some objects are
more likely to be judged salient than others, and implies a
relative rank exists on salient objects. The solution presented
in this paper solves this more general problem that considers
relative rank, and we propose data and metrics suitable to
measuring success in a relative object saliency landscape.
A novel deep learning solution is proposed based on a hierarchical representation of relative saliency and stage-wise
refinement. We also show that the problem of salient object
subitizing can be addressed with the same network, and our
approach exceeds performance of any prior work across all
metrics considered (both traditional and newly proposed).

1. Introduction
The majority of work in salient object detection considers
either a single salient object [37, 38, 7, 8, 31, 32, 9, 19, 17,
24, 39, 18] or multiple salient objects [13, 27, 36], but does
not consider that what is salient may vary from one person to
another, and certain objects may be met with more universal
agreement concerning their importance.
There is a paucity of data that includes salient objects that
are hand-segmented by multiple observers. It is important to
note that any labels provided by a small number of observers
(including one) does not allow for discerning the relative importance of objects. Implicit assignment of relative salience
based on gaze data [33] also presents difficulties, given a
different cognitive process than a calculated decision that
involves manual labeling [16]. Moreover, gaze data is relatively challenging to interpret given factors such as centre
bias, visuomotor constraints, and other latent factors [2, 1].
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

Figure 1. We present a solution in the form of a deep neural network
to detect salient objects, consider the relative ranking of salience
of these objects, and predict the total number of salient objects.
Left to right: input image, detected salient regions, rank order of
salient objects, confidence score for salient object count (subitizing).
Colors indicate the rank order of different salient object instances.

Therefore, in this paper we consider the problem of salient
object detection more broadly. This includes detection of all
salient regions in an image, and accounting for inter-observer
variability by assigning confidence to different salient regions. We augment the PASCAL-S dataset [23] via further
processing to provide ground truth in a form that accounts
for relative salience. Success is measured against other algorithms based on the rank order of salient objects relative
to ground truth orderings in addition to traditional metrics.
Recent efforts also consider the problem of salient object
subitizing. It is our contention that this determination should
be possible by a model that provides detection of salient
objects (see Fig. 1). We also allow our network to subitize.
As a whole, our work generalizes the problem of salient
object detection, we present a new model that provides predictions of salient objects according to the traditional form
of this problem, multiple salient object detection and relative
ranking, and subitizing. Our results show state-of-the-art
performance for all problems considered.

2. Background
2.1. Salient Object Detection:
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have raised the
bar in performance for many problems in computer vision
including salient object detection. CNN based models are
17142

