Glimpse Clouds: Human Activity Recognition from Unstructured Feature Points
Fabien Baradel1 , Christian Wolf1,2 , Julien Mille3 , Graham W. Taylor4,5
{fabien.baradel,christian.wolf}@liris.cnrs.fr, julien.mille@insa-cvl.fr, gwtaylor@uoguelph.ca
Abstract
We propose a method for human activity recognition from
RGB data that does not rely on any pose information during test time, and does not explicitly calculate pose information internally. Instead, a visual attention module learns
to predict glimpse sequences in each frame. These glimpses
correspond to interest points in the scene that are relevant
to the classified activities. No spatial coherence is forced
on the glimpse locations, which gives the attention module
liberty to explore different points at each frame and better
optimize the process of scrutinizing visual information.
Tracking and sequentially integrating this kind of unstructured data is a challenge, which we address by separating the set of glimpses from a set of recurrent tracking/recognition workers. These workers receive glimpses,
jointly performing subsequent motion tracking and activity prediction. The glimpses are soft-assigned to the workers, optimizing coherence of the assignments in space, time
and feature space using an external memory module. No
hard decisions are taken, i.e. each glimpse point is assigned
to all existing workers, albeit with different importance.
Our methods outperform the state-of-the-art on the largest
human activity recognition dataset available to-date, NTU
RGB+D, and on the Northwestern-UCLA Multiview Action
3D Dataset.

1. Introduction
We address human activity recognition in settings where activities are complex and diverse, either as performed by an
individual, or involving multiple participants. These activities may even include people interacting with objects or the
environment. The usage of RGB-D cameras is very popular for this case [44, 34, 56], as it allows for the use of
articulated pose (skeletons) to be delivered in real time and
1 Univ. Lyon, INSA-Lyon, CNRS, LIRIS, F-69621, Villeurbanne,
France.
2 INRIA, CITI Laboratory, Villeurbanne, France.
3 Laboratoire d’Informatique de l’Univ. de Tours, INSA Centre Val de
Loire, 41034 Blois, France.
4 School of Engineering, Univ. of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
5 Vector Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

relatively cheaply by some middleware. The exclusive usage of pose makes it possible to work on gesture and activity
recognition without being a specialist in vision [61, 52], and
with significantly reduced dimensionality of the input data.
The combined usage of pose and raw depth and/or RGB images can often boost performance over a solution that uses
a single modality [41].
We propose a method that only uses raw RGB images
at test time. We avoid the use of articulated pose for two
reasons: (i) depth data is not always available; for example, in applications involving smaller or otherwise resourceconstrained robots; and (ii) the question of whether articulated pose is the optimal intermediate representation for
activity recognition is unclear. We explore an alternative
strategy, which consists of learning a local representation of
video through a visual attention process.
We conjecture that the replacement of the articulated
pose modality should keep one important property, which
is its collection of local entities, which can be tracked over
time and whose motion is relevant to the activity at hand.
Instead of fixing the semantic meaning of these entities to
the definition of a subset of joints in the human body, we
learn it discriminatively. In our strategy, the attention process is completely free to attend to arbitrary locations at
each time instant. In particular, we do not impose any constraints on spatio-temporal coherence of glimpse locations,
which allows the model to vary its focus within and across
frames. Certain similarities can be made to human gaze patterns which saccade to different points in a scene.
Activities are highly correlated with motion [47], and
therefore tracking the motion of specific points of visual
interest is essential, yielding a distributed representation
of the collection of glimpses. Appearance and motion
features need to be collected over time from local points
and integrated into a sequential decision model. However, tracking a set of glimpse points, whose location is not
spatio-temporally smooth and whose semantic meaning can
change from frame to frame, is a challenge. Our objective
is to match new glimpses with past ones of the same (or a
nearby) location in the scene. Due to the unconstrained nature of the attention mechanism, it is not aware of when a
point in the scene has been last scrutinized, or if it has been
attended to in the past.
1469

