Towards Faster Training of Global Covariance Pooling Networks by Iterative
Matrix Square Root Normalization
Peihua Li, Jiangtao Xie, Qilong Wang, Zilin Gao
Dalian University of Technology
peihuali@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Global covariance pooling in convolutional neural networks has achieved impressive improvement over the classical first-order pooling. Recent works have shown matrix
square root normalization plays a central role in achieving state-of-the-art performance. However, existing methods depend heavily on eigendecomposition (EIG) or singular value decomposition (SVD), suffering from inefficient
training due to limited support of EIG and SVD on GPU.
Towards addressing this problem, we propose an iterative
matrix square root normalization method for fast end-toend training of global covariance pooling networks. At
the core of our method is a meta-layer designed with loopembedded directed graph structure. The meta-layer consists of three consecutive nonlinear structured layers, which
perform pre-normalization, coupled matrix iteration and
post-compensation, respectively. Our method is much faster
than EIG or SVD based ones, since it involves only matrix multiplications, suitable for parallel implementation on
GPU. Moreover, the proposed network with ResNet architecture can converge in much less epochs, further accelerating network training. On large-scale ImageNet, we achieve
competitive performance superior to existing counterparts.
By finetuning our models pre-trained on ImageNet, we establish state-of-the-art results on three challenging finegrained benchmarks. The source code and network models
will be available at http://www.peihuali.org/iSQRT-COV.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) have
made significant progress in the past years, achieving recognition accuracy surpassing human beings in large-scale object recognition [7]. The ConvNet models pre-trained on
ImageNet [5] have been proven to benefit a multitude of
other computer vision tasks, ranging from fine-grained viThe work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 61471082). Peihua Li is the corresponding author.

sual categorization (FGVC) [25], object detection [28], semantic segmentation [26] to scene parsing [37], where labeled data are insufficient for training from scratch. The
common layers such as convolution, non-linear rectification, pooling and batch normalization [11] have become offthe-shelf commodities, widely supported on devices including workstations, PCs and embedded systems.
Although the architecture of ConvNet has greatly
evolved in the past years, its basic layers largely keep unchanged [19, 18]. Recently, researchers have shown increasing interests in exploring structured layers to enhance
representation capability of networks [12, 25, 1, 22]. One
particular kind of structured layer is concerned with global
covariance pooling after the last convolution layer, which
has shown impressive improvement over the classical firstorder pooling, successfully used in FGVC [25], visual question answering [15] and video action recognition [34]. Very
recent works have demonstrated that matrix square root normalization of global covariance pooling plays a key role in
achieving state-of-the-art performance in both large-scale
visual recognition [21] and challenging FGVC [24, 32].
For computing matrix square root, existing methods
depend heavily on eigendecomposition (EIG) or singular
value decomposition (SVD) [21, 32, 24]. However, fast implementation of EIG or SVD on GPU is an open problem,
which is limitedly supported on NVIDIA CUDA platform,
significantly slower than their CPU counterparts [12, 24].
As such, existing methods opt for EIG or SVD on CPU
for computing matrix square root. Nevertheless, current
implementations of meta-layers depending on CPU are far
from ideal, particularly for multi-GPU configuration. Since
GPUs with powerful parallel computing ability have to be
interrupted and await CPUs with limited parallel ability,
their concurrency and throughput are greatly restricted.
In [24], for the purpose of fast forward propagation (FP),
Lin and Maji use Newton-Schulz iteration (called modified
Denman-Beavers iteration therein) algorithm, which is proposed in [9], to compute matrix square-root. Unfortunately,
for backward propagation (BP), they compute the gradient
through Lyapunov equation solution which depends on the

947

