Deep End-to-End Time-of-Flight Imaging
Shuochen Su
UBC

Felix Heide
Stanford University

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, amplitude-modulated continuous wave
(AMCW) time-of-flight cameras such as Microsoft’s
Kinect One have not only become widely adopted in interactive commercial applications, but have also emerged as an
exciting imaging modality in computer vision [15, 22, 45].
Combined with conventional color cameras, RGB-D data
allows for high-fidelity scene reconstruction [26], enabling
the collection of large 3D datasets which drive 3D deep
learning [9] for scene understanding [47, 24], action
recognition [40], and facial and pose tracking [31]. Beyond
enabling these core computer vision applications, RGB-D
cameras have wide-spread applications in human-computer
interaction, robotics, and for tracking in emerging augmented or virtual reality applications [35]. Due to low
power requirements, low-cost CMOS sensor technology,

Traditional

Phase & Amplitude

Depth Baseline

DN

PU

MP

Depth Proposed

Raw Sensor Data
Proposed

We present an end-to-end image processing framework
for time-of-flight (ToF) cameras. Existing ToF image processing pipelines consist of a sequence of operations including modulated exposures, denoising, phase unwrapping
and multipath interference correction. While this cascaded
modular design offers several benefits, such as closed-form
solutions and power-efficient processing, it also suffers from
error accumulation and information loss as each module
can only observe the output from its direct predecessor, resulting in erroneous depth estimates. We depart from a conventional pipeline model and propose a deep convolutional
neural network architecture that recovers scene depth directly from dual-frequency, raw ToF correlation measurements. To train this network, we simulate ToF images for
a variety of scenes using a time-resolved renderer, devise
depth-specific losses, and apply normalization and augmentation strategies to generalize this model to real captures. We demonstrate that the proposed network can efficiently exploit the spatio-temporal structures of ToF frequency measurements, and validate the performance of the
joint multipath removal, denoising and phase unwrapping
method on a wide range of challenging scenes.

Wolfgang Heidrich
KAUST

ToFNet

Figure 1: Top: given phase and amplitude images from
dual-frequency measurements, traditional ToF cameras apply a sequence of techniques for depth map generation, such
as denoising (DN), phase unwrapping (PU) and multipath
correction (MP). This often leads to inaccurate depth estimation as low frequency phases are particularly prone to
global illumination [19] and various types of sensor noise;
Bottom: we train a deep convolutional network to predict
scene depth directly from a ToF camera’s raw correlation
measurements. The proposed method is substantially more
robust to noise and MPI, and runs in real-time.
and small sensor-illumination baseline [20], AMCW
time-of-flight cameras have the potential to become a
cornerstone imaging technology. For brevity, we will in the
following refer to AMCW time-of-flight cameras simply
as ToF cameras, with the implicit understanding that they
are distinct from other time-of-flight imaging technologies,
such as direct temporal sampling with SPADs (e.g. [49]).
ToF cameras measure depth by illuminating a scene
with periodic amplitude-modulated flood-light, which is reflected back to the camera along direct as well as indirect
light paths. The camera then measures the phase shift of the
incident signal with respect to the illumination signal. To
extract depth from these raw phase measurements, a number
of challenging reconstruction problems must be solved. For
a single diffuse reflector in the scene, the phase measurements encode depth unambiguously only up to an integer
phase wrapping, which is addressed by phase unwrapping
16383

