Learning Descriptor Networks for 3D Shape Synthesis and Analysis
Jianwen Xie1∗, Zilong Zheng2∗, Ruiqi Gao2 , Wenguan Wang2,3 , Song-Chun Zhu2 , Ying Nian Wu2
1 Hikvision Research Institute 2 University of California, Los Angeles 3 Beijing Institute of Technology

Abstract
This paper proposes a 3D shape descriptor network,
which is a deep convolutional energy-based model, for
modeling volumetric shape patterns. The maximum likelihood training of the model follows an “analysis by synthesis” scheme and can be interpreted as a mode seeking and
mode shifting process. The model can synthesize 3D shape
patterns by sampling from the probability distribution via
MCMC such as Langevin dynamics. The model can be used
to train a 3D generator network via MCMC teaching. The
conditional version of the 3D shape descriptor net can be
used for 3D object recovery and 3D object super-resolution.
Experiments demonstrate that the proposed model can generate realistic 3D shape patterns and can be useful for 3D
shape analysis.

1. Introduction
1.1. Statistical models of 3D shapes
Recently, with the introduction of large 3D CAD datasets,
e.g., ShapeNet [29, 4], some interesting attempts [5, 24, 17]
have been made on object recognition and synthesis based
on voxelized 3D shape data. From the perspective of statistical modeling, the existing 3D models can be grouped
into two main categories: (1) 3D discriminators, such as
Voxnet [16], which aim to learn a mapping from 3D voxel
input to semantic labels for the purpose of 3D object classification and recognition, and (2) 3D generators, such as
3D-GAN[28], which are in the form of latent variable models that assume that the 3D voxel signals are generated by
some latent variables. The training of discriminators usually
relies on big data with annotations and is accomplished by a
direct minimization of the prediction errors, while the training of the generators learns a mapping from the latent space
to 3D voxel data space.
The generator model, while useful for synthesizing 3D
shape patterns, involves a challenging inference step (i.e.,
sampling from the posterior distribution) in maximum likelihood learning, therefore variational inference [12] and ad∗ Equal contributions.

versarial learning [6, 18, 28] methods are commonly used,
where an extra network is incorporated into the learning algorithm to get around the difficulty of the posterior inference.
The past few years have witnessed impressive progress on
developing discriminator models and generator models for
3D shape data, however, there has not been much work in the
literature on modeling 3D shape data based on energy-based
models. We call this type of models the descriptive models
or descriptor networks following [34], because the models
describe the data based on bottom-up descriptive features
learned from the data. The focus of the present paper is to
develop a volumetric 3D descriptor network for voxelized
shape data. It can be considered an alternative to 3D-GAN
[28] for 3D shape generation.

1.2. 3D shape descriptor network
Specifically, we present a novel framework for probabilistic modeling of volumetric shape patterns by combining the
merits of energy-based model [14] and volumetric convolutional neural network [16]. The model is a probability
density function directly defined on voxelized shape signal, and the model is in the form of a deep convolutional
energy-based model, where the feature statistics or the energy function is defined by a bottom-up volumetric ConvNet
that maps the 3D shape signal to the features. We call the
proposed model the 3D DescriptorNet, because it uses a
volumetric ConvNet to extract 3D shape features from the
voxelized data.
The training of the proposed model follows an “analysis
by synthesis” scheme [7]. Different from the variational inference or adversarial learning, the proposed model does not
need to incorporate an extra inference network or an adversarial discriminator in the learning process. The learning and
sampling process is guided by the same set of parameters
of a single model, which makes it a particularly natural and
statistically rigorous framework for probabilistic 3D shape
modeling.
Modeling 3D shape data by a probability density function
provides distinctive advantages: First, it is able to synthesize
realistic 3D shape patterns by sampling examples from the
distribution via MCMC, such as Langevin dynamics. Second, the model can be modified into a conditional version,
18629

