Object Referring in Videos with Language and Human Gaze
Arun Balajee Vasudevan1 , Dengxin Dai1 , Luc Van Gool1,2
ETH Zurich1
KU Leuven 2
{arunv,dai,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
We investigate the problem of object referring (OR) i.e.
to localize a target object in a visual scene coming with
a language description. Humans perceive the world more
as continued video snippets than as static images, and describe objects not only by their appearance, but also by
their spatio-temporal context and motion features. Humans
also gaze at the object when they issue a referring expression. Existing works for OR mostly focus on static images
only, which fall short in providing many such cues. This
paper addresses OR in videos with language and human
gaze. To that end, we present a new video dataset for OR,
with 30, 000 objects over 5, 000 stereo video sequences annotated for their descriptions and gaze. We further propose a novel network model for OR in videos, by integrating appearance, motion, gaze, and spatio-temporal context into one network. Experimental results show that our
method effectively utilizes motion cues, human gaze, and
spatio-temporal context. Our method outperforms previous
OR methods. For dataset and code, please refer https:
//people.ee.ethz.ch/˜arunv/ORGaze.html.

1. Introduction
In their daily communication, humans refer to objects all
the time. The speaker issues a referring expression and the
co-observers identify the object referred to. In reality, coobserver also verifies by watching the gaze of the speaker.
Upcoming AI machines, such as cognitive robots and autonomous cars, are expected to have the same capacities, in
order to interact with their users in a human-like manner.
This paper investigates the task of object referring (OR) in
videos with language and human gaze.
OR has received increasing attention in the last years.
Notable examples are interpreting referring expressions
[57, 34], phrase localization [39, 55], and grounding of textual phrases [44]. Thanks to these excellent works, OR
could be pushed to large-scale datasets [27, 34, 57] with sophisticated learning approaches [34, 23, 36, 39, 55]. However, previous OR methods are still limited to static images,

Figure 1: A human issuing a referring expression while gazing at the object in the scene. The system combines multiple modalities such as appearance, motion and stereo depth
from the video, along with the expression and the gaze to
localize the object.

whereas humans are well aware of the world’s dynamic aspects. We describe objects not only by their appearance,
but also their spatial-temporal contexts and motion features,
such as ‘the car in front of us turning left’; ‘the boy running
fast under the tree there’. Static images fall short in providing many of such cues. Thus, there is a strong need to push
s-o-a OR to videos.
Another important cue that co-observers use to identify
the objects is Gaze of the speaker. While describing the object, speakers gaze at the object to come out with an unique
expression. Gaze is another important cue for object localization from the point of view of co-observer, along with
the language expression. For example, suppose a car occupant instructs his/her autonomous car with expression ‘Park
under the yellow tree on the right’, it is highly likely that
he/she is gazing at that tree, or did so in the brief past. This
gaze cue can be a promising aid to the car to localize the
tree. In this work, we also investigate how gaze can be
useful in assisting the OR task. As shown in Fig. 1, we
use text language, gaze estimates, visual appearance, motion features and depth features to localize the object being
referred.
As shown several times in computer vision, large-scale
datasets can play a crucial role in advancing research, for instance by enabling the deployment of more complex learning approaches and by benchmarking progress. This paper presents a video dataset for OR, the first of its kind,
14129

