Importance Weighted Adversarial Nets for Partial Domain Adaptation
Jing Zhang, Zewei Ding, Wanqing Li, Philip Ogunbona
Advanced Multimedia Research Lab, University of Wollongong, Australia
jz960@uowmail.edu.au, zd027@uowmail.edu.au, wanqing@uow.edu.au, philipo@uow.edu.au

Abstract
This paper proposes an importance weighted adversarial nets-based method for unsupervised domain adaptation,
specific for partial domain adaptation where the target domain has less number of classes compared to the source
domain. Previous domain adaptation methods generally assume the identical label spaces, such that reducing the distribution divergence leads to feasible knowledge transfer.
However, such an assumption is no longer valid in a more
realistic scenario that requires adaptation from a larger and
more diverse source domain to a smaller target domain with
less number of classes. This paper extends the adversarial nets-based domain adaptation and proposes a novel adversarial nets-based partial domain adaptation method to
identify the source samples that are potentially from the outlier classes and, at the same time, reduce the shift of shared
classes between domains.

1. Introduction
It is generally assumed that the training and test data
are drawn from the same distribution in statistical learning theory. Unfortunately, this assumption does not hold
in many applications. Domain adaptation [1, 20] is a
well-studied strategy to address this issue, which employs
previously labeled source domain data to boost the task
in a new target domain with a few or even no labeled
data. Since recent advance in deep learning has shown
that more transferable and domain invariant features can
be extracted through deep framework, the domain adaptation techniques are also transferred from shallow learningbased [1, 20, 15, 16, 8, 6, 28] to deep learning-based [25,
14, 18, 17, 27, 22, 23, 7, 24, 3, 13, 19].
The deep learning based methods have witnessed better
performance compared to the shallow learning based methods. However, most of the current approaches still assume
the same label spaces between the source and target domains. For example, previous deep learning-based domain
adaptation methods generally follow the idea that the divergence between source and target distributions is small in the

xs

z
(xs)
s= F
s

Fs
l
d

w(z
)
s

D
LD
∂ LD
∂ θD

Ft

D0
LD

∂ LD
∂ θD

xt

z
(xt)
t=F
t

−λ

∂ LD
∂ θF

0

0

0

GRL

0

t

∂L
∂θ
Fo
r
war
dp
r
o
p
ag
at
i
o
n
Bac
kwar
dpr
o
p
ag
at
i
o
n

Figure 1: The overview of the proposed method. The green
parts are the feature extractors for source and target domains. The block filled with slashes indicates the parameters are pre-learned and will not be updated during the
training procedure. The blue parts are the first domain classifier for obtaining the source sample importance weights.
The red parts are the second domain classifier that plays the
minimax game with the weighted source domain samples
and the target samples. The GRL [7] indicates the gradient
reversal layer, which acts as an identity transformation in
forward propagation while changes the sign of the gradient
in backward propagation.

feature space and adaptation can be achieved by matching
the statistic moments [25, 14, 18, 17, 27, 22], or by relying
on the domain adversarial nets [23, 7, 24, 3], or by using
Batch Normalization statistics [13, 19]. Since all the approaches rely on the comparison of marginal distributions
between the source and target domains, the label spaces between the two domains are required to be the same for feasible adaptation. This paper is concerned with a different
and more practical scenario that the target domain only has
a subset of classes, referred to as partial domain adaptation
(similar to [4]). In addition, there is no labeled data in the
target domain and the potential number and name of the tar18156

