Weakly Supervised Learning of Single-Cell Feature Embeddings
Juan C. Caicedo

Claire McQuin
Allen Goodman
Anne E. Carpenter
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
Cambridge, MA. USA

Shantanu Singh

{jcaicedo, mcquin, agoodman, shsingh, anne}@broadinstitute.org

Abstract
We study the problem of learning representations for single cells in microscopy images to discover biological relationships between their experimental conditions. Many new
applications in drug discovery and functional genomics require capturing the morphology of individual cells as comprehensively as possible. Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can learn powerful visual representations,
but require ground truth for training; this is rarely available
in biomedical profiling experiments. While we do not know
which experimental treatments produce cells that look alike,
we do know that cells exposed to the same experimental
treatment should generally look similar. Thus, we explore
training CNNs using a weakly supervised approach that
uses this information for feature learning. In addition, the
training stage is regularized to control for unwanted variations using mixup or RNNs. We conduct experiments on two
different datasets; the proposed approach yields single-cell
embeddings that are more accurate than the widely adopted
classical features, and are competitive with previously proposed transfer learning approaches.

1. Introduction
Steady progress in automated microscopy makes it possible to study cell biology at a large scale. Experiments that
were done using a single pipette before can now be replicated thousands of times using robots, targeting different
experimental conditions to understand the effect of chemical compounds or the function of genes [22]. Key to the process is the automatic analysis of microscopy images, which
quantifies the effect of treatments and reports relevant biological changes observed at the single-cell level. An effective computer vision system can have tremendous impact in
the future of health care, including more efficient drug discovery cycles, and the design of personalized genetic treatments [3].
The automated analysis of microscopy images has been

increasingly adopted by the pharmaceutical industry and
thousands of biological laboratories around the world.
However, the predominant approach is based on classical
image processing to extract low-level features of cells. This
presents two main challenges: 1) low-level features are susceptible to various types of noise and artifacts commonly
present in biological experiments, being potentially biased
by undesired effects and thus confounding the conclusions
of a study. 2) It is unlikely that these features can detect
all relevant biological properties captured by automated microscopes. With a large number of experimental conditions,
the differences in cell morphology may become very subtle, and a potentially effective treatment for a disease may
be missed if the vision system lacks sensitivity.
Learning representations of cells using deep neural networks may improve the quality and sensitivity of the signal measured in biological experiments. Learning representations is at the core of recent breakthroughs in computer
vision [19, 26, 14], with two aspects contributing to these
advances: 1) the availability of carefully annotated image
databases [30, 20], and 2) the design of novel neural network architectures [15, 33]. In image-based profiling experiments, while we build on top of state-of-the-art architectures to design a solution, we face the challenge of having large image collections with very few or no ground truth
annotations at all.
To overcome this challenge, we propose to train deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based on a weakly
supervised approach that leverages the structure of biological experiments. Specifically, we use replicates of the same
treatment condition as labels for learning a classification
network, assuming that they ought to yield cells with similar features. Then, we discard the classifier and keep the
learned features to investigate treatment similarities in a
downstream analysis. This task is analogous to training a
CNN for face recognition among a large number of people, and then using the learned representation to statistically
identify family members in the population.
Given the high learning capacity of CNNs [36], weak la19309

