Semi-parametric Image Synthesis
Xiaojuan Qi
CUHK

Qifeng Chen
Intel Labs

Abstract
We present a semi-parametric approach to photographic
image synthesis from semantic layouts. The approach combines the complementary strengths of parametric and nonparametric techniques. The nonparametric component is a
memory bank of image segments constructed from a training set of images. Given a novel semantic layout at test
time, the memory bank is used to retrieve photographic references that are provided as source material to a deep network. The synthesis is performed by a deep network that
draws on the provided photographic material. Experiments
on multiple semantic segmentation datasets show that the
presented approach yields considerably more realistic images than recent purely parametric techniques.

1. Introduction
Zeuxis having painted a child carrying grapes,
the birds came to peck at them; upon which [...]
he expressed himself vexed with his work, and exclaimed – “I have surely painted the grapes better
than the child, for if I had fully succeeded in the
last, the birds would have been in fear of it.”
– Pliny the Elder, The Natural History, 79 AD
Photographic image synthesis by deep networks can
open a new route to photorealism: a problem that has traditionally been approached via explicit manual modeling of
three-dimensional surface layout and reflectance distributions [24]. A deep network that is capable of synthesizing
photorealistic images given a rough specification could become a new tool in the arsenal of digital artists. It could
also prove useful in the creation of AI systems, by endowing them with a form of visual imagination [19].
Recent progress in photographic image synthesis has
been driven by parametric models – deep networks that represent all data concerning photographic appearance in their
weights [11, 2]. This is in contrast to the practices of human
photorealistic painters, who do not draw purely on memory
but use external references as source material for reproducing detailed object appearance [17]. It is also in contrast to

Jiaya Jia
CUHK

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

earlier work on image synthesis, which was based on nonparametric techniques that could draw on large datasets of
images at test time [7, 15, 3, 13, 10]. In switching from
nonparametric approaches to parametric ones, the research
community gained the advantages of end-to-end training of
highly expressive models. But it relinquished the ability to
draw on large databases of original photographic content at
test time: a strength of earlier nonparametric techniques.
In this paper, we present a semi-parametric approach to
photographic image synthesis from semantic layouts. The
presented approach exemplifies a general family of methods that we call semi-parametric image synthesis (SIMS).
Semi-parametric synthesis combines the complementary
strengths of parametric and nonparametric techniques. In
the presented approach, the nonparametric component is
a database of segments drawn from a training set of photographs with corresponding semantic layouts. At test time,
given a novel semantic layout, the system retrieves compatible segments from the database. These segments are used
as raw material for synthesis. They are composited onto a
canvas with the aid of deep networks that align the segments
to the input layout and resolve occlusion relationships. The
canvas is then processed by a deep network that produces a
photographic image as output.
We conduct experiments on the Cityscapes, NYU, and
ADE20K datasets. The experimental results indicate that
images produced by SIMS are considerably more realistic than the output of purely parametric models for photographic image synthesis from semantic layouts.

2. Related Work
Recent work on conditional image synthesis is predominantly based on parametric models [26, 34, 32, 25, 6, 21,
22, 8, 11, 2, 37]. Most related to ours are the works of Isola
et al. [11] and Chen and Koltun [2]. Isola et al. propose
a general framework for image-to-image translation based
on adversarial training. This approach can be applied to
synthesize images from semantic layouts. Chen and Koltun
propose a direct approach to synthesizing high-resolution
images conditioned on semantic layouts. Their method does
not rely on adversarial training, but rather trains a convolutional network directly with a perceptual loss. Our approach
18808

