Baseline Desensitizing In Translation Averaging
Bingbing Zhuang, Loong-Fah Cheong, Gim Hee Lee
National University of Singapore
zhuang.bingbing@u.nus.edu, {eleclf,gimhee.lee}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Many existing translation averaging algorithms are either sensitive to disparate camera baselines and have to
rely on extensive preprocessing to improve the observed
Epipolar Geometry graph, or if they are robust against disparate camera baselines, require complicated optimization
to minimize the highly nonlinear angular error objective.
In this paper, we carefully design a simple yet effective
bilinear objective function, introducing a variable to perform the requisite normalization. The objective function
enjoys the baseline-insensitive property of the angular error and yet is amenable to simple and efficient optimization by block coordinate descent, with good empirical performance. A rotation-assisted Iterative Reweighted Least
Squares scheme is further put forth to help deal with outliers. We also contribute towards a better understanding of
the behavior of two recent convex algorithms, LUD [20]
and Shapefit/kick [9], clarifying the underlying subtle difference that leads to the performance gap. Finally, we
demonstrate that our algorithm achieves overall superior
accuracies in benchmark dataset compared to state-of-theart methods, and is also several times faster.

1. Introduction
Modern large-scale Structure-from-Motion (SfM) systems have enjoyed widespread success in many applications [26, 33, 27, 21, 17]. Earlier methods often adopt an
incremental method by adding the cameras one by one sequentially as the size of the model grows up. As a consequence, the quality of the result heavily depends on the
order in which the cameras are added, and the accumulated
error often leads to significant drift as the size of the model increases. Therefore, frequent intermediate bundle adjustments (BA) [29] have to be applied to obtain stable result, which unfortunately increases the computational cost
substantially. Given such disadvantages, the global SfM
method emerges as a serious alternative. Unlike the incremental method, the global method attempts to determine the
absolute poses for all the cameras simultaneously from all

the observed pairwise Epipolar Geometry (EG) [12]. Such a
holistic approach spreads the error as uniformly as possible
to the whole model, avoiding the problem of error accumulation and drift. Thus, BA needs to be run only once as a
final refinement, leading to a more efficient system.
Formally, a global SfM algorithm takes as input a view
graph G=(V, E), where each node Vi in V and edge Eij
in E represent respectively a camera and relative pose
(Rij , tij ) between the camera pair i and j whose fields of
view overlap. It aims to find the absolute rotation Ri (a.k.a.
rotation averaging) and location ti (a.k.a. translation averaging) for each camera (up to a gauge freedom), such that
the observed pairwise relative poses are best explained. In
the noiseless case, the following two equations hold:
t j − ti
= Ri tij .
(1)
RiT Rj = Rij ,
||tj − ti ||2
Typically, rotation averaging is performed before translation averaging. In this paper, we follow this practice and
shall focus on the second equation to perform translation averaging. Note that rotation is assumed to have been solved,
and henceforth, for brevity, we shall denote Ri tij as vij .
Translation averaging is recognized as a hard task. One
of the reasons is that the input relative translation estimate
is sensitive to small camera baselines [7]. More importantly, EG only encodes the relative direction between cameras without any magnitude information. This causes a remove of the measurement space (directions between pairwise cameras) from the solution space (camera locations);
this gap complicates the task much more, posing a significant challenge for the objective function design. The geometrically more meaningful objective would be to minimize
the angular error between unit direction vectors [24, 32], but
this leads to highly nonlinear functions that require complicated optimization. Instead, many recent methods simply
ignore the normalization terms required for obtaining unit
vectors, thereby yielding various forms of quasi-Euclidean
distance terms in the objectives [16, 20, 9]. Often, such expediency allows the problem to be formulated as a convex
optimization problem. However, the serious qualification of
such magnitude-based objective functions is that they suffer
from unbalanced weighting on each individual term when

4539

