Partially Shared Multi-Task Convolutional Neural Network with Local
Constraint for Face Attribute Learning
Jiajiong Cao, Yingming Li∗, and Zhongfei Zhang
College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering
Zhejiang University, China
{jiajiong, yingming, zhongfei}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we study the face attribute learning problem by considering the identity information and attribute
relationships simultaneously. In particular, we first introduce a Partially Shared Multi-task Convolutional Neural Network (PS-MCNN), in which four Task Specific Networks (TSNets) and one Shared Network (SNet) are connected by Partially Shared (PS) structures to learn better
shared and task specific representations. To utilize identity information to further boost the performance, we introduce a local learning constraint which minimizes the difference between the representations of each sample and its
local geometric neighbours with the same identity. Consequently, we present a local constraint regularized multitask network, called Partially Shared Multi-task Convolutional Neural Network with Local Constraint (PS-MCNNLC), where PS structure and local constraint are integrated
together to help the framework learn better attribute representations. The experimental results on CelebA and LFWA
demonstrate the promise of the proposed methods.

1. Introduction
Face attribute learning [26, 1, 2, 30, 37, 8, 18, 9] has attracted much attention in many real-world applications such
as face identification and verification [33, 23, 32, 34, 27]. It
aims to learn mid-level representations as the abstraction
between the low-level features and the high-level labels.
However, large-scale face attribute learning is still a very
challenging problem as the faces captured in the wild are
usually influenced by the variations of the factors such as
illumination, pose, and expression.
Motivated by the success of convolutional neural network (CNN) [16, 35, 31, 6, 24, 10, 11], the deep CNN representations have been widely employed for face attribute
learning. For example, Razavian et al. exploit a face
∗ Corresponding author

recognition network to extract facial features and then train
SVMs for attribute classification [30]. Further, Hand and
Chellappa consider exploiting the attribute correlations to
construct reliable deep architecture for attribute classification [9]. In particular, Multi-task deep CNN (MCNN) is introduced by sharing the lower layers of network for all the
attributes and sharing the higher layers for closely related
attributes through a split structure. Based on the assumption
that many attributes are strongly correlated, MCNN divides
all the 40 attributes into nine attribute groups so that similar attributes are within a group and high-level features are
independently learned for each group.
Although MCNN has become the state-of-the-art performance by exploiting the complementary information for
attributes, the interactions among different groups are restricted since they are independent after the split. The
shared information vanishing among groups emerges when
it reaches the high-level layers of MCNN. Consequently, it
is difficult for attribute groups to effectively utilize the attribute relatedness from the beginning of the network to its
end to boost the overall performance. From a perspective of
multi-task learning, it is necessary to learn shared features
among groups (tasks) throughout the network to model the
sophisticated attribute relationships. Further, MCNN ignores the samples’ identity information which implies their
inter-dependence and encodes local geometric structure. As
such local structure usually helps feature learning, the existing attribute learning methods that ignore the identity information may not be appropriate.
In this paper we investigate the multi-task face attribute
learning problem with a new perspective of considering
identity information and attribute relationships simultaneously. We hypothesize that combining identity information
and task relationship modeling enables us to develop more
accurate multi-task attribute learning algorithms. Our hypothesis is based on two insights: (1) efficient interactions
among different attribute groups (tasks) help lead to more
accurate attribute relationship modeling; and (2) informative identity labels further help boost the performance by

4290

