Spatially-Adaptive Filter Units for Deep Neural Networks
Domen Tabernik1 , Matej Kristan1 and Aleš Leonardis1,2
1
Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
2
CN-CR Centre, School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
{domen.tabernik,matej.kristan}@fri.uni-lj.si
a.leonardis@cs.bham.ac.uk

...

Abstract
Classical deep convolutional networks increase receptive field size by either gradual resolution reduction or application of hand-crafted dilated convolutions to prevent increase in the number of parameters. In this paper we propose a novel displaced aggregation unit (DAU) that does
not require hand-crafting. In contrast to classical filters
with units (pixels) placed on a fixed regular grid, the displacement of the DAUs are learned, which enables filters
to spatially-adapt their receptive field to a given problem.
We extensively demonstrate the strength of DAUs on a classification and semantic segmentation tasks. Compared to
ConvNets with regular filter, ConvNets with DAUs achieve
comparable performance at faster convergence and up to
3-times reduction in parameters. Furthermore, DAUs allow
us to study deep networks from novel perspectives. We study
spatial distributions of DAU filters and analyze the number
of parameters allocated for spatial coverage in a filter.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (ConvNet) [10, 25,
21, 14] have become prevalent in visual feature learning.
The integral part of these approaches are convolutional filters. In combination with other layers, the definition of the
filter directly influences the kind of features a network can
capture. Current state-of-the-art ConvNets define filters as
rectangular windows of weights where each learnable unit
is a single pixel value in the filter.
An important hyperparameter of the filters is their size,
which is directly related to the number of free parameters in ConvNets. Large filters are avoided in the interest
of keeping this number low and reducing overfitting. On
the other hand, feature expressiveness improves with increased receptive fields [2]. Classification networks thus
apply small filters and implicitly increase the receptive field
size by gradually reducing resolution via pooling layers and
increased depth [23]. But in dense prediction problems like

Output channles

+

...

+
Displacement

+

+

addition

...

...

- Learning receptive field sizes

Blured
channels
Input
channels

...

Displaced Aggregation
Unit (DAU) highlights:

x

Aggregation
(averaging)

...

- Decupled parameters from
receptive field sizes
- Efficient parameter allocation

Figure 1: The displaced aggregation units (DAUs) afford
efficient implementation. Convolution of a feature channel
with a filter composed of several DAUs is implemented as
blurring by a single Gaussian and subsampling at learned
displacements.
segmentation [18, 3], sufficient resolution is required for accurate localization of segmentation boundaries. Thus large
receptive fields have to explicitly be accounted for without
resolution loss [4, 26, 27].
Increasing a receptive field without sacrificing resolution
is addressed by dilated (atrous) convolution [26, 27]. This
approach increases the kernel receptive field by spreading
out (dilating) the positions of the kernel sampling units (i.e.,
pixels). Large dilations significantly violate Nyquist theorem [1], resulting in griding artifacts [27]. Mitigation of
these requires additional convolutional layers with progressively smaller dilations. The dilation factors are another hyperparameter that is manually tuned. To alleviate manual
specification to some extent, [3, 4] propose to use several
pre-selected dilation factors and achieve excellent results.
We define a convolutional filter as a mixture of several displaced aggregation units which is a generalization
of the convolutional layers typically used for classification
19388

