Real-Time Rotation-Invariant Face Detection with
Progressive Calibration Networks
Xuepeng Shi 1,2
1

Shiguang Shan1,3

Meina Kan1,3

Shuzhe Wu 1,2

Xilin Chen1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology

{xuepeng.shi, shiguang.shan, meina.kan, shuzhe.wu, xilin.chen}@vipl.ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Rotation-invariant face detection, i.e. detecting faces
with arbitrary rotation-in-plane (RIP) angles, is widely required in unconstrained applications but still remains as a
challenging task, due to the large variations of face appearances. Most existing methods compromise with speed or
accuracy to handle the large RIP variations. To address
this problem more efficiently, we propose Progressive Calibration Networks (PCN) to perform rotation-invariant face
detection in a coarse-to-fine manner. PCN consists of three
stages, each of which not only distinguishes the faces from
non-faces, but also calibrates the RIP orientation of each
face candidate to upright progressively. By dividing the
calibration process into several progressive steps and only predicting coarse orientations in early stages, PCN can
achieve precise and fast calibration. By performing binary
classification of face vs. non-face with gradually decreasing RIP ranges, PCN can accurately detect faces with full
360◦ RIP angles. Such designs lead to a real-time rotationinvariant face detector. The experiments on multi-oriented
FDDB and a challenging subset of WIDER FACE containing rotated faces in the wild show that our PCN achieves
quite promising performance.

1. Introduction
Face detection serves as an important component in computer vision systems which aim to extract information from
face images. Practical applications, such as face recognition and face animation, all need to quickly and accurately
detect faces on input images in advance. Same as many other vision tasks, the performance of face detection has been
substantially improved by Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) [4, 17, 14, 13, 20, 23, 12, 7, 15]. The CNN-based
detectors enjoy the natural advantage of strong capability

Figure 1. Many complex situations need rotation-invariant face detectors. The face boxes are the outputs of our detector, and the blue
line indicates the orientation of faces.

in non-linear feature learning. However, most works focus
on designing an effective detector for generic faces without
considerations for specific scenarios, such as detecting faces
with full rotation-in-plane (RIP) angles as shown in Figure
1. They become less satisfactory in such complex applications. Face detection in full RIP, i.e. rotation-invariant
face detection, is quite challenging, because faces can be
captured almost from any RIP angle, leading to significant divergence in face appearances. An accurate rotationinvariant face detector can greatly boost the performance
of subsequent process, e.g. face alignment and face recognition.
Generally, there are three strategies for dealing with
the rotation variations including data augmentation, divideand-conquer, and rotation router [18], detailed as follows.
Data Augmentation is the most straightforward solution
for training a rotation-invariant face detector, which augments the training data by uniformly rotating the upright
4321
2295

