A Certifiably Globally Optimal Solution
to the Non-Minimal Relative Pose Problem
Jesus Briales
MAPIR-UMA Group
University of Malaga, Spain

Laurent Kneip
Mobile Perception Lab
SIST ShanghaiTech

Javier Gonzalez-Jimenez
MAPIR-UMA Group
University of Malaga, Spain

jesusbriales@uma.es

lkneip@shanghaitech.edu.cn

javiergonzalez@uma.es

Abstract
Finding the relative pose between two calibrated views
ranks among the most fundamental geometric vision problems. It therefore appears as somewhat a surprise that a
globally optimal solver that minimizes a properly defined
energy over non-minimal correspondence sets and in the
original space of relative transformations has yet to be discovered. This, notably, is the contribution of the present
paper. We formulate the problem as a Quadratically Constrained Quadratic Program (QCQP), which can be converted into a Semidefinite Program (SDP) using Shor’s convex relaxation. While a theoretical proof for the tightness of
this relaxation remains open, we prove through exhaustive
validation on both simulated and real experiments that our
approach always finds and certifies (a-posteriori) the global
optimum of the cost function.

1. Introduction
Relative pose estimation from corresponding point pairs
between two calibrated views constitutes a fundamental
geometric building block in most sparse structure-frommotion and visual SLAM algorithms. In structure from motion, it helps to initialize both topology and initial values of
the view-graph, which will then be used in transformation
averaging schemes [15] as well as bundle adjustment [42]
to obtain the joint solution over all poses and points. More
specifically, using an image matching technique [29], we establish a hypothetical covisibility graph between neighbouring pairs of views, which are then verified geometrically using robust relative pose computation. In visual SLAM [26],
the algorithm is used to bootstrap the computation and thus
solve the chicken-and-egg problem behind the mutually depending tracking and mapping modules.
The relative pose problem is constrained by the epipolar geometry [17]. The correspondence condition between
two views can notably be translated into a linear constraint

by employing the well-known essential matrix. Due to scale
invariance, the essential matrix has only five degrees of freedom. Five point correspondences are hence enough to constrain the relative pose [23]. The solution to the linear problem given by stacking five correspondence conditions first
results in a four-dimensional nullspace. The true solution
can then be recovered by applying the additional non-linear
constraints that exist on the coefficients of a proper essential matrix. It can be solved using polynomial elimination
techniques [28], or—more generally—the Groebner basis
method [38].
The above solution is the so-called minimal solution to
the problem as—ignoring special cases like degenerate 3D
point configurations or zero parallax—it always leads to an
exact solution for the considered correspondences (up to
numerical inaccuracies). The minimal solver can be used
within Ransac in order to gain robustness against outlier
correspondences. An important observation in this regard
is that—depending on the noise inside the data—using only
five points for each hypothesis instantiation may not necessarily lead to a minimum number of Ransac iterations,
as those hypotheses may be hard to bring in agreement with
other points. For moderate effective outlier ratios, increased
noise in the data means that sampling more points will lead
to noise-cancellation effects and thus quicker convergence
and better identified inlier ratios [21]. In short, a complete
theory of epipolar geometry requires a non-minimal solver
to the relative pose problem.
What comes as a surprise is that, despite the maturity of
the field and the age of the problem, a good non-minimal
solver for the calibrated relative pose problem has never
been discovered. This stands in harsh contrast with the
absolute pose problem, where recent solvers even achieve
global and geometric optimality in closed form for an arbitrary number of 2D-to-3D correspondences [20]. The expert
reader may ask why we can not use the 7 or 8-point algorithm [24, 13] to solve this problem. The reason is again
explained by the noise in the data. Noise notably causes
the rank-defficiency of our essential matrix constraints to

145

