Multimodal Visual Concept Learning with Weakly Supervised Techniques
Giorgos Bouritsas, Petros Koutras, Athanasia Zlatintsi and Petros Maragos
School of E.C.E., National Technical University of Athens, Greece
gbouritsas@gmail.com, {pkoutras, nzlat, maragos}@cs.ntua.gr

Abstract
Despite the availability of a huge amount of video data
accompanied by descriptive texts, it is not always easy to
exploit the information contained in natural language in order to automatically recognize video concepts. Towards this
goal, in this paper we use textual cues as means of supervision, introducing two weakly supervised techniques that
extend the Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) framework:
the Fuzzy Sets Multiple Instance Learning (FSMIL) and the
Probabilistic Labels Multiple Instance Learning (PLMIL).
The former encodes the spatio-temporal imprecision of the
linguistic descriptions with Fuzzy Sets, while the latter models different interpretations of each description’s semantics
with Probabilistic Labels, both formulated through a convex optimization algorithm. In addition, we provide a novel
technique to extract weak labels in the presence of complex semantics, that consists of semantic similarity computations. We evaluate our methods on two distinct problems, namely face and action recognition, in the challenging
and realistic setting of movies accompanied by their screenplays, contained in the COGNIMUSE database. We show
that, on both tasks, our method considerably outperforms
a state-of-the-art weakly supervised approach, as well as
other baselines.

1. Introduction
Automatic video understanding has become one of the
most essential and demanding challenges and research directions. The problems that span from this field, such as
activity recognition, saliency and scene analysis, comprise
detecting events and extracting high level semantics in realistic video sequences. So far, the majority of the methods designed for these tasks deal with visual data ignoring
the presence of other modalities, such as text and sound.
Nonetheless, the exploitation of the information they provide can lead to better understanding of the underlying semantics. In addition, most of these techniques are fully supervised and are trained on diverse and usually large-scale
datasets. Recently, in an attempt to avoid the significant

Figure 1: Example of a video segment described by the text
shown below the pictures. During the time interval [0:19:21
- 0:19:34] three actions take place (“standing up”, “walk”,
“answering phone”) performed by the same person (Colin).
The corresponding text mentions the actions as “gets up”,
“walks back” and “opens his cell phone”, respectively.
cost of manual annotation, there has been an increasing interest in exploring learning techniques that reduce human
intervention.
Motivated by the above, in this paper we approach video
understanding multimodally, where our goal is to recognize visual concepts mining their labels from an accompanying descriptive document. Visual concepts could be
loosely defined as spatio-temporally localized video segments that carry a specific structure in the visual domain,
which allows them to be classified in various categories.
Some specific examples are human faces, actions, scenes,
objects etc. The main reason for using text as a complementary modality is the convenience that natural language
provides in expressing semantics. Nowadays, there is a
plethora of video data with natural language descriptions,

4914

