PlaneNet: Piece-wise Planar Reconstruction from a Single RGB Image
Chen Liu1
1

Jimei Yang2

Washington University in St. Louis
chenliu@wustl.edu

Duygu Ceylan2
2

Ersin Yumer3

Adobe Research

{jimyang,ceylan}@adobe.com

3

Argo AI

Yasutaka Furukawa4
4

Simon Fraser University

meyumer@gmail.com

furukawa@sfu.ca

Figure 1: This paper proposes a deep neural architecture for piece-wise planar depthmap reconstruction from a single RGB image. From
left to right, an input image, a piece-wise planar segmentation, a reconstructed depthmap, and a texture-mapped 3D model.

Abstract
This paper proposes a deep neural network (DNN) for
piece-wise planar depthmap reconstruction from a single RGB image. While DNNs have brought remarkable
progress to single-image depth prediction, piece-wise planar depthmap reconstruction requires a structured geometry representation, and has been a difficult task to master
even for DNNs. The proposed end-to-end DNN learns to
directly infer a set of plane parameters and corresponding plane segmentation masks from a single RGB image.
We have generated more than 50,000 piece-wise planar
depthmaps for training and testing from ScanNet, a largescale RGBD video database. Our qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate that the proposed approach
outperforms baseline methods in terms of both plane segmentation and depth estimation accuracy. To the best of our
knowledge, this paper presents the first end-to-end neural
architecture for piece-wise planar reconstruction from a single RGB image. Code and data are available at https:
//github.com/art-programmer/PlaneNet.

1. Introduction
Human vision has a remarkable perceptual capability in
understanding high-level scene structures. Observing a typical indoor scene (e.g., Fig. 1), we can instantly parse a room
∗ Work done during Chen Liu’s internship at Adobe Research.

into a few number of dominant planes (e.g., a floor, walls,
and a ceiling), perceive major surfaces for a furniture, or
recognize a horizontal surface at the table-top. Piece-wise
planar geometry understanding would be a key for many
applications in emerging domains such as robotics or augmented reality (AR). For instance, a robot needs to identify
the extent of a floor to plan a movement, or a table-top
segmentation to place objects. In AR applications, planar
surface detection is becoming a fundamental building block
for placing virtual objects on a desk [17], replacing floor textures, or hanging artworks on walls for interior remodeling.
A fundamental problem in Computer Vision is to develop
a computational algorithm that masters similar perceptual
capability to enable such applications.
With the surge of deep neural networks, single image
depthmap inference [8, 7, 20, 35, 36] and room layout estimation [21] have been active areas of research. However, to
our surprise, little attention has been given to the study of
piece-wise planar depthmap reconstruction, mimicking this
remarkable human perception in a general form. The main
challenge is that the piece-wise planar depthmap requires
structured geometry representation (i.e., a set of plane parameters and their segmentation masks). In particular, we
do not know the number of planes to be inferred, and the
order of planes to be regressed in the output feature vector,
making the task challenging even for deep neural networks.
This paper proposes a novel deep neural architecture
“PlaneNet” that learns to directly produce a set of plane
12579

