Stereoscopic Neural Style Transfer
Dongdong Chen1∗ Lu Yuan2 , Jing Liao2 , Nenghai Yu1 , Gang Hua2
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Microsoft Research
cd722522@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{luyuan,jliao}@microsoft.com,
ynh@ustc.edu.cn, ganghua@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper presents the first attempt at stereoscopic neural style transfer, which responds to the emerging demand
for 3D movies or AR/VR. We start with a careful examination of applying existing monocular style transfer methods
to left and right views of stereoscopic images separately.
This reveals that the original disparity consistency cannot be well preserved in the final stylization results, which
causes 3D fatigue to the viewers. To address this issue, we
incorporate a new disparity loss into the widely adopted
style loss function by enforcing the bidirectional disparity
constraint in non-occluded regions. For a practical realtime solution, we propose the first feed-forward network by
jointly training a stylization sub-network and a disparity
sub-network, and integrate them in a feature level middle
domain. Our disparity sub-network is also the first end-toend network for simultaneous bidirectional disparity and
occlusion mask estimation. Finally, our network is effectively extended to stereoscopic videos, by considering both
temporal coherence and disparity consistency. We will show
that the proposed method clearly outperforms the baseline
algorithms both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Stereoscopic 3D was on the cusp of becoming a mass
consumer media such as 3D movies, TV and games. Nowadays, with the development of head-mounted 3D display
(e.g., AR/VR glasses) and dual-lens smart phones, stereoscopic 3D is attracting increasing attention and spurring a
lot of interesting research works, such as stereoscopic inpainting [36, 27], video stabilization [15], and panorama
[39]. Among these studies, creating stereoscopic 3D contents is always intriguing.
Recently, style transfer techniques used to reproduce famous painting styles on natural images become a trending
topic in content creation. For example, the recent film “Loving Vincent” is the first animated film made entirely of oil
∗ This work was done when Dongdong Chen is an intern at MSR Asia.

paintings by well-trained artists. Inspired by the power of
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), the pioneering work
of Gatys et al. [13] presented a general solution to transfer
the style of a given artwork to any images automatically.
Many follow-up works [21, 19, 34, 12, 11] have been proposed to either improve or extend it. These techniques are
also applied to many successful industrial applications (e.g.,
Prisma [1], Ostagram [2], and Microsoft Pix [3]).
However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no techniques that apply style transfer to stereoscopic images or
videos. In this paper, we address the need for this emerging
3D content by proposing the first stereoscopic neural style
transfer algorithm. We start with a careful examination of
naive application of existing style transfer methods to left
and right views independently.
We found that it often fails to produce geometric consistent stylized texture across the two views. As a result, it induces problematic depth perception and leads to 3D fatigue
to the viewers as shown in Figure 1. Therefore, we need to
enable the method to produce stylized textures that are consistent across the two views. Moreover, a fast solution is
required, especially for practical real-time 3D display (e.g.,
AR/VR glasses). Last but not least, style transfer in stereoscopic video as a further extension should satisfy temporal
coherence simultaneously.
In this paper, we propose the first feed-forward network for fast stereoscopic style transfer. Besides the widely
adopted style loss function [13, 19], we introduce an additional disparity consistency loss, which penalizes the deviations of stylization results in non-occluded regions. Specifically, given the bidirectional disparity and occlusion mask,
we establish correspondences between the left and right
view, and penalize the stylization inconsistencies of the
overlapped regions which are visible in both views.
We first validate this new loss term in the optimizationbased solution [13]. As shown in Figure 1, by jointly considering stylization and disparity consistency in the optimization procedure, our method can produce much more
consistent stylization results for the two views. We further
incorporate this new disparity loss into a feedforward deep
network that we designed for stereoscopic stylization.
16654

