Classification-Driven Dynamic Image Enhancement
Vivek Sharma1 , Ali Diba2 , Davy Neven2 , Michael S. Brown3 , Luc Van Gool2,4 , and Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1

CV:HCI, KIT, Karlsruhe, 2 ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, 3 York University, Toronto, and 4 CVL, ETH Zürich

{firstname.lastname}@kit.edu, {firstname.lastname}@esat.kuleuven.be, mbrown@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract
[a]

Convolutional neural networks rely on image texture and
structure to serve as discriminative features to classify the
image content. Image enhancement techniques can be used
as preprocessing steps to help improve the overall image
quality and in turn improve the overall effectiveness of a
CNN. Existing image enhancement methods, however, are
designed to improve the perceptual quality of an image for a
human observer. In this paper, we are interested in learning
CNNs that can emulate image enhancement and restoration, but with the overall goal to improve image classification and not necessarily human perception. To this end,
we present a unified CNN architecture that uses a range of
enhancement filters that can enhance image-specific details
via end-to-end dynamic filter learning. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of this strategy on four challenging benchmark
datasets for fine-grained, object, scene, and texture classification: CUB-200-2011, PASCAL-VOC2007, MIT-Indoor,
and DTD. Experiments using our proposed enhancement
show promising results on all the datasets. In addition, our
approach is capable of improving the performance of all
generic CNN architectures.

1. Introduction
Image enhancement methods are commonly used as preprocessing steps that are applied to improve the visual quality of an image before higher level-vision tasks, such as
classification and object recognition [28, 29]. Examples
include enhancement to remove the effects of blur, noise,
poor contrast, and compression artifacts – or to boost image
details. Examples of such enhancement methods include
Gaussian smoothing, anisotropic diffusion, weighted least
squares (WLS), and bilateral filtering. Such enhancement
methods are not simple filter operations (e.g., 3×3 Sobel
filter), but often involve complex optimization. In practice,
the run time for these methods is expensive and can take
seconds or even minutes for high-resolution images.
Several recent works have shown that convolutional neural networks (CNN) [2, 3, 23, 27, 39, 40] can successfully

C
O
N
V

Classification
prediction
with lowconfidence

C
O
N
V

Classification
prediction
with highconfidence

RGB

[b]

WLS Filter

Enhanced

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed unified CNN architecture
using enhancement filters to improve classification tasks. Given
an input RGB image, instead of directly applying the CNN on this
image ([a]), we first enhance the image details by convolving the
input image with a WLS filter (see Sec. 3.1), resulting in improved
classification with high confidence ([b]).

emulate a wide range of image enhancement by training on
input and target output image pairs. These CNNs often have
a significant advantage in terms of run-time performance.
The current strategy, however, is to train these CNN-based
image filters to approximate the output of their non-CNN
counterparts.
In this paper, we propose to extend the training of CNNbased image enhancement to incorporate the high-level goal
of image classification. Our contribution is a method that
jointly optimizes a CNN for enhancement and image classification. We achieve this by adaptively enhancing the features on an image basis via dynamic convolutions, which
enables the enhancement CNN to selectively enhance only
those features that lead to improved image classification.
Since we understand the critical role of selective feature
enhancement, we propose to use the dynamic convolutional
layer (or dynamic filter) [7] to dynamically enhance the
image-specific features with a classification objective (see
Fig. 1). Our work is inspired by [7]. However, while [7]
applies the dynamic convolutional module to transform an
angle into a filter (steerable filter) using input-output image
pairs, we used the same terminology as in [7]. The dynamic
filters are a function of the input and therefore vary from

4033

