Taskonomy: Disentangling Task Transfer Learning
Amir R. Zamir1,2 Alexander Sax1∗ William Shen1∗ Leonidas Guibas1 Jitendra Malik2 Silvio Savarese1
1

Stanford University

2

University of California, Berkeley

http://taskonomy.vision/

Abstract
Do visual tasks have a relationship, or are they unrelated? For instance, could having surface normals simplify estimating the depth of an image? Intuition answers
these questions positively, implying existence of a structure
among visual tasks. Knowing this structure has notable values; it is the concept underlying transfer learning and provides a principled way for identifying redundancies across
tasks, e.g., to seamlessly reuse supervision among related
tasks or solve many tasks in one system without piling up
the complexity.
We proposes a fully computational approach for modeling the structure of space of visual tasks. This is done via
finding (first and higher-order) transfer learning dependencies across a dictionary of twenty six 2D, 2.5D, 3D, and
semantic tasks in a latent space. The product is a computational taxonomic map for task transfer learning. We study
the consequences of this structure, e.g. nontrivial emerged
relationships, and exploit them to reduce the demand for
labeled data. We provide a set of tools for computing and
probing this taxonomical structure including a solver users
can employ to find supervision policies for their use cases.

1. Introduction
Object recognition, depth estimation, edge detection,
pose estimation, etc are examples of common vision tasks
deemed useful and tackled by the research community.
Some of them have rather clear relationships: we understand that surface normals and depth are related (one is a
derivate of the other), or vanishing points in a room are useful for orientation. Other relationships are less clear: how
keypoint detection and the shading in a room can, together,
perform pose estimation.
The field of computer vision has indeed gone far without
explicitly using these relationships. We have made remarkable progress by developing advanced learning machinery
(e.g. ConvNets) capable of finding complex mappings from
∗ Equal.

3D
Edges

Object Class.

Point
Matching

Reshading

(1000 class)

Curvature
3D Edges
2.5D Segm.
Normals

Reshading Z-Depth Distance
Triplet
Point
Cam. Pose
Matching

Semantic
Segm.

Normals

Cam. Pose
2D Segm.
2D Keypoints
Denoising

Autoencoding

(fixated)

Room
Cam. Pose Layout
(non-fixated)

Vanishing Pts

Figure 1: A sample task structure discovered by the computational
task taxonomy (taskonomy). It found that, for instance, by combining the
learned features of a surface normal estimator and occlusion edge detector,
good networks for reshading and point matching can be rapidly trained
with little labeled data.

X to Y when many pairs of (x, y) s.t. x ∈ X, y ∈ Y are
given as training data. This is usually referred to as fully supervised learning and often leads to problems being solved
in isolation. Siloing tasks makes training a new task or a
comprehensive perception system a Sisyphean challenge,
whereby each task needs to be learned individually from
scratch. Doing so ignores their quantifiably useful relationships leading to a massive labeled data requirement.
Alternatively, a model aware of the relationships among
tasks demands less supervision, uses less computation, and
behaves in more predictable ways. Incorporating such
a structure is the first stepping stone towards developing provably efficient comprehensive/universal perception
models [32, 4], i.e. ones that can solve a large set of tasks
before becoming intractable in supervision or computation
demands. However, this task space structure and its effects
13712

