Learning Patch Reconstructability for Accelerating Multi-View Stereo
Alex Poms
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA

Chenglei Wu, Shoou-I Yu, Yaser Sheikh
Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh
4420 Bayard Street, Pittsburgh, PA

apoms@cs.cmu.edu

{chenglei.wu,shoou-i.yu,yaser.sheikh}@fb.com

YGBTUFS

16% of Pixels Processed

100% of Pixels Processed

Figure 1: Left: A reconstruction performed using all pixels from the input. Right: Our method produces a similar reconstruction using a fraction of the pixels (white regions in the input images are unused).

Abstract
We present an approach to accelerate multi-view stereo
(MVS) by prioritizing computation on image patches that
are likely to produce accurate 3D surface reconstructions.
Our key insight is that the accuracy of the surface reconstruction from a given image patch can be predicted significantly faster than performing the actual stereo matching.
The intuition is that non-specular, fronto-parallel, in-focus
patches are more likely to produce accurate surface reconstructions than highly specular, slanted, blurry patches —
and that these properties can be reliably predicted from the
image itself. By prioritizing stereo matching on a subset of
patches that are highly reconstructable and also cover the
3D surface, we are able to accelerate MVS with minimal
reduction in accuracy and completeness. To predict the reconstructability score of an image patch from a single view,
we train an image-to-reconstructability neural network: the
I2RNet. This reconstructability score enables us to efficiently identify image patches that are likely to provide the
most accurate surface estimates before performing stereo
matching. We demonstrate that the I2RNet, when trained
on the ScanNet dataset, generalizes to the DTU and Tanks
& Temples MVS datasets. By using our I2RNet with an existing MVS implementation, we show that our method can
achieve more than a 30⇥ speed-up over the baseline with
only an minimal loss in completeness.

1. Introduction
Using a large number of calibrated high-resolution RGB
images, very high quality surface geometry can be reconstructed using Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [31, 3, 19].
The high-level pipeline used by many state-of-the-art MVS
methods first estimates the surface, i.e., the depth and normal, for each pixel in each view and then fuses estimates
from all views together to create the final surface reconstruction. To estimate the depth and normal of a pixel (the
reference pixel), MVS selects a window around the reference pixel, which we call the reference patch, and attempts
to find a matching patch in each neighboring image. Once
the reference patch has been matched, the match combined
with the known geometric calibration of the views enables
the MVS algorithm to compute the depth and normal of the
3D point.
Unfortunately, if this matching process is performed for
every pixel in the image against every neighboring image,
the running time scales with O(v 2 p) where v is the number
of images and p is the number of pixels per image, since every pixel in every image (vp) must be matched against every
other image (v). This time complexity means that as we add
more images with higher resolution, the time required can
become prohibitively long. In order to leverage the increasing resolution and proliferation of cameras, it is critical that
we develop scalable MVS algorithms that can still produce
highly accurate surfaces while avoiding performing matching for every pixel against every image.
13041

