Domain Generalization with Adversarial Feature Learning
Haoliang Li1
Sinno Jialin Pan2
Shiqi Wang3
Alex C. Kot1
1
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, China
hli016@e.ntu.edu.sg, sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg, shiqwang@cityu.edu.hk, eackot@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of domain generalization: how to learn a generalized feature representation for an “unseen” target domain by taking the advantage
of multiple seen source-domain data. We present a novel framework based on adversarial autoencoders to learn
a generalized latent feature representation across domains
for domain generalization. To be specific, we extend adversarial autoencoders by imposing the Maximum Mean
Discrepancy (MMD) measure to align the distributions among different domains, and matching the aligned distribution to an arbitrary prior distribution via adversarial feature learning. In this way, the learned feature representation is supposed to be universal to the seen source domains because of the MMD regularization, and is expected
to generalize well on the target domain because of the introduction of the prior distribution. We proposed an algorithm to jointly train different components of our proposed
framework. Extensive experiments on various vision tasks
demonstrate that our proposed framework can learn better
generalized features for the unseen target domain compared
with state-of-the-art domain generalization methods.

1. Introduction
In some computer vision applications, it is often the case
that there are only some unlabeled training data in the domain of interest (a.k.a. the target domain), while there are
plenty of labeled training data in some related domain(s)
(a.k.a. the source domain(s)). Due to the domain difference,
a model trained with the source-domain data may perform
poorly on the target domain. To address this problem, recently, many studies have been conducted to leverage the
unlabeled data of the target domain given in advance for
adapting the model learned with the source-domain labeled
data to the target domain. These are referred to as domain
adaptation methods [28, 13, 9].
However, in many other scenarios, one may not have any

Figure 1. Object recognition as multi-source domain generalization. Given labeled data sampled from several domains, domain
generalization aims to extract universal knowledge across the seen
domains (source domains) to learn a classifier to be used in a previously “unseen” domain (target domain).

data of the target domain in training, but is still asked to
build a precise model for the “unseen” target domain. This
is a common case in many computer vision tasks. For example, in object recognition or action recognition, it is difficult
to collect images with all possible background or videos in
all possible conditions (e.g. capturing angle [30], diverse
reflection [36]) during training. Here, each type of background or views can be considered as a domain as shown
in Figure 1. Domain generalization has been proposed to
address this problem by leveraging the labeled data from
multiple source domains to learn a universal representation,
which is expected to generalize well for the target domain.
Therefore, a key research issue is how to learn a representation of good generalization for the unseen target domain
from some related source domains.
Previous works on domain generalization focused on developing data-driven approaches to learn invariant features
among different source domains. For example, Yang and

5400

