Towards High Performance Video Object Detection
Xizhou Zhu1,2∗
1

Jifeng Dai2

Lu Yuan2

University of Science and Technology of China

There has been significant progresses for image object
detection in recent years. Nevertheless, video object detection has received little attention, although it is more challenging and more important in practical scenarios.
Built upon the recent works [37, 36], this work proposes
a unified approach based on the principle of multi-frame
end-to-end learning of features and cross-frame motion.
Our approach extends prior works with three new techniques and steadily pushes forward the performance envelope (speed-accuracy tradeoff), towards high performance
video object detection.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in object detection [17] in still images. However, directly applying these detectors to videos faces new challenges. First,
applying the deep networks on all video frames introduces
unaffordable computational cost. Second, recognition accuracy suffers from deteriorated appearances in videos that
are seldom observed in still images, such as motion blur,
video defocus, rare poses, etc.
There has been few works on video object detection. The
recent works [37, 36] suggest that principled multi-frame
end-to-end learning is effective towards addressing above
challenges. Specifically, data redundancy between consecutive frames is exploited in [37] to reduce the expensive feature computation on most frames and improve the speed.
Temporal feature aggregation is performed in [36] to improve the feature quality and recognition accuracy. These
works are the foundation of the ImageNet Video Object Detection Challenge 2017 winner [6].
The two works focus on different aspects and presents
their own drawbacks. Sparse feature propagation (see
Eq. (1)) is used in [37] to save expensive feature computation on most frames. Features on these frames are propa∗ This work is done when Xizhou Zhu is intern at Microsoft Research

Asia

2

Microsoft Research

{jifdai,luyuan,yichenw}@microsoft.com

ezra0408@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Yichen Wei2

gated from sparse key frames cheaply. The propagated features, however, are only approximated and error-prone, thus
hurting the recognition accuracy. Multi-frame dense feature
aggregation (see Eq. (2)) is performed in [36] to improve
feature quality on all frames and detection accuracy as well.
Nevertheless, it is much slower due to repeated motion estimation, feature propagation and aggregation.
The two works are complementary in nature. They also
share the same principles: motion estimation module is built
into the network architecture and end-to-end learning of all
modules is performed over multiple frames.
Built on these progresses and principles, this work
presents a unified approach that is faster, more accurate, and
more flexible. Specifically, three new techniques are proposed. First, sparsely recursive feature aggregation is used
to retain the feature quality from aggregation but as well
reduce the computational cost by operating only on sparse
key frames. This technique combines the merits of both
works [37, 36] and performs better than both.
Second, spatially-adaptive partial feature updating is introduced to recompute features on non-key frames wherever
propagated features have bad quality. The feature quality is
learnt via a novel formulation in the end-to-end training.
This technique further improves the recognition accuracy.
Last, temporally-adaptive key frame scheduling replaces
the previous fixed key frame scheduling. It predicts the usage of a key frame accordingly to the predicted feature quality above. It makes the key frame usage more efficient.
The proposed techniques are unified with the prior
works [37, 36] under a unified viewpoint. Comprehensive
experiments show that the three techniques steadily pushes
forward the performance (speed-accuracy trade-off) envelope, towards high performance video object detection. For
example, we achieve 77.8% mAP score at speed of 15.22
frame per second. It establishes the new state-of-the-art.

2. From Image to Video Object Detection
Object detection in static images has achieved significant
progress in recent years using deep CNN [17]. State-ofthe-art detectors share the similar methodology and network
17210

