Aligning Infinite-Dimensional Covariance Matrices in Reproducing Kernel
Hilbert Spaces for Domain Adaptation
Zhen Zhang, Mianzhi Wang, Yan Huang, Arye Nehorai
Washington University in St. Louis
{zhen.zhang, mianzhi.wang, yanhuang640, nehorai}@wustl.edu

Abstract
Domain shift, which occurs when there is a mismatch
between the distributions of training (source) and testing
(target) datasets, usually results in poor performance of the
trained model on the target domain. Existing algorithms
typically solve this issue by reducing the distribution discrepancy in the input spaces. However, for kernel-based
learning machines, performance highly depends on the statistical properties of data in reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces (RKHS). Motivated by these considerations, we propose a novel strategy for matching distributions in RKHS,
which is done by aligning the RKHS covariance matrices (descriptors) across domains. This strategy is a generalization of the correlation alignment problem in Euclidean spaces to (potentially) infinite-dimensional feature
spaces. In this paper, we provide two alignment approaches,
for both of which we obtain closed-form expressions via
kernel matrices. Furthermore, our approaches are scalable to large datasets since they can naturally handle outof-sample instances. We conduct extensive experiments
(248 domain adaptation tasks) to evaluate our approaches.
Experiment results show that our approaches outperform
other state-of-the-art methods in both accuracy and computationally efficiency.

1. Introduction
Standard supervised learning algorithms rely on the assumption that the training data and the testing data are
drawn from an identical distribution. The validity of this
assumption guarantees that the trained model can generalize well to the testing set. However, in real world applications, data are sensed by various types of acquisition devices and in different situations. For example, in computer
vision tasks, images may be taken by cameras with different resolutions or under different light conditions. In such
cases, a distribution mismatch or domain shift usually occurs, and consequently traditional statistical learning meth-

ods tend to perform poorly. Therefore, how to handle the
statistical heterogeneity among data becomes a fundamental problem, called the domain adaptation problem.
A domain adaptation problem usually involves two domains: the source domain and the target domain. The
source domain is composed of labeled data {X s , ~lX } =
s
{(xi , lxi )}N
i=1 , which can be used to train a reliable classifier. The target domain is composed of unlabeled data
t
Y t = {yj }N
j=1 , whose statistical properties are different.
The main objective is to adapt the model (e.g., classifier)
trained on the source domain to the target domain.
Many works have considered this problem. One class of
algorithms [4, 14, 26] reduces the distribution discrepancies
across domains by pointwise re-weighting. Another widely
investigated paradigm finds domain-invariant feature representations. Typical algorithms include domain invariant
projection (DIP) [1], transfer component analysis (TCA)
[23], and joint distribution alignment (JDA) [20]. However,
sometimes, the statistical distributions across domains are
very different, and even their supports are significantly mismatched. In such cases, it is difficult to find suitable weights
for matching, or to identify domain-invariant features. More
recently, to solve the above issue, another line of algorithms,
which consider “moving” the source data to the target domain so as to make their distributions closer, has been proposed. In [7], Courty et al. borrowed a concept from optimal transport theory [28], making use of the optimal transport plan (map) to “transport” source data. But their method
suffers from a drawback: It can be applied only in transductive settings. That is, when new data are available, one need
to recompute a new optimization problem. In [27], Sun et
al. used a linear map to transform source data to align covariance matrices across domains. However, this method
considers only the linear correlation of data, which limits
its applications on datasets with complex nonlinear correlation structures.
All the above works attempt to tackle domain shift in the
input spaces, which is probably not optimal for kernel-based
learning machines. Moreover, there exist various data representations, such as strings [19], graphs [18], lattices [5],

3437

