Making Convolutional Networks Recurrent for Visual Sequence Learning
Xiaodong Yang Pavlo Molchanov Jan Kautz
NVIDIA
{xiaodongy,pmolchanov,jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have emerged as a
powerful model for a broad range of machine learning
problems that involve sequential data. While an abundance
of work exists to understand and improve RNNs in the context of language and audio signals such as language modeling and speech recognition, relatively little attention has
been paid to analyze or modify RNNs for visual sequences,
which by nature have distinct properties. In this paper, we
aim to bridge this gap and present the first large-scale exploration of RNNs for visual sequence learning. In particular, with the intention of leveraging the strong generalization capacity of pre-trained convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), we propose a novel and effective approach, PreRNN, to make pre-trained CNNs recurrent by transforming
convolutional layers or fully connected layers into recurrent layers. We conduct extensive evaluations on three representative visual sequence learning tasks: sequential face
alignment, dynamic hand gesture recognition, and action
recognition. Our experiments reveal that PreRNN consistently outperforms the traditional RNNs and achieves stateof-the-art results on the three applications, suggesting that
PreRNN is more suitable for visual sequence learning.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have achieved excellent performance on a variety of sequential learning
problems including language modeling [27], handwriting
recognition [16], machine translation [6], speech recognition [17], polyphonic music modeling [8], and intelligent
video analytics [10]. A vanilla recurrent neural network
(VRNN) [2] extends the conventional feedforward network
to handle a variable-length sequence by accumulating the
context of previous inputs in its internal state to influence
proceeding outputs. However, the range of context that can
be accessed in VRNN is limited as the gradients tend to
either vanish or explode [2]. Unlike the gradient exploding
problem which is relatively easy to address through gradient
norm clipping [32], the gradient vanishing problem involves

devising more sophisticated gating mechanism. As an earliest attempt in this direction, the long short-term memory
(LSTM) [21] adopts a memory cell to maintain the internal
state over time and employs gating functions to modulate
the information flow into and out of the cell. A simpler alternative to LSTM, the gated recurrent unit (GRU) [6] modifies the functional gates and has been growing increasingly
popular. Recently, there have been a number of attempts to
understand and further improve these basic recurrent structures for language and speech modeling as seen with the
memory network [47], the massive evolutionary architecture search [23], the content based soft attention scheme
[1], and the ablation study of removing various gates and
connections [18].
RNNs have also been widely applied for visual sequence
learning tasks to model dynamic evolutions and provide
temporal contexts. However, visual sequences have by nature distinct properties compared to other sequential data.
In contrast to language and speech, the processing unit of
a visual sequence is in a more structured format such as an
image or a short video snippet. Therefore, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) usually serve as the backbone networks to extract semantic features, which RNNs are then
built on top. A key advantage of the feature extraction for
visual sequences is to exploit the extremely expressive CNN
models that are pre-trained on large-scale image or video
datasets such as ImageNet [9] and Sports1M [25]. However, it remains an open question how to construct RNNs
to better leverage the representational power and generalization ability of these pre-trained CNNs. In addition, visual sequences typically exhibit large redundancy [36] and
have diverse temporal dependencies depending on different
applications [19, 28, 29]. As a result, it is still poorly understood which recurrent structure and which gating mechanism is best suited.
Our main contributions in this paper are as follows. First,
we propose PreRNN, which is an effective approach to
make pre-trained CNNs recurrent by directly transforming
pre-trained convolutional layers or fully connected layers
into recurrent layers. PreRNN is applicable to all three basic recurrent structures (i.e., VRNN, LSTM and GRU) and

6469

