GAGAN: Geometry-Aware Generative Adversarial Networks
Jean Kossaifi∗

Linh Tran∗
Yannis Panagakis∗,†
∗
Imperial College London
†
Middlesex University London

Maja Pantic∗

{jean.kossaifi;linh.tran;i.panagakis;m.pantic}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep generative models learned through adversarial
training have become increasingly popular for their ability to generate naturalistic image textures. However, aside
from their texture, the visual appearance of objects is significantly influenced by their shape geometry; information
which is not taken into account by existing generative models. This paper introduces the Geometry-Aware Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAGAN) for incorporating geometric information into the image generation process. Specifically, in GAGAN the generator samples latent variables
from the probability space of a statistical shape model. By
mapping the output of the generator to a canonical coordinate frame through a differentiable geometric transformation, we enforce the geometry of the objects and add an
implicit connection from the prior to the generated object.
Experimental results on face generation indicate that the
GAGAN can generate realistic images of faces with arbitrary facial attributes such as facial expression, pose, and
morphology, that are of better quality than current GANbased methods. Our method can be used to augment any
existing GAN architecture and improve the quality of the
images generated.

1. Introduction
Generating images that look authentic to human observers is a longstanding problem in computer vision and
graphics. Benefitting from the rapid development of deep
learning methods and the easy access to large amounts of
data, image generation techniques have made significant advances in recent years. In particular, Generative Adversarial
Networks [14] (GANs) have become increasingly popular
for their ability to generate visually pleasing results, without the need to explicitly compute probability densities over
the underlying distribution.
However, GAN-based models still face many unsolved
difficulties. The visual appearance of objects is not only
dictated by their visual texture but also depends heavily on

Figure 1: Samples generated by GANs trained on the
CelebA [24]. The first row shows some real images used
for training. The middles rows present results obtained with
popular GAN architectures, namely DCGAN [32] (row 2)
and WGAN [2] (row 3). Images generated by our proposed GAGAN architecture (last row) look more realistic
and the represented objects follows an imposed geometry,
expressed by a given shape prior.

their shape geometry. Unfortunately, GANs do not allow
to incorporate such geometric information into the image
generation process. As a result, the shape of the generated
visual object cannot be explicitly controlled. This significantly degenerates the visual quality of the produced images. Figure 1 demonstrates the challenges for face generation with different GAN architectures (DCGAN [32]
and WGAN [2]) that have been trained on the celebA
dataset [24]. Whilst GANs [14, 32] and Wasserstein GANs
(WGANs) [2] generate crisp realistic objects (e.g. faces),
their geometry is not followed. There have been attempts
to include such information in the prior, for instance the
recently proposed Boundary Equilibrium GANs (BEGAN)
[4], or to learn latent codes for identities and observations
[11]. However, whilst these approaches in some cases improved image generation, they still fail to explicitly model
the geometry of the problem. As a result, the wealth of existing annotations for fiducial points, for example from the
1878

