Occlusion Aware Unsupervised Learning of Optical Flow
Yang Wang1

Yi Yang1 Zhenheng Yang2 Liang Zhao1 Peng Wang1 Wei Xu1,3
1
Baidu Research 2 University of Southern California
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Applications

{wangyang59, yangyi05, zhaoliang07, wangpeng54, wei.xu}@baidu.com zhenheny@usc.edu

Abstract
It has been recently shown that a convolutional neural
network can learn optical flow estimation with unsupervised learning. However, the performance of the unsupervised methods still has a relatively large gap compared to
its supervised counterpart. Occlusion and large motion are
some of the major factors that limit the current unsupervised learning of optical flow methods. In this work we
introduce a new method which models occlusion explicitly
and a new warping way that facilitates the learning of large
motion. Our method shows promising results on Flying
Chairs, MPI-Sintel and KITTI benchmark datasets. Especially on KITTI dataset where abundant unlabeled samples
exist, our unsupervised method outperforms its counterpart
trained with supervised learning.

1. Introduction
Video motion prediction, or namely optical flow, is a fundamental problem in computer vision. With the accurate
optical flow prediction, one could estimate the 3D structure
of a scene [18], segment moving objects based on motion
cues [38], track objects in a complicated environment [11],
and build important visual cues for many high level vision
tasks such as video action recognition [45] and video object
detection [60].
Traditionally, optical flow is formulated as a variational
optimization problem with the goal of finding pixel correspondences between two consecutive video frames [23].
With the recent development of deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [32], deep learning based methods have
been adopted to learn optical flow estimation, where the
networks are either trained to compute discriminative image features for patch matching [21] or directly output the
dense flow fields in an end-to-end manner [16]. One major
advantage of the deep learning based methods compared to
classical energy-based methods is the computational speed,
where most state-of-the-art energy-based methods require
1-50 minutes to process a pair of images, while deep nets

only need less than 100 milliseconds with a modern GPU.
Since most deep networks are built to predict flow using
two consecutive frames and trained with supervised learning [26], it would require a large amount of training data
to obtain reasonably high accuracy [35]. Unfortunately,
most large-scale flow datasets are from synthetic movies
and ground-truth motion labels in real world videos are generally hard to annotate [29]. To overcome this problem, unsupervised learning framework is proposed to utilize the resources of unlabeled videos [30]. The overall strategy behind those unsupervised methods is that instead of directly
training the neural nets with ground-truth flow, they use a
photometric loss that measures the difference between the
target image and the (inversely) warped subsequent image
based on the dense flow field predicted from the fully convolutional networks. This allows the networks to be trained
end-to-end with a large amount of unlabeled image pairs,
overcoming the limitation from the lack of ground-truth
flow annotations.
However, the performance of the unsupervised methods
still has a relatively large gap compared to their supervised
counterparts [41]. To further improve unsupervised flow
estimation, we realize that occlusion and large motion are
among the major factors that limit the current unsupervised
learning methods. In this paper, we propose a new end-toend deep neural architecture that carefully addresses these
issues.
More specifically, the original baseline networks estimate motion and attempt to reconstruct every pixel in the
target image. During reconstruction, there will be a fraction
of pixels in the target image that have no source pixels due
to occlusion. If we do not address this issue, it could limit
the optical flow estimation accuracy since the loss function
would prefer to compensate the occluded regions by moving
other pixels. For example, in Fig. 1, we would like to estimate the optical flow from frame 1 to frame 2, and reconstruct frame 1 by warping frame 2 with the estimated flow.
Let us focus on the chair in the bottom left corner of the
image. It moves in the down-left direction, and some part
of the background is occluded by it. When we warp frame
14884

