Low-shot learning with large-scale diffusion
Matthijs Douze† , Arthur Szlam† , Bharath Hariharan†∗, Hervé Jégou†
†
Facebook AI Research
*
Cornell University
seed images
(labeled)

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of inferring image labels from images when only a few annotated examples are
available at training time. This setup is often referred to
as low-shot learning, where a standard approach is to retrain the last few layers of a convolutional neural network
learned on separate classes for which training examples are
abundant. We consider a semi-supervised setting based on
a large collection of images to support label propagation.
This is possible by leveraging the recent advances on largescale similarity graph construction.
We show that despite its conceptual simplicity, scaling
label propagation up to hundred millions of images leads to
state of the art accuracy in the low-shot learning regime.

1. Introduction
Large, diverse collections of images are now commonplace; these often contain a “long tail” of visual concepts.
Some concepts like “person” or “cat” appear in many images, but the vast majority of the visual classes do not occur
frequently. Even though the total number of images may
be large, it is hard to collect enough labeled data for most
of the visual concepts. Thus if we want to learn them, we
must do so with few labeled examples. This task is named
low-shot learning in the literature.
In order to learn new classes with little supervision, a
standard approach is to leverage classifiers already learned
for the most frequent classes, employing a so-called transfer learning strategy. For instance, for new classes with few
labels, only the few last layers of a convolutional neural network are re-trained. This limits the number of parameters
that need to be learned and limits over-fitting.
In this paper, we consider the low-shot learning problem described above, where the goal is to learn to detect
new visual classes with only a few annotated images per
class, but we also assume that we have many unlabelled images. This is called semi-supervised learning [39, 37] (con-

background images
(unlabeled)

test images
(labels witheld)

Figure 1. The diffusion setup. The arrows indicate the direction
of diffusion. There is no diffusion performed from the test images. For the rest of the graph, the edges are bidirectional (i.e., the
graph matrix is symmetric). Except when mentioned otherwise,
the edges have no weights.

sidered, e.g., for face annotation [14]). The motivation of
this work is threefold. First we want to show that with modern computational tools, classical semi-supervised learning
methods scale gracefully to hundreds of millions of unlabeled points. A limiting factor in previous evaluations was
that constructing the similarity graph supporting the diffusion was slow. This is no longer a bottleneck: thanks to
advances both in computing architectures and algorithms,
one can routinely compute the similarity graph for 100 millions images in a few hours [21]. Second, we want to answer the question: Does a very large number of images help
for semi-supervised learning? Finally, by comparing the
results of these methods on Imagenet and the YFCC100M
dataset [33], we highlight how these methods exhibit some
artificial aspects of Imagenet that can influence the performance of low shot learning algorithms.
In summary, the contribution of our paper is a study of
semi-supervised learning in the scenario where we have a
very large number of unlabeled images. Our main results
are that in this setting, semi-supervised learning leads to
state of the art low-shot learning performance. In more detail, we make the following contributions:
• We carry out a large-scale evaluation for diffusion
methods for semi-supervised learning and compare

∗ This work was carried out while B. Hariharan was post-doc at FAIR.

13349

