Recurrent Saliency Transformation Network:
Incorporating Multi-Stage Visual Cues for Small Organ Segmentation

1

Qihang Yu1 , Lingxi Xie2( ) , Yan Wang2 , Yuyin Zhou2 , Elliot K. Fishman3 , Alan L. Yuille2
Peking University 2 The Johns Hopkins University 3 The Johns Hopkins Medical Institute

{yucornetto,198808xc,wyanny.9,zhouyuyiner,alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Abstract
We aim at segmenting small organs (e.g., the pancreas)
from abdominal CT scans. As the target often occupies
a relatively small region in the input image, deep neural
networks can be easily confused by the complex and variable background. To alleviate this, researchers proposed a
coarse-to-fine approach [46], which used prediction from
the first (coarse) stage to indicate a smaller input region
for the second (fine) stage. Despite its effectiveness, this
algorithm dealt with two stages individually, which lacked
optimizing a global energy function, and limited its ability
to incorporate multi-stage visual cues. Missing contextual
information led to unsatisfying convergence in iterations,
and that the fine stage sometimes produced even lower
segmentation accuracy than the coarse stage.
This paper presents a Recurrent Saliency Transformation Network. The key innovation is a saliency transformation module, which repeatedly converts the segmentation probability map from the previous iteration as spatial
weights and applies these weights to the current iteration.
This brings us two-fold benefits. In training, it allows joint
optimization over the deep networks dealing with different
input scales. In testing, it propagates multi-stage visual
information throughout iterations to improve segmentation
accuracy. Experiments in the NIH pancreas segmentation
dataset demonstrate the state-of-the-art accuracy, which
outperforms the previous best by an average of over 2%.
Much higher accuracies are also reported on several small
organs in a larger dataset collected by ourselves. In addition, our approach enjoys better convergence properties,
making it more efficient and reliable in practice.

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on small organ (e.g., the pancreas)
segmentation from abdominal CT scans, which is an important prerequisite for enabling computers to assist human
doctors for clinical purposes. This problem falls into the

efishman@jhmi.edu

NIH Case #001

coronal view ( -axis)

axial view ( -axis)

sagittal view ( -axis)

Figure 1. A typical example from the NIH pancreas segmentation
dataset [34] (best viewed in color). We highlight the pancreas in
red seen from three different viewpoints. It is a relatively small
organ with irregular shape and boundary.

research area named medical imaging analysis. Recently,
great progress has been brought to this field by the fast development of deep learning, especially convolutional neural
networks [18][27]. Many conventional methods, such as
the graph-based segmentation approaches [1] or those based
on handcrafted local features [41], have been replaced by
deep segmentation networks, which typically produce higher segmentation accuracy [33][34].
Segmenting a small organ from CT scans is often challenging. As the target often occupies a small part of input
data (e.g., less than 1.5% in a 2D image, see Figure 1), deep
segmentation networks such as FCN [27] and DeepLab [5]
can be easily confused by the background region, which
may contain complicated and variable contents. This motivates researchers to propose a coarse-to-fine approach [46]
with two stages, in which the coarse stage provides a rough
localization and the fine stage performs accurate segmentation. But, despite state-of-the-art performance achieved in
pancreas segmentation, this method suffers from inconsistency between its training and testing flowcharts, which is
to say, the training phase dealt with coarse and fine stages
individually and did not minimize a global energy function,
but the testing phase assumed that these two stages can
18280

