CarFusion: Combining Point Tracking and Part Detection for
Dynamic 3D Reconstruction of Vehicles
N Dinesh Reddy

Minh Vo
Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University

{dnarapur,mpvo,srinivas}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Despite significant research in the area, reconstruction
of multiple dynamic rigid objects (eg. vehicles) observed
from wide-baseline, uncalibrated and unsynchronized cameras, remains hard. On one hand, feature tracking works
well within each view but is hard to correspond across multiple cameras with limited overlap in fields of view or due to
occlusions. On the other hand, advances in deep learning
have resulted in strong detectors that work across different
viewpoints but are still not precise enough for triangulationbased reconstruction. In this work, we develop a framework to fuse both the single-view feature tracks and multiview detected part locations to significantly improve the detection, localization and reconstruction of moving vehicles,
even in the presence of strong occlusions. We demonstrate
our framework at a busy traffic intersection by reconstructing over 62 vehicles passing within a 3-minute window.
We evaluate the different components within our framework
and compare to alternate approaches such as reconstruction using tracking-by-detection.

Figure 1: Reconstruction of vehicles crossing a busy intersection, making turns, going straight and changing lanes. A
subset of vehicle skeletons (3D detector locations) and their
3D trajectories are augmented within the Google Earth view
of the intersection. The reconstructions are reprojected into
multiple views of two cars (a sedan and an SUV) demonstrating good performance under partial occlusions.

1. Introduction
Multiple video cameras are becoming increasingly common at urban traffic intersections. This provides us a strong
opportunity to reconstruct moving vehicles crossing those
intersections. The shapes (even sparse) and motions of
the vehicles can be invaluable to traffic analysis, including vehicle type, speed, density, trajectory and frequency
of events such as near-accidents. Infrastructure-to-Vehicle
(I2V) communication systems can provide such analysis to
other (semi-)autonomous vehicles approaching the intersection. That said, reconstructing moving vehicles in a busy
intersection is hard because of severe occlusions. Furthermore, the cameras are often unsynchronized, provide widebaseline views with little overlap in fields of view and need
to be calibrated each frame as they are often not rigidly attached and sway because of wind or vibrations.
There has been a rich history of detection [12, 13, 34,
17], tracking [48, 9, 44, 41] and reconstruction [50, 19, 15,
8, 3] of vehicles. Their performances are progressively improving thanks to recent advances in deep learning. In particular, detection of parts of vehicles (wheels, headlights,

doors, etc.) across multiple views is becoming increasingly
reliable [32, 24, 42]. However, the detected part locations
are still not precise enough to directly apply triangulationbased 3D reconstruction methods, and are incomplete in the
presence of occlusions. For the same reason, tracking via
per-frame detection is not stable enough to be useful for
structure-from-motion approaches. We will refer to the detected part locations as structured points.
On the other hand, there has also been significant work
on tracking feature points [38, 1] in structure-from-motion
approaches applied to a video from a single moving camera [20, 31, 11, 30]. But corresponding these features across
wide-baseline views is near impossible given that each camera sees only parts of a vehicle (front, one side, or back) at
any given time instant. These feature points do not often
have a semantic meaning (like the structured parts) and we
will call them unstructured points.
In this paper, we present a comprehensive framework
that fuses (a) incomplete and imprecise structured points

1906

