Matryoshka Networks: Predicting 3D Geometry via Nested Shape Layers
Stephan R. Richter1,2
1
TU Darmstadt

∗

Stefan Roth1
2
Intel Labs

Figure 1. Exemplary shape reconstructions from a single image by our Matryoshka network based on nested shape layers.

Abstract
In this paper, we develop novel, efficient 2D encodings for 3D geometry, which enable reconstructing full 3D
shapes from a single image at high resolution. The key idea
is to pose 3D shape reconstruction as a 2D prediction problem. To that end, we first develop a simple baseline network
that predicts entire voxel tubes at each pixel of a reference
view. By leveraging well-proven architectures for 2D pixelprediction tasks, we attain state-of-the-art results, clearly
outperforming purely voxel-based approaches. We scale
this baseline to higher resolutions by proposing a memoryefficient shape encoding, which recursively decomposes a
3D shape into nested shape layers, similar to the pieces of
a Matryoshka doll. This allows reconstructing highly detailed shapes with complex topology, as demonstrated in extensive experiments; we clearly outperform previous octreebased approaches despite having a much simpler architecture using standard network components. Our Matryoshka
networks further enable reconstructing shapes from IDs or
shape similarity, as well as shape sampling.

1. Introduction
Being able to reason about the 3D shape of objects, even
when presented with only a single monocular image, is one
of the remarkable abilities of the human visual system. In
∗ This work was carried out while at TU Darmstadt.

the absence of geometric cues from stereopsis or motion,
our visual system is still able to infer detailed surfaces or
plausibly complete hidden parts.
The advent of large-scale shape collections [4] and advances in data-driven approaches, especially convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), have sparked new interest in developing approaches that mimic the human visual system
in its ability to reconstruct 3D shapes from a single image,
e.g. [5, 15, 20, 22, 27, 31]. The predominant structure of
CNNs employed for this task is an hourglass shape with an
encoder, which transforms a single image into a shape code,
and a decoder finally producing a 3D shape [5, 10]. Interpreting the shape code as a multi-dimensional tensor with
spatial and feature dimensions, the decoder successively increases the spatial resolution of the shape code while reducing the number of feature dimensions. The output of the
decoder is a volumetric binary occupancy map. The overall
down-sampling and up-sampling of representations in this
hourglass architecture facilitates the accumulation of shape
information from the whole image and propagating it to all
parts of the reconstructed shape. Higher resolutions of the
input and/or output require more levels of scaling, which
results in deeper networks. The network depth is in turn
bound by the available GPU memory, impeding CNNs with
volumetric decoders in their ability to reconstruct shapes at
high resolution [11, 22, 27].
More efficient encodings, for example based on octrees
[11, 22, 27], alleviate this problem, but require sophisticated structures and mechanisms for feature propagation

1936

