SeGAN: Segmenting and Generating the Invisible
Kiana Ehsani1 , Roozbeh Mottaghi2 , Ali Farhadi1,2
1
University of Washington, 2 Allen Institute for AI (AI2)

Abstract

Image

Input

Objects often occlude each other in scenes; Inferring
their appearance beyond their visible parts plays an important role in scene understanding, depth estimation, object
interaction and manipulation. In this paper, we study the
challenging problem of completing the appearance of occluded objects. Doing so requires knowing which pixels to
paint (segmenting the invisible parts of objects) and what
color to paint them (generating the invisible parts). Our
proposed novel solution, SeGAN, jointly optimizes for both
segmentation and generation of the invisible parts of objects. Our experimental results show that: (a) SeGAN can
learn to generate the appearance of the occluded parts of
objects; (b) SeGAN outperforms state-of-the-art segmentation baselines for the invisible parts of objects; (c) trained
on synthetic photo realistic images, SeGAN can reliably
segment natural images; (d) by reasoning about occluderoccludee relations, our method can infer depth layering.

Seg
GAN

Visible+Invisible
Segmentation

Generated
Object

1. Introduction
Humans have strong ability to make inferences about the
appearance of the invisible and occluded parts of scenes [1,
34]. For example, when we look at the scene depicted in
Figure 1 we can make predictions about what is behind the
coffee table, and can even complete the sofa based on the
visible parts of the sofa, the coffee table, and what we know
in general about sofas and coffee tables and how they occlude each other. Devising algorithms to infer the appearance of what is behind an object exhibits several challenges.
Predicting the appearance of the occluded regions of objects
requires reasoning over multiple intertwined cues. Recognizing if an object is occluded or not is the first challenge
to begin with. Second, knowing what pixels to color requires extending the boundaries of objects from their visible regions to invisible parts which requires some form of
knowledge about the shapes of objects. The complex relations between the appearance of objects and the change in
viewpoint and occlusion patterns form the third challenge.
Deformable objects can even make the problem ill-defined.
Fourth, it is challenging to provide large-scale, accurate,

Visible Segmentation

Figure 1. Our goal is to jointly segment and paint the invisible
regions of objects. For instance, we predict how the sofa looks
like when the occluders (cushions, laptop and coffee table) are
removed. The input to our model is an image and a mask for the
visible regions of objects (shown in blue).

and reliable training data to train models for occlusion reasoning.
In this paper, we study the problem of generating the invisible parts of objects. Doing so requires segmenting the
invisible part of the object and then generating the appearance of (painting) it. Inspired by the principles of learningthe-easy-thing-first, we propose SeGAN, a novel model
that combines segmentation and generation and jointly optimizes for both of them. More specifically, given an input image and a segmentation for the visible regions of an
object, our proposed GAN-based model learns to predict

6144

