DeLS-3D: Deep Localization and Segmentation with a 3D Semantic Map
Peng Wang, Ruigang Yang, Binbin Cao, Wei Xu, Yuanqing Lin
Baidu Research
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Applications
{wangpeng54, yangruigang, caobinbin, wei.xu, linyuanqing}@baidu.com

Abstract
For applications such as augmented reality, autonomous
driving, self-localization/camera pose estimation and scene
parsing are crucial technologies. In this paper, we propose a unified framework to tackle these two problems simultaneously. The uniqueness of our design is a sensor fusion scheme which integrates camera videos, motion
sensors (GPS/IMU), and a 3D semantic map in order to
achieve robustness and efficiency of the system. Specifically, we first have an initial coarse camera pose obtained
from consumer-grade GPS/IMU, based on which a label
map can be rendered from the 3D semantic map. Then, the
rendered label map and the RGB image are jointly fed into
a pose CNN, yielding a corrected camera pose. In addition, to incorporate temporal information, a multi-layer recurrent neural network (RNN) is further deployed improve
the pose accuracy. Finally, based on the pose from RNN,
we render a new label map, which is fed together with
the RGB image into a segment CNN which produces perpixel semantic label. In order to validate our approach, we
build a dataset with registered 3D point clouds and video
camera images. Both the point clouds and the images are
semantically-labeled. Each video frame has ground truth
pose from highly accurate motion sensors. We show that
practically, pose estimation solely relying on images like
PoseNet [25] may fail due to street view confusion, and it
is important to fuse multiple sensors. Finally, various ablation studies are performed, which demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed system. In particular, we show that
scene parsing and pose estimation are mutually beneficial
to achieve a more robust and accurate system.

1. Introduction
In applications like robotic navigation [34] or augment
reality [2], visual-based 6-DOF camera pose estimation [5,
31, 25, 10], and concurrently parsing each frame of a video
into semantically meaningful regions [48, 46, 6] efficiently
are the key components, which are attracting much attention
in computer vision.
Currently, most state-of-the-art (SOTA) algorithms try

to solve both tasks using solely visual signals. For camera localization, geometric based methods are relying on visual feature matching, e.g. systems of Perspective-n-Points
(PnP) [19, 26, 5] when a 3D map and an image is provided,
or systems of SLAM [15, 32, 33] when there is a video.
Such systems are dependent on local appearance, which
could fail when confronted with low-texture environments.
Most recently, deep learning based methods, e.g. for either
images [25] or videos [8], have been developed, which not
only consider hierarchical features, while yielding real-time
performance. Nevertheless, those methods are good for environments with rich distinguishable features, such as these
in the Cambridge landmarks dataset [25]. They could fail
for common street views with very similar appearances or
even repetitive structures.
For scene parsing, approaches [48, 6] based on deep fully
convolutional network (FCN) with ResNet [21] are the bestperforming algorithms for single image input. When the
input is video, researchers [28, 49] incorporate the optical
flow between consecutive frames, which not only accelerates the parsing, but also improve temporal consistency.
Furthermore, for static background, one may use structurefrom-motion (SFM) techniques [44] to jointly parse and
reconstruct [27]. However, these methods could be either
time-consuming or hard to generalize for applications asking online real-time performance.
In this paper, we aim to solve this camera localization
and scene parsing problem jointly from a more practical
standpoint. In our system, we assume to have (a) GPS/IMU
signal to provide a coarse camera pose estimation; (b) a semantic 3D map for the static environment. The GPS/IMU
signals serve as a crucial prior for our deep-learning based
pose estimation system. The semantic 3D map, which can
synthesize a semantic view for a given camera pose, not
only provides strong guidance for scene parsing, but also
helps maintain temporal consistency. Our setting is considered on par with the widely used mobile navigation systems,
whereas the 2D labeled map is replaced with a 3D semantic map, and we are able to virtually place the navigation
signals into the images with more accurate self-localization
15860

