What have we learned from deep representations for action recognition?
Christoph Feichtenhofer*
TU Graz

Axel Pinz
TU Graz

Richard P. Wildes
York University, Toronto

Andrew Zisserman
University of Oxford

feichtenhofer@tugraz.at

axel.pinz@tugraz.at

wildes@cse.yorku.ca

az@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
As the success of deep models has led to their deployment
in all areas of computer vision, it is increasingly important to understand how these representations work and what
they are capturing. In this paper, we shed light on deep spatiotemporal representations by visualizing what two-stream
models have learned in order to recognize actions in video.
We show that local detectors for appearance and motion objects arise to form distributed representations for recognizing human actions. Key observations include the following.
First, cross-stream fusion enables the learning of true spatiotemporal features rather than simply separate appearance and motion features. Second, the networks can learn
local representations that are highly class specific, but also
generic representations that can serve a range of classes.
Third, throughout the hierarchy of the network, features become more abstract and show increasing invariance to aspects of the data that are unimportant to desired distinctions (e.g. motion patterns across various speeds). Fourth,
visualizations can be used not only to shed light on learned
representations, but also to reveal idiosyncracies of training
data and to explain failure cases of the system. This document is best viewed offline where figures play on click.

1. Motivation
Principled understanding of how deep networks operate
and achieve their strong performance significantly lags behind their realizations. Since these models are being deployed to all fields from medicine to transportation, this issue becomes of ever greater importance. Previous work has
yielded great advances in effective architectures for recognizing actions in video, with especially significant strides
towards higher accuracies made by deep spatiotemporal
networks [2, 8, 32, 39, 40]. However, what these models actually learn remains unclear, since their compositional
structure makes it difficult to reason explicitly about their
learned representations. In this paper we use spatiotempo* C. Feichtenhofer made the primary contribution to this work and therefore is listed first. Others contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Studying a single filter at layer conv5 fusion: (a) and
(b) show what maximizes the unit at the input: multiple coloured
blobs in the appearance input (a) and moving circular objects at
the motion input (b). (c) shows a sample clip from the test set,
and (d) the corresponding optical flow (where the RGB channels
correspond to the horizontal, vertical and magnitude flow components respectively). Note that (a) and (b) are optimized from white
noise under regularized spatiotemporal variation. Best viewed in
Adobe Reader where (b)-(d) should play as videos.

rally regularized activation maximization [23, 25, 31, 38,
42] to visualize deep two-stream representations [32] and
better understand what the underlying models have learned.
As an example, in Fig. 1 we highlight a single interesting unit at the last convolutional layer of the VGG-16
Two-Stream Fusion model [8], which fuses appearance and
motion features. We visualize the appearance and motion
inputs that highly activate this filter. When looking at the
inputs, we observe that this filter is activated by differently
coloured blobs in the appearance input and by linear motion of circular regions in the motion input. Thus, this unit
could support recognition of the Billiards class in UCF101,
and we show in Fig. 1c a sample Billiards clip from the test
set of UCF101. Similar to emergence of object detectors for
static images [1, 46], here we see the emergence of a spatiotemporal representation for an action. While [1, 46] automatically assigned concept labels to learned internal representations by reference to a large collection of labelled
input samples, our work instead is concerned with visualizing the network’s internal representations without appeal to
any signal at the input and thereby avoids biasing the visualization via appeal to a particular set of samples.
Generally, we can understand deep networks from two
viewpoints. First, the architectural viewpoint that considers a network as a computational structure (e.g. a directed
acyclic graph) of mathematical operations in feature space
(e.g. affine scaling and shifting, local convolution and pool17844

