DenseASPP for Semantic Segmentation in Street Scenes
Maoke Yang

Kun Yu

Chi Zhang
DeepMotion

Zhiwei Li

Kuiyuan Yang

{maokeyang, kunyu, chizhang, zhiweili, kuiyuanyang}@deepmotion.ai

Abstract
Semantic image segmentation is a basic street scene understanding task in autonomous driving, where each pixel in
a high resolution image is categorized into a set of semantic labels. Unlike other scenarios, objects in autonomous
driving scene exhibit very large scale changes, which poses
great challenges for high-level feature representation in a
sense that multi-scale information must be correctly encoded. To remedy this problem, atrous convolution[14] was
introduced to generate features with larger receptive fields
without sacrificing spatial resolution. Built upon atrous
convolution, Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP)[2]
was proposed to concatenate multiple atrous-convolved features using different dilation rates into a final feature representation. Although ASPP is able to generate multi-scale
features, we argue the feature resolution in the scale-axis
is not dense enough for the autonomous driving scenario.
To this end, we propose Densely connected Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (DenseASPP), which connects a set
of atrous convolutional layers in a dense way, such that it
generates multi-scale features that not only cover a larger
scale range, but also cover that scale range densely, without significantly increasing the model size. We evaluate
DenseASPP on the street scene benchmark Cityscapes[4]
and achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
With Fully Convolutional Network (FCN)[16], semantic image segmentation has achieved promising results with
significantly improved feature representation. High level
semantic information plays a crucial role in achieving high
performance for a segmentation network. To extract high
level information, FCN uses multiple pooling layers to increase the receptive field size of an output neuron. However,
increased number of pooling layers leads to reduced feature
map size, which poses serious challenges to up-sample the
segmentation output back to full resolution. On the other
hand, if we output the segmentation from an early layer with
larger resolution, we were not able to make use of higher

Figure 1. Illustration of challenging scale variations of street
scenes from Cityscapes [4]. In the first exemplar image, the same
category such as person varies largely in scale caused by distance
to the camera. The second exemplar image illustrates an even challenging case where a large bus is close while several small traffic
lights are far away.

level semantics for better reasoning.
Atrous convolution[14] is proposed to resolve the contradictory requirements between larger feature map resolution
and larger receptive fields. An atrous kernel can be dilated
in varied rates by inserting zeros into appropriate positions
in the kernel mask. Compared to the traditional convolution
operator, atrous convolution is able to achieve a larger receptive field size without increasing the numbers of kernel
parameters. A feature map produced by an atrous convolution can be as the same size as the input, but with each
output neuron possessing a larger receptive field, and therefore encoding higher level semantics.
Although atrous convolution solves the contradiction
between feature map resolution and receptive field size,
a method that simply generates a semantic mask from
atrous-convolved feature map still suffers from a limitation. Specifically, all neurons in the atrous-convolved feature map share the same receptive field size, which means
the process of semantic mask generation only made use
of features from a single scale. However, experiences
[24, 2, 3] show that multi-scale information would help resolve ambiguous cases and results in more robust classifi13684

