Im2Flow: Motion Hallucination from Static Images for Action Recognition
Ruohan Gao
UT Austin

Bo Xiong
UT Austin

Kristen Grauman
UT Austin

rhgao@cs.utexas.edu

bxiong@cs.utexas.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Existing methods to recognize actions in static images take the images at their face value, learning the
appearances—objects, scenes, and body poses—that distinguish each action class. However, such models are deprived
of the rich dynamic structure and motions that also define
human activity. We propose an approach that hallucinates
the unobserved future motion implied by a single snapshot
to help static-image action recognition. The key idea is to
learn a prior over short-term dynamics from thousands of
unlabeled videos, infer the anticipated optical flow on novel
static images, and then train discriminative models that exploit both streams of information. Our main contributions
are twofold. First, we devise an encoder-decoder convolutional neural network and a novel optical flow encoding
that can translate a static image into an accurate flow map.
Second, we show the power of hallucinated flow for recognition, successfully transferring the learned motion into a
standard two-stream network for activity recognition. On
seven datasets, we demonstrate the power of the approach.
It not only achieves state-of-the-art accuracy for dense optical flow prediction, but also consistently enhances recognition of actions and dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
Video-based action recognition has long been an active
research topic in computer vision [9, 35, 49, 78, 79], with
many recent methods employing deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [65, 40, 37, 86, 70, 12, 81]. Regardless of the approach, most methods rely on two crucial and
complementary cues: appearance and motion. Motion is
usually represented by (stacked) optical flow or flow-based
descriptors [65, 12, 9, 52, 81, 19], localized spatio-temporal
descriptors [48, 82] or trajectories [78, 79].
Static-image action recognition instead requires the system to identify the activity taking place in an individual
photo [25]. The problem is of great practical interest for organizing photo collections (e.g., on the Web, social media,
stock photos) based on human behavior and events. Yet, it

···

···

learn a motion prior from videos
novel static image
inferred flow image
Im2Flow

appearance

...

...

Pu Pu Sq
ll-u sh ua
ps -up ts
s

motion

Figure 1. Our system first learns a motion prior by watching thousands of video clips containing various actions. Then, given a
static image, the system translates the observed RGB image into
a flow map encoding the inferred motion for the static image. Finally, we combine the appearance of the original static image and
the motion from the inferred flow to perform action recognition.

presents the additional challenge of understanding activity
in the absence of motion information.
Or is the motion really absent? A static snapshot can reveal the motions that are likely to occur next, at least for
human viewers. Indeed, neuroscientists report that the medial temporal/medial superior temporal cortex—one of the
main brain regions engaged in the perceptual analysis of visual motion—is also involved in representing implied motion from static images [44]. Over many years of observations, humans accumulate visual experience about how
things move in the world. Given a single static image, not
only can we interpret the instantaneous semantic content,
but also we can anticipate what is going to happen next, e.g.,
based on human poses and object configurations present in
the image. This suggests that a human viewer can leverage
the implied motion to help perceive actions in static images.
For example, given a static image as shown in Fig. 1, expecting that the person’s back is going to either move up or
down may aid the recognition of push-ups.
15937

