Human Appearance Transfer
Mihai Zanfir2∗ Alin-Ionut Popa2∗ Andrei Zanfir2

Cristian Sminchisescu1,2

{mihai.zanfir, alin.popa, andrei.zanfir}@imar.ro cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se
1

Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy

Abstract
We propose an automatic person-to-person appearance
transfer model based on explicit parametric 3d human representations and learned, constrained deep translation network architectures for photographic image synthesis. Given
a single source image and a single target image, each
corresponding to different human subjects, wearing different clothing and in different poses, our goal is to photorealistically transfer the appearance from the source image onto the target image while preserving the target shape
and clothing segmentation layout. Our solution to this new
problem is formulated in terms of a computational pipeline
that combines (1) 3d human pose and body shape estimation
from monocular images, (2) identifying 3d surface colors elements (mesh triangles) visible in both images, that can be
transferred directly using barycentric procedures, and (3)
predicting surface appearance missing in the first image but
visible in the second one using deep learning-based image
synthesis techniques. Our model achieves promising results
as supported by a perceptual user study where the participants rated around 65% of our results as good, very good
or perfect, as well in automated tests (Inception scores and
a Faster-RCNN human detector responding very similarly
to real and model generated images). We further show how
the proposed architecture can be profiled to automatically
generate images of a person dressed with different clothing transferred from a person in another image, opening
paths for applications in entertainment and photo-editing
(e.g. embodying and posing as friends or famous actors),
the fashion industry, or affordable online shopping of clothing.

1. Introduction
People are of central interest in images and video, so understanding and capturing their pose and appearance from
visual data is critically important. While problems like de∗ Authors contributed equally

Figure 1. Bidirectional transfer automatically produced by our
method. We transfer from one image (first column) to the second
(second column) and vice-versa, with automatically generated images shown on the third and fourth columns.

tection or 2d pose estimation have received considerable attention and witnessed significant progress recently, appearance modeling has been less explored comparatively, especially for bodies and clothing, in contrast to faces. One setback is that people are extremely sensitive to invalid human
appearance variations and immediately spot them. This is to
a large extent true for faces, as people are sharply tuned to
fine social signals expressed as subtle facial expressions, but
also stands true for human body poses, shapes and clothing.
This makes it difficult to capture and possibly re-synthesize
human appearance in ways that pass the high bar of human
perception. While the realistic 3d human shape and appearance generation, including clothing, has been a long standing goal in computer graphics, with impressive studio results that occasionally pass the Turing test, these usually require complex models with sophisticated layering, manual
interaction, and many cameras, which makes them difficult
to use at large scale. For this purpose, flexible methods, that
can be learned from data and can synthesize realistic human
appearance are of obvious value. Arguably, even more im-

5391

