Feedback-prop: Convolutional Neural Network Inference under Partial Evidence
Tianlu Wang1 , Kota Yamaguchi2 , Vicente Ordonez1
1
University of Virginia, 2 CyberAgent, Inc.
yamaguchi kota@cyberagent.co.jp
{tw8cb, vicente}@virginia.edu

Abstract
We propose an inference procedure for deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) when partial evidence is
available. Our method consists of a general feedback-based
propagation approach (feedback-prop) that boosts the prediction accuracy for an arbitrary set of unknown target labels when the values for a non-overlapping arbitrary set
of target labels are known. We show that existing models trained in a multi-label or multi-task setting can readily
take advantage of feedback-prop without any retraining or
fine-tuning. Our feedback-prop inference procedure is general, simple, reliable, and works on different challenging visual recognition tasks. We present two variants of feedbackprop based on layer-wise and residual iterative updates. We
experiment using several multi-task models and show that
feedback-prop is effective in all of them. Our results unveil
a previously unreported but interesting dynamic property of
deep CNNs. We also present an associated technical approach that takes advantage of this property for inference
under partial evidence in general visual recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
In this paper we tackle visual recognition problems
where partial evidence or partial information about an input image is available at test time. For instance, if we know
for certain that an image was taken at the beach, this should
change our beliefs about the types of objects that could be
present, e.g. an office chair would be unlikely. This is because something is known for certain about the image even
before performing any visual recognition. We argue that
this setting is realistic in many applications. For instance,
images on the web are usually surrounded by text, images
on social media have user comments, many images contain geo-location information, images taken with portable
devices contain other sensor information. More generally,
images in standard computer vision datasets are effectively
partially annotated with respect to a single task or modality.
Assuming only visual content as inputs, while convenient

apple: 0.26
banana: 1
fork: 0.76
hat: 1
person: 0.86
table: 0

known labels

unknown labels

Figure 1: Feedback-prop inference leverages an arbitrary
set of known labels to iteratively predict a set of unknown
labels for a test input image. This example shows a multilabel classification task. Neural activations are used to
transfer information among variables in the target space.
for benchmarking purposes, does not reflect many end-user
applications where extra information is available during inference. We propose here a general framework to address
this problem in any task involving deep convolutional neural networks trained with multiple target outputs (i.e. multilabel classification) or multiple tasks (i.e. multi-task learning). We provide an example in Figure 1, where a set of
labels are known: banana, hat, table, while we are
trying to predict the other labels: apple, fork, person.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become the
state-of-the-art in most visual recognition tasks. Their extraordinary representation ability has allowed researchers to
address problems at an unprecedented scale with remarkable accuracy. While reasoning under partial evidence using probabilistic graphical models would involve marginalization over the variables of interest, CNNs do not model
a joint distribution, therefore making such type of reasoning non-trivial. The typical pipeline using CNNs for visual recognition involves training the model using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and the back-propagation algorithm [30] using an annotated image dataset, and then performing forward-propagation during inference given only
visual input. In this paper, we challenge this prevail1898

