Deep Hashing via Discrepancy Minimization
Zhixiang Chena,b,c , Xin Yuana,b,c , Jiwen Lua,b,c,∗ , Qi Tiand , Jie Zhoua,b,c
a
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
b
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, Tsinghua University, China
c
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
d
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio, USA

Abstract
This paper presents a discrepancy minimizing model to
address the discrete optimization problem in hashing learning. The discrete optimization introduced by binary constraint is an NP-hard mixed integer programming problem.
It is usually addressed by relaxing the binary variables into
continuous variables to adapt to the gradient based learning of hashing functions, especially the training of deep
neural networks. To deal with the objective discrepancy
caused by relaxation, we transform the original binary optimization into differentiable optimization problem over hash
functions through series expansion. This transformation decouples the binary constraint and the similarity preserving
hashing function optimization. The transformed objective
is optimized in a tractable alternating optimization framework with gradual discrepancy minimization. Extensive experimental results on three benchmark datasets validate the
efficacy of the proposed discrepancy minimizing hashing.

1. Introduction
Content-based image retrieval finds similar images from
the database given a query image. To measure the similarity,
images are characterized by relevant representative features,
and then the distances between features are utilized to identify relevant images or nearest neighbors. In the presence of
high dimensionality of features and large scale of database,
hashing methods have become a promising solution for similarity search [1, 7, 9, 19, 34, 37, 39, 41, 49]. Hashing methods encode images as compact binary codes with similarity
preservation in the Hamming space. Learning based hashing [13, 24, 26, 33, 38, 45, 50] mines the data properties and
the semantic affinities and shows superior performance than
data-independent hashing methods [9, 16].
In learning based hashing, the optimization of similarity
*Corresponding author (lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of the objective discrepancy minimization
through series expansion. (a) The sign function b = sgn(x) is
usually relaxed as h = tanh(x) for gradient based optimization.
(b) The objective, e.g. f (b) = b2 , is then relaxed as g1 (h) = h2 ,
where large discrepancy is observed. (c) The discrepancy is reduced by considering the quantization loss |δ| = |b − h| in g2 . (d)
We minimize the discrepancy through series expansion in g3 .

preserving objective is a mixed integer optimization problem due to the discrete constraint of binary codes [2, 20,
21, 27, 51, 52], which is incompatible to the gradient based
training of neural networks. The key challenge of hashing
learning lies on the discrete constraint optimization. Relaxation on the binary code transforms the discrete optimization problem into a continuous one [32, 42, 46]. The
discrepancy introduced by relaxation leads to the deviation
from the optimal binary codes and the optimal hashing functions. The coupling of the solution to binary codes with
the optimization over hashing functions aggravates the optimization of the discrete constraint problem. Although the
quantization error is taken into consideration [10,11,25] and
direct solutions on binary codes are proposed [28, 30, 36],
the hashing functions are still learned with a separated optimization over continuous outputs and a post-step sign
thresholding. This may deteriorate the quality of hashing
functions and fail to generate optimal binary codes.
16838

