A Pose-Sensitive Embedding for Person Re-Identification
with Expanded Cross Neighborhood Re-Ranking
M. Saquib Sarfraz1 , Arne Schumann2,1 , Andreas Eberle1 , Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 2 Fraunhofer IOSB
Karlsruhe, Germany
{firstname.lastname}@kit.edu

Abstract
Person re-identification is a challenging retrieval task
that requires matching a person’s acquired image across
non-overlapping camera views. In this paper we propose
an effective approach that incorporates both the fine and
coarse pose information of the person to learn a discriminative embedding. In contrast to the recent direction of
explicitly modeling body parts or correcting for misalignment based on these, we show that a rather straightforward
inclusion of acquired camera view and/or the detected joint
locations into a convolutional neural network helps to learn
a very effective representation. To increase retrieval performance, re-ranking techniques based on computed distances have recently gained much attention. We propose a
new unsupervised and automatic re-ranking framework that
achieves state-of-the-art re-ranking performance. We show
that in contrast to the current state-of-the-art re-ranking
methods our approach does not require to compute new
rank lists for each image pair (e.g., based on reciprocal
neighbors) and performs well by using simple direct rank
list based comparison or even by just using the already computed euclidean distances between the images. We show
that both our learned representation and our re-ranking
method achieve state-of-the-art performance on a number
of challenging surveillance image and video datasets. Code
is available at https://github.com/pse-ecn.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) in non-overlapping camera views poses a difficult matching problem. Most previous solutions try to learn the global appearance of a persons
using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) by either applying a straightforward classification loss or using a metric learning loss. To better learn local statistics, the same
has been applied to image regions, e.g. by using horizontal
stripes or grids [19, 4]. Because of the inherent challenge
of matching between different views and poses of a person,

Figure 1. Camera view and body pose can significantly alter the
visual appearance of a person. A different view might show different aspects of the clothing (e.g. a backpack) while an altered pose
may lead to body parts (e.g. arms or legs) being located at different
positions of the image. Pose information can also help guide the
attention of a re-id approach in case of mis-aligned detections.

there is no implicit correspondence between the local regions of the images (see Figure 1). This correspondence
can be established by explicitly using full body pose information for alignment [32] or locally through matching corresponding detected body parts [41, 42]. Using this local or
global person description by incorporating the body pose or
body parts information can strongly benefit person re-id.
In this work we show that incorporating a simple cue of
the person’s coarse pose (i.e. the captured view with respect
to the camera) or the fine body pose (i.e. joint locations)
suffice to learn a very discriminative representation with
a simple classification loss. We present an appealing design choice to incorporate these cues and show its benefit in
the performance gain over state-of-the-art methods on large
and challenging surveillance benchmarks. We demonstrate
that learning and combining view specific feature maps on
a standard underlying CNN architecture results in a significantly better re-id embedding. Similarly an incorporation
of body joint locations as additional input channels helps to
increase the re-id accuracy.
For improving person retrieval, after computing the initial distances, a re-ranking step can often improve ranking
quality by a good margin. Re-ranking has seen a renewed

420

