Fast and Accurate Online Video Object Segmentation via Tracking Parts
Jingchun Cheng1,2 Yi-Hsuan Tsai3 Wei-Chih Hung2 Shengjin Wang1 * Ming-Hsuan Yang2
1
Tsinghua University 2 University of California, Merced 3 NEC Laboratories America

Abstract
Online video object segmentation is a challenging task
as it entails to process the image sequence timely and accurately. To segment a target object through the video, numerous CNN-based methods have been developed by heavily
finetuning on the object mask in the first frame, which is
time-consuming for online applications. In this paper, we
propose a fast and accurate video object segmentation algorithm that can immediately start the segmentation process once receiving the images. We first utilize a partbased tracking method to deal with challenging factors such
as large deformation, occlusion, and cluttered background.
Based on the tracked bounding boxes of parts, we construct a region-of-interest segmentation network to generate
part masks. Finally, a similarity-based scoring function is
adopted to refine these object parts by comparing them to
the visual information in the first frame. Our method performs favorably against state-of-the-art algorithms in accuracy on the DAVIS benchmark dataset, while achieving
much faster runtime performance.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation aims at separating target objects from the background and other instances on the pixel
level. Segmenting objects in videos is a fundamental task
in computer vision because of its wide applications such as
video surveillance, video editing, and autonomous driving.
However, it is a challenging task due to camera motion, object deformation, occlusion between instances and cluttered
background. Particularly for online applications, significant
different issues arise when the methods are required to be
robust and fast without given access to future frames. In
this paper, we focus on solving the problem of online video
object segmentation. Given the object in the first frame, our
goal is to immediately perform online segmentation on this
target object without knowing future frames. For real application usages, the difficulties lie in the requirement of efficient runtime performance while maintaining accurate seg* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Accuracy versus runtime comparisons on the DAVIS
2016 dataset. We evaluate the state-of-the-art methods and demonstrate that our approach is significantly faster, while maintaining
high accuracy. Note that the runtime includes the pre-processing
steps averaged on all frames for fair comparisons.

mentation. Figure 1 illustrates comparisons of the state-ofthe-art methods in terms of speed and performance, where
we show that the proposed algorithm is fast, accurate and
applicable to online tasks.
Existing video object segmentation algorithms can be
broadly classified into unsupervised and semi-supervised
settings. Unsupervised methods [9, 14, 18, 35] mainly segment moving objects from the background without any prior
knowledge of the target, e.g., initial object masks. However, these methods cannot handle multiple object segmentation as they are not capable of identifying a specific instance. In addition, several methods require batch model
processing (i.e., all the frames are available) before segmenting the object [21, 41], which cannot be applied to
online applications. On the other hand, semi-supervised
methods [6, 16, 19, 20, 44] are given with an initial object mask which provides critical visual cues of the target.
Thus, these methods can handle multi-instance cases and
usually perform better than the unsupervised approaches.
However, many state-of-the-art semi-supervised methods
heavily rely on the segmentation mask in the first frame.
For instance, before making predictions on the test video,
the state-of-the-art methods need to finetune the networks
for each video [4, 6, 19, 44], or the model for each instance [5, 34]. This finetuning step on the video or instance
level is computationally expensive, where it usually takes
more than ten minutes to update a model [4, 6]. In ad-

7415

