Focal Visual-Text Attention for Visual Question Answering
Junwei Liang1
Lu Jiang2
Liangliang Cao3
Li-Jia Li2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Google Inc.

Alexander Hauptmann1
3
HelloVera AI

{junweil,alex}@cs.cmu.edu, {lujiang,lijiali}@google.com, liangliang.cao@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent insights on language and vision with neural networks have been successfully applied to simple singleimage visual question answering. However, to tackle reallife question answering problems on multimedia collections
such as personal photos, we have to look at whole collections with sequences of photos or videos. When answering
questions from a large collection, a natural problem is to
identify snippets to support the answer. In this paper, we
describe a novel neural network called Focal Visual-Text
Attention network (FVTA) for collective reasoning in visual
question answering, where both visual and text sequence information such as images and text metadata are presented.
FVTA introduces an end-to-end approach that makes use of
a hierarchical process to dynamically determine what media and what time to focus on in the sequential data to answer the question. FVTA can not only answer the questions
well but also provides the justifications which the system results are based upon to get the answers. FVTA achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the MemexQA dataset and
competitive results on the MovieQA dataset.

1. Introduction
Language and vision have emerged as a popular research area in computer vision. Visual question answering (VQA) [2] is a successful direction utilizing both computer vision and natural language processing techniques to
solve an interesting problem: given a pair of image and a
question (in natural language), the goal is to learn an inference model that can the answer questions according to
cues discovered from the image. A variety of methods have
been proposed to address the challenges from different aspects [5, 27, 14, 6, 20, 3, 16, 13], with remarkable progress
on answering about a single image.
Extending from VQA on a single image, this paper considers the following problem: Suppose a user’s photos and
videos are organized in a sequence ordered by their creation
time. Some photos or videos may be associated with meta
labels or annotations such as time, GPS, captions, comments, and meaningful title. We are interested in training

Figure 1. Focal Visual-Text Attention (FVTA) Mechanism. Given
the visual-text sequences input and the question, our temporal
visual-text attention tensor captures the temporal constraint in the
question and emphasizes the most recent image with ”bar” scene
visible. Then FVTA selects the appropriate attention region (the
“date”) and finds the correct answer.

a model to answer questions about these images and texts,
e.g. “when was the last time I went to a bar?” or “what did
my son do after his 2017 Halloween dinner party?”
There are two challenges to solve the above problem.
First, the input is provided in an unstructured form. The
question is associated with multiple sequences, in the form
of videos or images. Such sequences are temporally ordered, and each sequence contains multiple time steps. At
each time there are visual data, text annotations and other
metadata. In this paper, we call the format visual-text sequence data. Note that not all the photos and videos are
annotated, which requires a robust method to leverage inconsistently available multimodal data.
The second challenge requires interpretable justifications
in addition to direct answer based on sequence data. To help
users with a lot of photos and videos, a natural requirement
is to identify the supporting evidence for the answer. An
example question as shown in Fig. 1, is “when was the last
time I went to a bar?” From the users’ viewpoint, a good QA
system should not only give a definite answer (e.g., January
20, 2016), but also ground evidential images or text snippets
in the input sequence to justify the reasoning process. Given
16135

