Separating Self-Expression and Visual Content in Hashtag Supervision
Andreas Veit∗
Cornell University

Maximilian Nickel
Facebook AI Research

Serge Belongie
Cornell University

Laurens van der Maaten
Facebook AI Research

andreas@cs.cornell.edu

maxn@fb.com

sjb344@cornell.edu

lvdmaaten@fb.com

Abstract
The variety, abundance, and structured nature of hashtags make them an interesting data source for training vision models. For instance, hashtags have the potential to
significantly reduce the problem of manual supervision and
annotation when learning vision models for a large number
of concepts. However, a key challenge when learning from
hashtags is that they are inherently subjective because they
are provided by users as a form of self-expression. As a
consequence, hashtags may have synonyms (different hashtags referring to the same visual content) and may be polysemous (the same hashtag referring to different visual content). These challenges limit the effectiveness of approaches
that simply treat hashtags as image-label pairs. This paper
presents an approach that extends upon modeling simple
image-label pairs with a joint model of images, hashtags,
and users. We demonstrate the efficacy of such approaches
in image tagging and retrieval experiments, and show how
the joint model can be used to perform user-conditional retrieval and tagging.

1. Introduction
Convolutional networks have shown great success on
image-classification tasks involving a small number of
classes (1000s). An increasingly important question is how
this success can be extended to tasks that require the recognition of a larger variety of visual content. An important obstacle to increasing variety is that successful recognition of
the long tail of visual content [11] may require manual annotation of hundreds of millions of images into hundreds of
thousands of classes, which is difficult and time-consuming.
Images annotated with hashtags provide an interesting
alternative source of training data because: (1) they are
available in great abundance, and (2) they describe the long
tail of visual content that we would like to recognize. Furthermore, hashtags appear in the sweet spot between capturing much of the rich information contained in natural lan∗ This work was performed while Andreas Veit was at Facebook.

user A

previous hashtags by user:

#livemusic #live #music #band #switzerland

#rock

previous hashtags by user:
user B #arizona
#sport #climbing #bouldering #az
#rock

Figure 1. Image-retrieval results obtained using our user-specific
hashtag model. The box above the query shows hashtags frequently used by the user in the past. Hashtag usage varies widely
among users because they are a means of self-expression, not just
a description of visual content. By jointly modeling users, hashtags, and images, our model disambiguates the query for a specific
user. We refer the reader to the supplementary material for license
information on the photos.

guage descriptions [15] whilst being nearly as structured as
image labels in datasets like ImageNet.
However, using hashtags as supervision comes with its
own set of challenges. In addition to the missing-label problem that hampers many datasets with multi-label annotations (e.g., [4, 13, 17]), hashtag supervision has the problem that hashtags are inherently subjective. Since hashtags
are provided by users as a form of self-expression, some
users may be using different hashtags to describe the same
content (synonyms), whereas other users may be using the
same hashtag to describe very different content (polysemy).
As a result, hashtags cannot be treated as oracle descriptions of the visual content of an image, but must be viewed
as user-dependent descriptions of that content.

5919

