From source to target and back: Symmetric Bi-Directional Adaptive GAN
Paolo Russo1,2 , Fabio M. Carlucci1,2 , Tatiana Tommasi2 and Barbara Caputo1,2
1
Department DIAG, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
2
Italian Institute of Technology
{Paolo.Russo, Fabio.Carlucci, Tatiana.Tommasi, Barbara.Caputo}@iit.it

Abstract

not be alternative, but complementary. Indeed, the main
ingredient for adaptation is the ability of transferring
successfully the style of one domain to the images of the
other. This, given a fixed generative architecture, will
depend on the application: there may be cases where
mapping from the source to the target is easier, and cases
where it is true otherwise. By pursuing both directions in
a unified architecture, we can obtain a system more robust
and more general than previous adaptation algorithms.
With this idea in mind, we designed SBADA-GAN:
Symmetric Bi-directional ADAptive Generative Adversarial Network. Its features are (see Figure 1):

The effectiveness of GANs in producing images according to a specific visual domain has shown potential
in unsupervised domain adaptation. Source labeled images have been modified to mimic target samples for
training classifiers in the target domain, and inverse mappings from the target to the source domain have also been
evaluated, without new image generation.
In this paper we aim at getting the best of both worlds
by introducing a symmetric mapping among domains.
We jointly optimize bi-directional image transformations
combining them with target self-labeling. We define a
new class consistency loss that aligns the generators in
the two directions, imposing to preserve the class identity
of an image passing through both domain mappings. A
detailed analysis of the reconstructed images, a thorough
ablation study and extensive experiments on six different
settings confirm the power of our approach.

• it exploits two generative adversarial losses that encourage the network to produce target-like images
from the source samples and source-like images from
the target samples. Moreover, it jointly minimizes two
classification losses, one on the original source images
and the other on the transformed target-like source
images;
• it uses the source classifier to annotate the source-like
transformed target images. Such pseudo-labels help
regularizing the same classifier while improving the
target-to-source generator model by backpropagation;

1. Introduction
The ability to generalize across domains is challenging
when there is ample labeled data on which to train a deep
network (source domain), but no annotated data for the
target domain. To attack this issue, a wide array of methods have been proposed, most of them aiming at reducing
the shift between the source and target distributions (see
Sec. 2 for a review of previous work). An alternative is
mapping the source data into the target domain, either by
modifying the image representation [10] or by directly
generating a new version of the source images [4]. Several authors proposed approaches that follow both these
strategies by building over Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13]. A similar but inverse method maps
the target data into the source domain, where there is
already an abundance of labeled images [39].
We argue that these two mapping directions should

• it introduces a new semantic constraint on the source
images: the class consistency loss. It imposes that by
mapping source images towards the target domain and
then again towards the source domain they should get
back to their ground truth class. This last condition
is less restrictive than a standard reconstruction loss
[41, 17], as it deals only with the image annotation and
not with the image appearance. Still, our experiments
show that it is highly effective in aligning the domain
mappings in the two directions;
• at test time the two trained classifiers are used respectively on the original target images and on their sourcelike transformed version. The two predictions are integrated to produce the final annotation.
1
8099

