Deep Adversarial Metric Learning
Yueqi Duan1,2,3 , Wenzhao Zheng1 , Xudong Lin1 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗ , Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
duanyq14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zhengwz14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; linxd14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn; jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning an effective distance metric between image pairs
plays an important role in visual analysis, where the
training procedure largely relies on hard negative samples.
However, hard negatives in the training set usually account
for the tiny minority, which may fail to fully describe the
distribution of negative samples close to the margin. In
this paper, we propose a deep adversarial metric learning
(DAML) framework to generate synthetic hard negatives
from the observed negative samples, which is widely
applicable to supervised deep metric learning methods.
Different from existing metric learning approaches which
simply ignore numerous easy negatives, the proposed
DAML exploits them to generate potential hard negatives
adversarial to the learned metric as complements. We simultaneously train the hard negative generator and feature
embedding in an adversarial manner, so that more precise
distance metrics can be learned with adequate and targeted
synthetic hard negatives. Extensive experimental results
on three benchmark datasets including CUB-200-2011,
Cars196 and Stanford Online Products show that DAML
effectively boosts the performance of existing deep metric
learning approaches through adversarial learning.

1. Introduction
Metric learning aims to learn a distance metric for image
pairs to measure their similarities, which makes the following classification and clustering tasks much simpler. Metric
learning approaches have been widely used in a variety of
visual analysis tasks, such as face recognition [8, 12], person re-identification [50, 48, 19], visual tracking [42, 11],
and image classification [4, 44, 3]. Existing metric learning
methods can be divided into two categories: linear and nonlinear [16]. Conventional linear metric learning methods
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparisons of conventional metric learning methods
and our DAML. For intuitive demonstration, we use the number
of “3” as the anchor and positive samples while other numbers and alphabets are negative samples. We compute the distances
between sample pairs based on the similarity of shapes. Existing
metric learning methods largely rely on a few observed hard negatives, pushing the negative distribution to the lower right, which
fail to handle the potential hard negatives in the upper right of the
margin. For DAML, we aim to generate potential hard negatives
from existing negative samples adversarial to the learned metric,
where numerous easy negatives are exploited as complements. We
simultaneously learn the generator and feature embedding to obtain better similarity estimation with adequate and targeted synthetic negative samples, where potential hard negatives in the unobserved space are also pushed away. (Best viewed in color.)

learn a Mahalanobis distance metric [4, 44, 8], while nonlinear methods apply kernel tricks or deep neural networks
to model high-order correlations [34, 3, 32, 33, 40, 22].
For most supervised metric learning methods, the training procedure is based on an objective that maximizes the
inter-class variations and minimizes the intra-class varia12780

