Don’t Just Assume; Look and Answer:
Overcoming Priors for Visual Question Answering

A number of studies have found that today’s Visual Question Answering (VQA) models are heavily driven by superficial correlations in the training data and lack sufficient
image grounding. To encourage development of models
geared towards the latter, we propose a new setting for VQA
where for every question type, train and test sets have different prior distributions of answers. Specifically, we present
new splits of the VQA v1 and VQA v2 datasets, which we call
Visual Question Answering under Changing Priors (VQACP v1 and VQA-CP v2 respectively). First, we evaluate
several existing VQA models under this new setting and
show that their performance degrades significantly compared to the original VQA setting. Second, we propose a
novel Grounded Visual Question Answering model (GVQA)
that contains inductive biases and restrictions in the architecture specifically designed to prevent the model from
‘cheating’ by primarily relying on priors in the training data.
Specifically, GVQA explicitly disentangles the recognition of
visual concepts present in the image from the identification
of plausible answer space for a given question, enabling
the model to more robustly generalize across different distributions of answers. GVQA is built off an existing VQA
model – Stacked Attention Networks (SAN). Our experiments
demonstrate that GVQA significantly outperforms SAN on
both VQA-CP v1 and VQA-CP v2 datasets. Interestingly, it
also outperforms more powerful VQA models such as Multimodal Compact Bilinear Pooling (MCB) in several cases.
GVQA offers strengths complementary to SAN when trained
and evaluated on the original VQA v1 and VQA v2 datasets.
Finally, GVQA is more transparent and interpretable than
existing VQA models.

1. Introduction
Automatically answering questions about visual content
is considered to be one of the highest goals of artificial
intelligence. Visual Question Answering (VQA) poses a
rich set of challenges spanning various domains such as
computer vision, natural language processing, knowledge
representation, and reasoning. In the last few years, VQA
∗ Work partially done while interning at Allen Institute for AI.

Example 2

Abstract

Example 1

Aishwarya Agrawal1∗, Dhruv Batra1,2 , Devi Parikh1,2 , Aniruddha Kembhavi3
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Facebook AI Research, 3 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
{aishwarya, dbatra, parikh}@gatech.edu, anik@allenai.org

Train
Training
Q+[A] What color is the dog ? [White] Prior

Image

white
red
blue
green
yellow

Q+[A] Is the person wearing shorts ? [No] Training
Prior
Image

no
female
woman

Test
Q+[A] What color is the dog ? [Black]

Image

Models
SAN GVQA
White

Black

Q+[A] Is the person wearing shorts ? [Yes]
Models
SAN GVQA
Image
No

Yes

Figure 1: Existing VQA models, such as SAN [38], tend to largely
rely on strong language priors in train sets, such as, the prior answer
(‘white’, ‘no’) given the question type (‘what color is the’, ‘is the
person’). Hence, they suffer significant performance degradation
on test image-question pairs whose answers (‘black’, ‘yes’) are not
amongst the majority answers in train. We propose a novel model
(GVQA), built off of SAN that explicitly grounds visual concepts
in images, and consequently significantly outperforms SAN in a
setting with mismatched priors between train and test.

has received a lot of attention – a number of VQA datasets
have been curated [5, 21, 41, 12, 25, 11, 29, 13, 39] and a
variety of deep-learning models have been developed [5, 9,
38, 37, 16, 3, 34, 19, 24, 4, 31, 20, 10, 26, 14, 35, 36, 40, 30].
However, a number of studies have found that despite
recent progress, today’s VQA models are heavily driven by
superficial correlations in the training data and lack sufficient
visual grounding [1, 39, 13, 17]. It seems that when faced
with a difficult learning problem, models typically resort to
latching onto the language priors in the training data to the
point of ignoring the image – e.g., overwhelmingly replying
to ‘how many X?’ questions with ‘2’ (irrespective of X),
‘what color is . . . ?’ with ‘white’, ‘is the . . . ?’ with ‘yes’.
One reason for this emergent dissatisfactory behavior is
the fundamentally problematic nature of IID train-test splits
in the presence of strong priors. As a result, models that intrinsically memorize biases in the training data demonstrate
acceptable performance on the test set. This is problematic
for benchmarking progress in VQA because it becomes unclear what the source of the improvements is – if models
have learned to ground concepts in images or they are driven
by memorizing priors in training data.
To help disentangle these factors, we present new splits
of the VQA v1 [5] and VQA v2 [13] datasets, called Visual
14971

