Matching Pixels using Co-Occurrence Statistics
Rotal Kat
School of EE
Tel-Aviv University

Roy Jevnisek
School of EE
Tel-Aviv University

Shai Avidan
School of EE
Tel-Aviv University

rotalkat@mail.tau.ac.il

jernisek@post.tau.ac.il

avidan@eng.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We propose a new error measure for matching pixels that
is based on co-occurrence statistics. The measure relies
on a co-occurrence matrix that counts the number of times
pairs of pixel values co-occur within a window. The error
incurred by matching a pair of pixels is inversely proportional to the probability that their values co-occur together,
and not their color difference. This measure also works with
features other than color, e.g. deep features. We show that
this improves the state-of-the-art performance of template
matching on standard benchmarks.
We then propose an embedding scheme that maps the input image to an embedded image such that the Euclidean
distance between pixel values in the embedded space resembles the co-occurrence statistics in the original space.
This lets us run existing vision algorithms on the embedded
images and enjoy the power of co-occurrence statistics for
free. We demonstrate this on two algorithms, the LucasKanade image registration and the Kernelized Correlation
Filter (KCF) tracker. Experiments show that performance
of each algorithm improves by about 10%.

1. Introduction
Measuring similarity between pixels is a basic task in
computer vision. Stereo matching algorithms, for example,
use template matching to measure the similarity of potential
matches. Texture synthesis algorithms rely on patch similarity to fill in holes, and tracking algorithms need to match
the appearance of the object from one frame to the next.
Let us focus on template matching as a canonical application that relies on a pixel similarity measure. Arguably the most popular measure is the Sum-of-SquaredDifferences (SSD) that is based on the Euclidean distance
between corresponding pixel values in the template and the
candidate window.
But SSD is very sensitive to small deformations. To deal
with this problem one often use patch level representations
such as SIFT [18], HOG [3], or the first layers of a deep net-

work [26]. These representations use a small neighborhood
to collect local statistics that increase the robustness of pixel
representation to small misalignment and deformations, at
the cost of losing precise pixel localization. The metric used
to compare these features often remains the Euclidean metric.
The key contribution of this paper is the introduction of
a new similarity measure between pixel values that is based
on co-occurrence statistics. Co-occurrence statistics are collected over the entire image plane and measure the probability of a pair of pixel values to co-occur within a small
window. We take the cost of matching pixels to be inversely
proportional to the probability of their values co-occurring.
Why?
Because co-occurrence statistics has long been used to
capture texture. Pixel values that co-occur frequently in the
image are probably a part of textured region. Therefore, this
measure implicitly captures some notion of texture similarity. This has nothing to do with the actual pixel values, only
their co-occurrence statistics. In other words, we learn pixel
similarity from data instead of imposing the Euclidean distance on it.
Co-occurrence statistics differ from the patch based representations mentioned earlier. Patch based methods collect
local statistics whereas co-occurrence collects global statistics. The two approaches complement each other and we
can collect co-occurrence statistics of RGB values, as well
as other, more involved features, such as deep features. Experiments show that combining both approaches greatly enhances the performance of template matching on standard
template matching benchmarks.
We then propose an embedding scheme that maps the
pixel values of the input image to a new space. The embedding maps pixel values that co-occur frequently to nearby
points in the embedded space, where proximity is based on
the Euclidean distance. There are several reasons for doing that. First, it allows us to run existing template matching implementations on the embedded images without any
modifications. Second, because existing template matching algorithms achieve sub-pixel accuracy, we get this accu11751

