End-to-end weakly-supervised semantic alignment
Ignacio Rocco1,2
1
2
DI ENS
Inria

Relja Arandjelović 3
3
DeepMind

Josef Sivic1,2,4
4
CIIRC, CTU in Prague

1. Introduction
Finding correspondence is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. Initial work has focused on finding
correspondence between images depicting the same object
or scene with applications in image stitching [31], multiview 3D reconstruction [11], motion estimation [6, 34] or
tracking [4, 22]. In this work we study the problem of
finding category-level correspondence, or semantic alignment [1, 20], where the goal is to establish dense correspondence between different objects belonging to the same category, such as the two different motorcycles illustrated in
Fig. 1. This is an important problem with applications in
object recognition [19], image editing [3], or robotics [23].
1 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, École normale supérieure,

CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
4 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the
Czech Technical University in Prague.

Inliers
Outliers

We tackle the task of semantic alignment where the goal
is to compute dense semantic correspondence aligning two
images depicting objects of the same category. This is a
challenging task due to large intra-class variation, changes
in viewpoint and background clutter. We present the following three principal contributions. First, we develop a convolutional neural network architecture for semantic alignment
that is trainable in an end-to-end manner from weak imagelevel supervision in the form of matching image pairs. The
outcome is that parameters are learnt from rich appearance variation present in different but semantically related
images without the need for tedious manual annotation of
correspondences at training time. Second, the main component of this architecture is a differentiable soft inlier scoring module, inspired by the RANSAC inlier scoring procedure, that computes the quality of the alignment based on
only geometrically consistent correspondences thereby reducing the effect of background clutter. Third, we demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance on multiple standard benchmarks for semantic
alignment.

Input pair

Abstract

Figure 1: We describe a CNN architecture that, given an input image pair (top), outputs dense semantic correspondence between the
two images together with the aligning geometric transformation
(middle) and discards geometrically inconsistent matches (bottom). The alignment model is learnt from weak supervision in
the form of matching image pairs without correspondences.

This is also an extremely challenging task because of the
large intra-class variation, changes in viewpoint and presence of background clutter.
The current best semantic alignment methods [10, 17,
24] employ powerful image representations based on convolutional neural networks coupled with a geometric deformation model. However, these methods suffer from one of
the following two major limitations. First, the image representation and the geometric alignment model are not trained
together in an end-to-end manner. Typically, the image representation is trained on some auxiliary task such as image
classification and then employed in an often ad-hoc geometric alignment model. Second, while trainable geometric

6917

