Augmenting Crowd-Sourced 3D Reconstructions using Semantic Detections
True Price1
1

Johannes L. Schönberger2

Zhen Wei1

Department of Computer Science, UNC Chapel Hill

2

Marc Pollefeys2,3

Jan-Michael Frahm1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich

{jtprice,zhenni,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

3

Microsoft

{jsch,pomarc}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Image-based 3D reconstruction for Internet photo collections has become a robust technology to produce impressive virtual representations of real-world scenes. However,
several fundamental challenges remain for Structure-fromMotion (SfM) pipelines, namely: the placement and reconstruction of transient objects only observed in single views,
estimating the absolute scale of the scene, and (suprisingly
often) recovering ground surfaces in the scene. We propose
a method to jointly address these remaining open problems
of SfM. In particular, we focus on detecting people in individual images and accurately placing them into an existing
3D model. As part of this placement, our method also estimates the absolute scale of the scene from object semantics, which in this case constitutes the height distribution of
the population. Further, we obtain a smooth approximation of the ground surface and recover the gravity vector
of the scene directly from the individual person detections.
We demonstrate the results of our approach on a number of
unordered Internet photo collections, and we quantitatively
evaluate the obtained absolute scene scales.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, a significant effort has grown to actively map the 3D world around us into the virtual realm.
In particular, virtual tourism applications [42] have become
immensely popular in allowing users to experience and explore places they may otherwise not be able to visit.1 These
applications use 3D reconstruction approaches to recover
models of actual places, typically starting from either a controlled capture scenario (e.g. aerial imagery of a single city)
or, to visualize scenes from anywhere on Earth, publicly
available photographs downloaded from the Internet. From
this initial imagery, 3D models are obtained via Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) [39, 43, 50, 49, 1, 12, 19, 40] and dense
multi-view stereo (MVS) pipelines [41, 14, 13]. The ideal
1 For example, Google Earth VR (https://vr.google.com/
earth/) is a prominent virtual reality application that allows users to
view cities from overhead in 3D.

Figure 1. Result for our method for San Marco Square, Venice.
Top: Dense, but incomplete, 3D reconstruction of static scene elements using multi-view stereo. Bottom: The same view, but with
our textured ground surface added into the scene, and populated
with a subset of pedestrians observed in the input images of the
reconstruction. Our method jointly recovers the 3D position of the
people, the absolute scale of the scene, the gravity direction of the
scene, and the texture and geometry of the ground surface.

for virtual tourism is to present such reconstructions as navigable environments that a user can explore (e.g. in virtual
reality) with a sense of “being” in the remote place.
The perception of a virtual environment, however, is
inherently tied to the completeness of the representation.
Modern SfM+MVS pipelines have fundamental limitations
in this respect. Ground reconstruction and transient object modeling are two bugbears of large-scale reconstruction from crowd-sourced still imagery. Ground is notoriously difficult to reconstruct from such image collections
due to the relatively low number of matched ground points
[26]. Transient objects such as people and moving cars are

1926

