Divide and Conquer for Full-Resolution Light Field Deblurring
M. R. Mahesh Mohan, A. N. Rajagopalan
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
{ee14d023,raju}@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
The increasing popularity of computational light field
(LF) cameras has necessitated the need for tackling motion blur which is a ubiquitous phenomenon in hand-held
photography. The state-of-the-art method for blind deblurring of LFs of general 3D scenes is limited to handling
only downsampled LF, both in spatial and angular resolution. This is due to the computational overhead involved
in processing data-hungry full-resolution 4D LF altogether.
Moreover, the method warrants high-end GPUs for optimization and is ineffective for wide-angle settings and irregular camera motion. In this paper, we introduce a new blind
motion deblurring strategy for LFs which alleviates these
limitations significantly. Our model achieves this by isolating 4D LF motion blur across the 2D subaperture images,
thus paving the way for independent deblurring of these
subaperture images. Furthermore, our model accommodates common camera motion parameterization across the
subaperture images. Consequently, blind deblurring of any
single subaperture image elegantly paves the way for costeffective non-blind deblurring of the other subaperture images. Our approach is CPU-efficient computationally and
can effectively deblur full-resolution LFs.

1. Introduction
Handheld light field cameras (LFCs) are being used in
a variety of tasks including wide-angle and hyperspectral
imaging, shape recovery, segmentation, etc. [4, 25, 14, 22].
Refer to [24] for a recent survey on light field (LF) related
works. The increase in popularity of LFCs can be attributed
to their attractive features over conventional cameras (CCs),
including post-capture refocusing, f-stopping, depth sensing [22, 1, 16], etc. LFCs achieve this by capturing multiple
(subaperture) images instead of a single CC image by segregating the light reaching the CC-sensor into multiple angular components; and synthesize these images post-capture
to form an image of desired CC setting [16, 1]. However,
there is a downside too. It is well-known that motion blur
is a common artifact in hand-held photography with CCs

[17, 26, 12]. This nuisance effect become exacerbated in
LFCs. This is because the light-segregation principle in
LFCs reduces the amount of photons that make up individual subaperture images, thereby necessitating higher exposure times relative to CC (under the same setting). This escalates the risk of motion blur in LFC. Moreover, a 4D LF
comprising of 2D spatial and 2D angular resolutions can be
interpreted as several CC images stacked together. Thus the
numerical optimization involved in LF deblurring must deal
with very large-sized data as compared to that of CC. This
poses additional computational challenges [24, 20].
In this work, we address the problem of LF blind motion
deblurring (LF-BMD). The problem of BMD deals with estimating both the clean image and underlying camera motion from a single motion blurred observation. BMD in CCs
is a well-studied topic replete with efficient methodolgies.
State-of-the-art CC-BMD methods [17, 26, 21] are based
on the motion density function (MDF) [5] which allows
both narrow- and wide-angle systems as well as nonparametric camera motion, have a homography-based filter flow
framework for computational efficiency [8], and employ a
scale-space approach to accommodate large blurs. Kohler et
al. [11] have shown (for CCs) that general camera motion
comprising of 3D translations and 3D rotations can be well
approximated by full rotations, or inplane translations and
inplane rotation. Inplane rotation common to both the approximations are necessary to capture wide angle settings
[15, 21]. Whyte et al. [23], Xu et al. [26], and Pan et al.
[17] follow full-rotations approximation and employ EFF
to yield high quality results in CC-BMD.
In contrast, LF-BMD is an emerging research area and
there exists very few works. Jin et al. [10] proposed the
first LF-BMD approach, but restrict the scene to be frontoparallel and bilayer, and limit the camera motion to only
inplane translations. A recent LF-BMD work by Srinivasan
et al. [20] eliminates the planar scene assumption and even
includes full 3D translations. However, the ego-motion is
constrained to be parametric. This reduces its effectiveness
under irregular ego-motions, which is common when imaging from moving vehicles, robotic platforms, etc. Moreover, since the translational pose cannot model inplane ro-

6421

