Learning Superpixels with Segmentation-Aware Affinity Loss
Wei-Chih Tu1 Ming-Yu Liu2 Varun Jampani2 Deqing Sun2 Shao-Yi Chien1 Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3 Jan Kautz2
1
National Taiwan University 2 NVIDIA 3 UC Merced

Abstract
Superpixel segmentation has been widely used in many
computer vision tasks. Existing superpixel algorithms are
mainly based on hand-crafted features, which often fail to
preserve weak object boundaries. In this work, we leverage deep neural networks to facilitate extracting superpixels from images. We show a simple integration of deep features with existing superpixel algorithms does not result in
better performance as these features do not model segmentation. Instead, we propose a segmentation-aware affinity
learning approach for superpixel segmentation. Specifically, we propose a new loss function that takes the segmentation error into account for affinity learning. We also
develop the Pixel Affinity Net for affinity prediction. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed algorithm based on the learned segmentation-aware loss performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods. We
also demonstrate the use of the learned superpixels in numerous vision applications with consistent improvements.

1. Introduction
Superpixels are the image regions generated by grouping image pixels. Superpixels provide a more natural representation of image data compared to pixels. In addition, superpixels reduce the number of primitives to operate on, thereby improving the computational efficiency of
vision algorithms. The process of extracting superpixels
is known as superpixel segmentation or over-segmentation.
Superpixels are widely used in both conventional energyminimization [32, 30] and recent deep learning [23, 13, 9]
frameworks with applications to a wide range of problems
such as salient object detection [29, 32, 13], and semantic
segmentation [23, 9], to name a few.
In light of fundamental importance of superpixels in
computer vision, numerous superpixel segmentation algorithms [17, 1, 27, 16, 2] have been proposed in the literature. Despite their differences in problem formulation, existing algorithms mainly rely on hand-crafted features, and
thus often fail to separate objects from the backgrounds if
no strong boundaries can be identified.
In this work, we leverage deep networks to facilitate ex-

tracting superpixels from images. There are several challenges in learning superpixels using deep networks. First,
there is no groundtruth for superpixels. Second, the indices
of different superpixels are interchangeable. Third, existing
superpixel algorithms are not differentiable. To overcome
these issues, we propose to learn pixel affinities for graphbased superpixel segmentation. Pixel affinities measure the
likelihood of two neighboring pixels belonging to the same
object. With better pixel affinities that take object boundaries into account, graph-based algorithms can extract semantically more meaningful superpixels. Empirically, we
find that deep features learned from other high-level vision
tasks do not perform well for superpixel segmentation. Our
experiments show that simply replacing the hand-crafted
features with pre-trained deep features for computing pixel
affinities does not result in good superpixel segmentation. A
closely-related problem to affinity computation is edge detection, where a number of CNN-based methods have been
developed. One may expect that edges extracted from the
state-of-the-art deep networks [28] provide effective visual
cues of pixel affinities for superpixel segmentation. However, our experiments show that this approach results in inferior performance compared to that of using hand-crafted
pixel affinities.
We observe that affinities derived from pre-trained deep
features or deep edges are not sensitive to segmentation errors. We therefore propose a method for learning
segmentation-aware affinities for graph-based superpixel
segmentation. Specifically, we propose a deep network,
termed Pixel Affinity Net (PAN), for learning pixel affinities and exploiting existing segmentation datasets [3, 6] as
supervisory signals where pixel affinities should be low at
segmentation boundaries and high elsewhere. To ensure the
predicted affinities result in good segmentation quality, we
propose a new SEgmentation-Aware Loss (SEAL) function.
We first use the predicted affinities to compute superpixels with a graph-based algorithm. Then the SEAL function
computes a loss at every pixel based on the computed superpixels and groundtruth segmentation. The loss at each
pixel is then back-propagated through the proposed PAN
model to adjust its parameters, thereby facilitating the use of
deep neural networks for learning superpixels while avoid-

568

