Low-Latency Video Semantic Segmentation
Yule Li1∗,
Jianping Shi2 ,
Dahua Lin3
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
2
SenseTime Research, 3 Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
yule.li@vipl.ict.ac.cn, shijianping@sensetime.com, dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

85

Recent years have seen remarkable progress in semantic segmentation. Yet, it remains a challenging task to apply segmentation techniques to video-based applications.
Specifically, the high throughput of video streams, the sheer
cost of running fully convolutional networks, together with
the low-latency requirements in many real-world applications, e.g. autonomous driving, present a significant challenge to the design of the video segmentation framework. To
tackle this combined challenge, we develop a framework for
video semantic segmentation, which incorporates two novel
components: (1) a feature propagation module that adaptively fuses features over time via spatially variant convolution, thus reducing the cost of per-frame computation; and
(2) an adaptive scheduler that dynamically allocate computation based on accuracy prediction. Both components
work together to ensure low latency while maintaining high
segmentation quality. On both Cityscapes and CamVid,
the proposed framework obtained competitive performance
compared to the state of the art, while substantially reducing the latency, from 360 ms to 119 ms.

80

PSPNet
NetWarp

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, a task to divide observed scenes
into semantic regions, has been an active research topic
in computer vision. In recent years, the advances in deep
learning [16, 27, 12] and in particular the development of
Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [19] have brought the
performance of this task to a new level. Yet, many existing methods for semantic segmentation were devised for
parsing images [19, 4, 18, 22, 29]. How to extend the
success of segmentation techniques to video-based applications (e.g. robotics, autonomous driving, and surveillance)
remains a challenging question.
The challenges of video-based semantic segmentation
∗ This work is done when Yule Li is intern at CUHK Multimedia Lab

Accuracy(mIoU%)

Ours
75
Deeplab
PEARL

70

DFF

65

Clockwork

60

55

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Latency(ms)

Figure 1. Latency and mIoU performance on Cityscapes [7]
dataset. Methods involved are NetWarp [10], PSPNet [29],
Deeplab [6], PEARL [14], DFF [31], Clockework [25] and Ours.
Our method achieves the lowest latency while maintaining competitive performance.

consist in two aspects. On one hand, videos usually involve
significantly larger volume of data compared to images.
Particularly, a video typically contains 15 to 30 frames per
second. Hence, analyzing videos requires much more computing resources. On the other hand, many real-world systems that need video segmentation, e.g. autonomous driving, have strict requirments on the latency of response, thus
making the problem even more challenging.
Previous efforts on video semantic segmentation mainly
fall into two classes, namely high-level modeling and
feature-level propagation. The former [8, 21] integrates
frame-wise analysis via a sequential model. The methods along this line usually add additional levels on top,
and therefore are unable to reduce the computing cost.
The latter, such as Clockwork Net [25] and Deep Feature
Flow [31], instead attempts to reuse the features in preceding frames to accelerate computation. Such methods
were designed to reduce the overall cost in an amortized
15997

