A Revised Underwater Image Formation Model
Derya Akkaynak
Tali Treibitz
University of Haifa
derya.akkaynak@gmail.com, ttreibitz@univ.haifa.ac.il

Abstract
The current underwater image formation model descends from atmospheric dehazing equations where attenuation is a weak function of wavelength. We recently showed
that this model introduces significant errors and dependencies in the estimation of the direct transmission signal because underwater, light attenuates in a wavelengthdependent manner. Here, we show that the backscattered
signal derived from the current model also suffers from dependencies that were previously unaccounted for. In doing
so, we use oceanographic measurements to derive the physically valid space of backscatter, and further show that the
wideband coefficients that govern backscatter are different
than those that govern direct transmission, even though the
current model treats them to be the same. We propose a revised equation for underwater image formation that takes
these differences into account, and validate it through in
situ experiments underwater. This revised model might explain frequent instabilities of current underwater color reconstruction models, and calls for the development of new
methods.

1. Introduction
Researchers aiming to color correct underwater images
are frequently faced with unstable results: available methods are either not robust, are too sensitive, or only work
for short object ranges. This is usually explained by the
challenge in the correction, e.g., images having low SNR,
severe distortions and loss of color, etc. Here we suggest
that there is a more fundamental reason to these instabilities
than merely “low quality images”, and show that they stem
from using an inaccurate image formation model.
Current underwater color correction methods [5, 8, 9, 12,
13, 26, 27, 31, 36, 40] rely on a commonly used image formation model first derived for haze [3, 4, 14, 17, 39]. However, light propagation in the ocean differs from that in the
atmosphere in major ways, which renders this model inadequate when applied to underwater images.
In pure air, attenuation (sum of absorption and scattering) is only due to gas molecules and is an inverse function

Figure 1. a) On the surface of the earth where most photographs
are taken, air is mixed with aerosols which increase inscatter, making attenuation independent of wavelength λ. Cloud, fog, and haze
coefficients are in situ measurements [11]; pure air and aerosol are
theoretical values [32]. b) In the ocean, attenuation is a strong
function of wavelength. c) Oceanographer Nils G. Jerlov [21] defined 5 open (I-III) and 5 coastal ocean (1-9C) classes based on
the diffuse downwelling attenuation coefficients Kd he measured
globally. Here we show coefficients of beam absorption a, scattering b, attenuation β, and Kd for Jerlov’s water types [38]. In
contrast to the atmosphere, absorption in the ocean is generally
not negligible compared to scattering [22]; e.g., types I (open Pacific), IA (eastern Mediterranean), IB (open Atlantic) are absorption dominated.

of the fourth power of wavelength [24, 32, 25] (Fig. 1a).
Near the surface of the earth, however, air is mixed with
solid and liquid particles (aerosols) that create the states we
call clouds, dust, haze, smoke, smog, mist, fog and vog (fog
from volcanic ash). In the presence of aerosols, whose mean
diameters can be up to ten times larger than the incident
light wavelength, multiple scattering effects become significant and wavelength dependency decreases [32]. In haze
and fog, scattering becomes non-selective and attenuation
16723

