Repulsion Loss: Detecting Pedestrians in a Crowd
Xinlong Wang1∗ Tete Xiao2∗
1

Yuning Jiang3

Shuai Shao3
2

Tongji University

1452405wxl@tongji.edu.cn
3

Jian Sun3

Chunhua Shen4

Peking University

jasonhsiao97@pku.edu.cn
4

Megvii, Inc.

jyn, shaoshuai, sunjian@megvii.com

The University of Adelaide

chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Target Groundtruth T

Detecting individual pedestrians in a crowd remains a
challenging problem since the pedestrians often gather together and occlude each other in real-world scenarios. In
this paper, we first explore how a state-of-the-art pedestrian
detector is harmed by crowd occlusion via experimentation,
providing insights into the crowd occlusion problem. Then,
we propose a novel bounding box regression loss specifically designed for crowd scenes, termed repulsion loss. This
loss is driven by two motivations: the attraction by target,
and the repulsion by other surrounding objects. The repulsion term prevents the proposal from shifting to surrounding
objects thus leading to more crowd-robust localization. Our
detector trained by repulsion loss outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods with a significant improvement in occlusion
cases.

1. Introduction
Occlusion remains one of the most significant challenges
in object detection although great progress has been made
in recent years [10, 9, 24, 19, 1, 20, 11, 3]. In general, occlusion can be divided into two groups: inter-class occlusion
and intra-class occlusion. The former one occurs when an
object is occluded by stuff or objects of other categories,
while the latter one, also referred to as crowd occlusion,
occurs when an object is occluded by objects of the same
category.
In pedestrian detection [31, 14, 6, 5, 7, 21], crowd occlusion constitutes the majority of occlusion cases. The
reason is that in application scenarios of pedestrian detection, e.g., video surveillance and autonomous driving,
pedestrians often gather together and occlude each other.
For instance, in the CityPersons dataset [33], there are a
∗ The work was done when Xinlong Wang and Tete Xiao were interns
at Megvii, Inc.

Surrounding Groundtruth B
Predicted Box (for the target)

Repulsion Loss = Distattr(

,

Attraction Term

) – Distrep(

,

)

Repulsion Term

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed repulsion loss. The repulsion
loss consists of two parts: the attraction term to narrow the gap between a proposal and its designated target, as well as the repulsion
term to distance it from the surrounding non-target objects.

total of 3, 157 pedestrian annotations in the validation subset, among which 48.8% of them overlap with another annotated pedestrian whose Intersection over Union (IoU) is
above 0.1. Moreover, 26.4% of all pedestrians have considerable overlaps with another annotated pedestrian whose
IoU is above 0.3. The highly frequent crowd occlusion
severely harms the performance of pedestrian detectors.
The main impact of crowd occlusion is that it significantly increases the difficulty in pedestrian localization.
For example, when a target pedestrian T is overlapped by
another pedestrian B, the detector is apt to get confused
since these two pedestrians have similar appearance features. As a result, the predicted boxes which should have
bounded T will probably shift to B, leading to inaccurate
localization. Even worse, as the primary detection results
are required to be further processed by non-maximum suppression (NMS), shifted bounding boxes originally from T
may be suppressed by the predicted boxes of B, in which
T turns into a missed detection. That is, crowd occlusion
makes the detector sensitive to the threshold of NMS: a
higher threshold brings in more false positives while a lower

7774

