Learning from Noisy Web Data with Category-level Supervision
Li Niu+ , Qingtao Tang∗ , Ashok Veeraraghavan+ , and Ashu Sabharwal+
+
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University
∗
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
+

{ln7,vashok,ashu}@rice.edu, ∗ tqt15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning from web data is increasingly popular due to
abundant free web resources. However, the performance
gap between webly supervised learning and traditional supervised learning is still very large, due to the label noise of
web data as well as the domain shift between web data and
test data. To fill this gap, most existing methods propose
to purify or augment web data using instance-level supervision, which generally requires heavy annotation. Instead,
we propose to address the label noise and domain shift by
using more accessible category-level supervision. In particular, we build our deep probabilistic framework upon variational autoencoder (VAE), in which classification network
and VAE can jointly leverage category-level hybrid information. Then, we extend our method for domain adaptation
followed by our low-rank refinement strategy. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

augment the web data by selecting informative web data to
label [17] or leveraging strong supervision (e.g., clean images, part landmarks, or bounding boxes) from well-labeled
dataset [50, 52]. However, these approaches are in high demand of manual annotations on the instance level, which
are generally difficult to acquire.

1. Introduction

Compared with instance-level supervision, categorylevel supervision is more accessible in real world. One of
the most prominent category-level supervision is attribute,
which is manually designed semantic cue for each category [9, 18] such as the shape (e.g., cylindrical), material (e.g., cloth), and color (e.g., white). When attribute
is not available, an alternative choice is the word vector, i.e., a real-valued vector, corresponding to each category name obtained based on free online corpus (e.g.,
Wikipedia) [1, 10, 39, 54]. Besides, we can also summarize
category-level visual information based on free web images
despite their inaccurate labels (see Section 6). Therefore,
the availability of category-level information motivates us
to explore learning from web data with category-level supervision, which is in the middle ground between no extra
supervision and instance-level supervision.

The recent success of image classification is largely fueled by available large-scale image datasets. However, manually annotating large-scale dataset is time-consuming and
labor-intensive. So it is unsurprising that learning from web
images becomes increasingly popular because of the large
amount of freely available web data. However, the labels
of web images crawled from public website are very noisy
and often inaccurate. Moreover, the data distributions between web data (i.e., source domain) and test data (i.e.,
target domain) are quite different, which is known as domain shift. Therefore, when applying the classifier learnt
on the noisy web training images to the test images, the performance will be significantly degraded. Although abundant research works are intended to tackle the label noise
and domain shift [42, 6, 3, 49, 57, 34], webly supervised
learning is still struggling to compete with conventional supervised learning. To facilitate webly supervised learning,
some works tend to utilize extra supervision to purify or

In order to cope with label noise with category-level
supervision, we opt for autoencoder-like network structure, because autoencoder has been used for outlier detection [37, 46] and its hidden layer can be regulated by
prior information, which is suitable for our task. Specifically, we build our probabilistic framework upon a probabilistic variant of autoencoder, i.e., variational autoencoder
(VAE) [14, 35], because its provided reconstruction probability density can be easily integrated into our probabilistic
framework. However, outlier detection is a non-trivial task
for VAE trained on multi-category noisy data. To tackle
this issue, we propose a framework named Webly Supervised learning with Category-level Information (WSCI), as
illustrated in Figure 1. It can be seen from Figure 1 that our
network consists of a classification network in the top flow
and variational autoencder (VAE) in the bottom flow, which
share common modules (i.e., CNN and encoder) and jointly
leverage category-level information. The classification net-

7689

