A Variational U-Net for Conditional Appearance and Shape Generation
Patrick Esser∗, Ekaterina Sutter∗, Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
firstname.lastname@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Deep generative models have demonstrated great performance in image synthesis. However, results deteriorate
in case of spatial deformations, since they generate images
of objects directly, rather than modeling the intricate interplay of their inherent shape and appearance. We present
a conditional U-Net [30] for shape-guided image generation, conditioned on the output of a variational autoencoder for appearance. The approach is trained end-to-end
on images, without requiring samples of the same object
with varying pose or appearance. Experiments show that
the model enables conditional image generation and transfer. Therefore, either shape or appearance can be retained
from a query image, while freely altering the other. Moreover, appearance can be sampled due to its stochastic latent representation, while preserving shape. In quantitative
and qualitative experiments on COCO [20], DeepFashion
[21, 23], shoes [43], Market-1501 [47] and handbags [49]
the approach demonstrates significant improvements over
the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Recently there has been great interest in generative models for image synthesis [7, 12, 18, 24, 49, 51, 32]. Generating images of objects requires a detailed understanding
of both, their appearance and spatial layout. Therefore, we
have to distinguish basic object characteristics. On the one
hand, there is the shape and geometrical layout of an object
relative to the viewpoint of the observer (a person sitting,
standing, or lying or a folded handbag). On the other hand,
there are inherent appearance properties such as those characterized by color and texture (curly long brown hair vs.
buzz cut black hair or the pattern of corduroy). Evidently,
objects naturally change their shape, while retaining their
inherent appearance (bending a shoe does not change its
style). However, the picture of the object varies dramati∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1: Our model learns to infer appearance from the queries
on the left and can synthesize images with that appearance in different poses given in the top row. An animated version can be
found at https://compvis.github.io/vunet.

cally in the process, e.g., due to translation or even selfocclusion. Conversely, the color or fabric of a dress can
change with no impact on its shape, but again clearly altering the image of the dress.
With deep learning, there has lately been great progress
in generative models, in particular generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [1, 8, 10, 27, 38], variational autoencoders [16], and their combination [2, 17]. Despite impressive results, these models still suffer from weak performance in case of image distributions with large spatial
variation: while on perfectly registered faces (e.g., aligned
CelebA dataset [22]) high-resolution images have been generated [19, 13], synthesizing the full human body from
datasets as diverse as COCO [20] is still an open challenge.
The main reason for this is that these generative models directly synthesize the image of an object, but fail to model
the intricate interplay of appearance and shape that is pro-

8857

