Inference in Higher Order MRF-MAP Problems with Small and Large Cliques
Ishant Shanu1

Chetan Arora1 S.N. Maheshwari2
1
IIIT Delhi 2 IIT Delhi

Abstract
Higher Order MRF-MAP formulation has been a popular technique for solving many problems in computer vision.
Inference in a general MRF-MAP problem is NP Hard,
but can be performed in polynomial time for the special
case when potential functions are submodular. Two popular combinatorial approaches for solving such formulations
are flow based and polyhedral approaches. Flow based approaches work well with small cliques and in that mode can
handle problems with millions of variables. Polyhedral approaches can handle large cliques but in small numbers. We
show in this paper that the variables in these seemingly disparate techniques can be mapped to each other. This allows
us to combine the two styles in a joint framework exploiting the strength of both of them. Using the proposed joint
framework, we are able to perform tractable inference in
MRF-MAP problems with millions of variables and a mix
of small and large cliques, a formulation which can not be
solved by either of the two styles individually. We show applicability of this hybrid framework on object segmentation
problem as an example of a situation where quality of results is significantly better than systems which are based
only on the use of small or large cliques.

1. Introduction
Many problems in computer vision can be posed as labeling problems [33, 16]. Modeling them as MRF and finding the labeling configuration with maximum a posteriori
probability converts them to the following discrete optimization problem:
X
X
fc (lc ).
(1)
fp (lp ) +
lV ∗ = arg min
lV

p∈V

c∈C

Here, a pixel is denoted by p and V is the set of all pixels. A
clique is a set of pixels conditionally dependent upon each
other and is denoted by c, and lc is the set of labels assigned
to the pixels in clique c. C denotes the set of all cliques.
fp (lp ), called unary energy, assigns the cost for labeling a
particular pixel p as lp , whereas fc (lc ), called clique potential, is the cost of assigning labeling configuration lc to

clique c. The inference problem, popularly known as MRFMAP, is to find the labeling, lV ∗ which minimizes the right
hand side of Eq. (1). Many computer vision problems like
image restoration, segmentation of videos and images, super resolution, texture synthesis, stereo matching to object
detection, can be modelled as MRF-MAP inference problems [33, 16].
MRF-MAP is computationally a hard problem even
in the restricted setting of binary labels and pairwise
cliques. However, its applicability to modeling computer
vision problems is so well established that variety of approaches have been explored to solve the problem in the restricted setting mentioned above. These approaches have
ranged from message passing [24], dual decomposition
[26], semidefinite programming relaxation [34], and graph
cut [1, 25].
Since higher order clique potentials are more expressive
compared to pairwise and lead to improved visual quality
in the inferred output, the above mentioned techniques have
been generalized to handle such problems also. The inference problem, however, becomes significantly more complicated. Apart from generalization of message passing
and dual decomposition [23, 31], reducing the higher order
problem to an equivalent pseudo Boolean form and solving it approximately using the QPBO algorithm is the other
notable approach to handle such generalizations [8, 11, 15].
It should be noted that all the methods mentioned above
provide only approximate solutions. Therefore, developing
efficient inference techniques for some special subclass of
clique potentials of interest has become an area of active research [18, 19, 20, 29]. One such special class of clique potentials whose importance to solving MRF MAP inference
problems in computer vision is increasingly getting recognized is based on the notion of submodularity (formally defined in the next section).
Algorithms that minimize submodular functions (SFM)
in polynomial time have now been known for over two
decades [9, 30]. These algorithms work directly with the
submodular polyhedron (defined formally in the next section), but have been found to be unusable as their run time
is bounded by very high degree polynomials. There have
been attempts to adapt/improvise various SFM techniques
17883

