Depth-Aware Stereo Video Retargeting
Bing Li† , Chia-Wen Lin‡ , Boxin Shi§ , Tiejun Huang§ , Wen Gao§ , C.-C. Jay Kuo†
†
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA
‡
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
§
National Engineering Lab for Video Technology, School of EECS, Peking University, China

Abstract
As compared with traditional video retargeting, stereo
video retargeting poses new challenges because stereo
video contains the depth information of salient objects and
its time dynamics. In this work, we propose a depth-aware
stereo video retargeting method by imposing the depth fidelity constraint. The proposed depth-aware retargeting
method reconstructs the 3D scene to obtain the depth information of salient objects. We cast it as a constrained optimization problem, where the total cost function includes
the shape, temporal and depth distortions of salient objects.
As a result, the solution can preserve the shape, temporal
and depth fidelity of salient objects simultaneously. It is
demonstrated by experimental results that the depth-aware
retargeting method achieves higher retargeting quality and
provides better user experience.

1. Introduction
3D video contents and display technologies become mature nowadays, and they offer real-world viewing experience to users. With this trend, many companies are manufacturing 3D display devices of different sizes suitable for
different application environments such as theaters, TVs,
and computers. Furthermore, virtual/augmented-reality devices (e.g., Google Cardboard and Oculus Rift) adopt stereo
video to create immersive environments. It is however a
nontrivial task to allow the same stereo content to be displayed on screens of different sizes and/or aspect ratios automatically, which is known as the resizing technique.
As compared with 2D video retargeting, stereo video retargeting poses new challenges because stereo video contains the depth information of salient objects and its time
dynamics. This is particularly true when the object has a
movement along the depth direction as illustrated in Fig. 1,
leading to poorer 3D viewing experience. Generally speaking, there are two key factors that influence human 3D viewing experience greatly. They are the correct depth information at each time instance (i.e., a single frame) and the

correct depth dynamics across multiple frames. The former
determines the distance of a 3D object to the screen while
the latter indicates the motion direction and speed in a 3D
scene. In order to provide satisfactory 3D viewing experience, we have to design a stereo video retargeting method
that takes these factors into account on top of the requirements of shape preservation and temporal coherence of traditional 2D video retargeting.
It is worth pointing out that most existing video retargeting methods do not impose the depth fidelity constraint.
For example, the uniform scaling method is widely used
for stereo video resizing. It up- or down-samples the left
and right 2D videos of a stereo video, respectively. However, the depth of a salient object can be distorted. The
comparison of the uniform scaling and the proposed depthaware retargeting schemes is shown in Fig. 1. Uniform
scaling not only shrinks the girl’s size but does not capture
her movement along the depth direction properly. The perceived depth change is relatively small. Clearly, the stereo
video retargeting problem cannot be solved by traditional
2D video retargeting methods since they do not preserve
the depth information of salient objects by analyzing the
left- and right-views jointly (see Fig. 2).
In this work, we propose a depth-aware stereo video retargeting method that achieves high-quality retargeting performance by preserving the depth information of the original stereo video. This method infers the depth information
and include its deviation in the total cost function for minimization. Furthermore, it adopts a grid warping scheme
to facilitate the optimization framework. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work on stereo video retargeting
by considering the depth-preserving constraints. The constraints are simple and flexible to apply. Once salient objects are detected, the algorithm will preserve their depth
information as faithfully as possible. It enhances users’
3D viewing experience of retargeted stereo video. Experimental results are given to demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed depth-aware retargeting method.
16517

