Multi-Evidence Filtering and Fusion for Multi-Label Classification, Object Detection and
Semantic Segmentation Based on Weakly Supervised Learning
Weifeng Ge
Sibei Yang
Yizhou Yu
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Supervised object detection and semantic segmentation
require object or even pixel level annotations. When there
exist image level labels only, it is challenging for weakly
supervised algorithms to achieve accurate predictions. The
accuracy achieved by top weakly supervised algorithms is
still significantly lower than their fully supervised counterparts. In this paper, we propose a novel weakly supervised curriculum learning pipeline for multi-label object recognition, detection and semantic segmentation. In
this pipeline, we first obtain intermediate object localization and pixel labeling results for the training images, and
then use such results to train task-specific deep networks
in a fully supervised manner. The entire process consists
of four stages, including object localization in the training
images, filtering and fusing object instances, pixel labeling for the training images, and task-specific network training. To obtain clean object instances in the training images, we propose a novel algorithm for filtering, fusing and
classifying object instances collected from multiple solution
mechanisms. In this algorithm, we incorporate both metric learning and density-based clustering to filter detected
object instances. Experiments show that our weakly supervised pipeline achieves state-of-the-art results in multi-label
image classification as well as weakly supervised object detection and very competitive results in weakly supervised
semantic segmentation on MS-COCO, PASCAL VOC 2007
and PASCAL VOC 2012.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks give rise to many breakthroughs in
computer vision by usinging huge amounts of labeled training data. Supervised object detection and semantic segmentation require object or even pixel level annotations, which
are much more labor-intensive to obtain than image level labels. On the other hand, when there exist image level labels
only, due to incomplete annotations, it is very challenging to
predict accurate object locations, pixel-wise labels, or even
image level labels in multi-label image classification.

Given image level supervision only, researchers have
proposed many weakly supervised algorithms for detecting
objects and labeling pixels. These algorithms employ different mechanisms, including bottom-up, top-down [44, 23]
and hybrid approaches [32], to dig out useful information.
In bottom-up algorithms, pixels are usually grouped into
many object proposals, which are further classified, and the
classification results are merged to match groundtruth image labels. In top-down algorithms, images first go through
a forward pass of a deep neural network, and the result is
then propagated backward to discover which pixels actually
contribute to the final result [44, 23]. There are also hybrid
algorithms [32] that consider both bottom-up and top-down
cues in their pipeline.
Although there exist many weakly supervised algorithms, the accuracy achieved by top weakly supervised algorithms is still significantly lower than their fully supervised counterparts. This is reflected in both the precision
and recall of their results. In terms of precision, results from
weakly supervised algorithms contain much more noise and
outliers due to indirect and incomplete supervision. Likewise, such algorithms also achieve much lower recall because there is insufficient labeled information for them to
learn comprehensive feature representations of target object
categories. However, different types of weakly supervised
algorithms may return different but complementary subsets
of the ground truth.
These observations motivate an approach that first collect as many evidences and results as possible from multiple types of solution mechanisms, put them together, and
then remove noise and outliers from the fused results using
powerful filtering techniques. This is in contrast to deep
neural networks trained from end to end. Although this
approach needs to collect results from multiple separately
trained networks, the filtered and fused evidences are eventually used for training a single network used for the testing
stage. Therefore, the running time of the final network during the testing stage is still comparable to that of state-ofthe-art end-to-end networks.
According to the above observations, we propose a
weakly supervised curriculum learning pipeline for object
recognition, detection and segmentation. At a high level, we

1277

