Deep Extreme Cut: From Extreme Points to Object Segmentation
K.-K. Maninis* S. Caelles∗ J. Pont-Tuset L. Van Gool
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Figure 1. Example results of DEXTR: The user provides the extreme clicks for an object, and the CNN produces the segmented masks.

Abstract
This paper explores the use of extreme points in an object
(left-most, right-most, top, bottom pixels) as input to obtain
precise object segmentation for images and videos. We do
so by adding an extra channel to the image in the input of
a convolutional neural network (CNN), which contains a
Gaussian centered in each of the extreme points. The CNN
learns to transform this information into a segmentation of
an object that matches those extreme points.
We demonstrate the usefulness of this approach for
guided segmentation (grabcut-style), interactive segmentation, video object segmentation, and dense segmentation
annotation. We show that we obtain the most precise results
to date, also with less user input, in an extensive and varied
selection of benchmarks and datasets. All our models and
code are publicly available on http://www.vision.
ee.ethz.ch/˜cvlsegmentation/dextr/.

1. Introduction
Deep learning techniques have revolutionized the field
of computer vision since their explosive appearance in the
ImageNet competition [34], where the task is to classify images into predefined categories, that is, algorithms produce
one label for each input image. Image and video segmentation, on the other hand, generate dense predictions where
each pixel receives a (potentially different) output classification. Deep learning algorithms, especially Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs), were adapted to this scenario by
* First two authors contributed equally

removing the final fully connected layers to produce dense
predictions.
Supervised techniques, those that train from manuallyannotated results, are currently the best performing in many
public benchmarks and challenges [43, 12]. In the case
of image and video segmentation, the supervision is in the
form of dense annotations, i.e. each pixel has to be annotated in an expensive and cumbersome process. Weaklysupervised techniques, which train from incomplete but
easier-to-obtain annotations, are still significantly behind
the state of the art. Semi-automatic techniques, which need
a human in the loop to produce results, are another way of
circumventing the expensive training annotations but need
interaction at test time, which usually comes in the form of
a bounding box [7] or scribbles [20] around the object of
interest. How to incorporate this information at test time
without introducing unacceptable lag, is also a challenge.
This paper tackles all these scenarios in a unified way
and shows state-of-the-art results in all of them in a variety
of benchmarks and setups. We present Deep Extreme Cut
(DEXTR), that obtains an object segmentation from its four
extreme points [25]: the left-most, right-most, top, and bottom pixels. Figure 1 shows an example result of our technique along with the input points provided.
In the context of semi-automatic object segmentation,
we show that information from extreme clicking results in
more accurate segmentations than the ones obtained from
bounding-boxes (PASCAL, COCO, Grabcut) in a Grabcutlike formulation. DEXTR outperforms other methods using
extreme points or object proposals (PASCAL), and provides
a better input to video object segmentation (DAVIS 2016,
1616

