Easy Identification from Better Constraints: Multi-Shot Person Re-Identification
from Reference Constraints

1

Jiahuan Zhou1 , Bing Su2 , Ying Wu1
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Northwestern University, US
2
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Science, China
{jzt011, yingwu}@eecs.northwestern.edu, subingats@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-shot person re-identification (MsP-RID) utilizes
multiple images from the same person to facilitate identification. Considering the fact that motion information may
not be discriminative nor reliable enough for MsP-RID, this
paper is focused on handling the large variations in the
visual appearances through learning discriminative visual
metrics for identification. Existing metric learning-based
methods usually exploit pair-wise or triple-wise similarity constraints, that generally demands intensive optimization in metric learning, or leads to degraded performances
by using sub-optimal solutions. In addition, as the training data are significantly imbalanced, the learning can be
largely dominated by the negative pairs and thus produces
unstable and non-discriminative results. In this paper, we
propose a novel type of similarity constraint. It assigns
the sample points to a set of reference points to produce
a linear number of reference constraints. Several optimal
transport-based schemes for reference constraint generation are proposed and studied. Based on those constraints,
by utilizing a typical regressive metric learning model, the
closed-form solution of the learned metric can be easily
obtained. Extensive experiments and comparative studies
on several public MsP-RID benchmarks have validated the
effectiveness of our method and its significant superiority
over the state-of-the-art MsP-RID methods in terms of both
identification accuracy and running speed.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (P-RID) is a critical yet very
challenging task in video surveillance [29]. It generally
evaluates the similarity between a probe image of an unknown person against a set of gallery candidates with
known identities. The gallery images are usually taken from
different camera-views at different times. Research efforts
have been devoted to single-shot person re-identification
(SsP-RID) [16, 18, 17, 36, 39, 32] in recent years. However, besides viewpoint changes, the quality of the only

Figure 1. (a) The background occlusion completely conceals the
motion information on the legs; (b) & (c) Even for the same person, the walking behavior can be very different; (d) & (e) For different persons, they may share very similar walking patterns.

given probe image can be severely degraded by various unpredictable conditions such as illumination changes, partial occlusion, low-resolution, etc. Thus SsP-RID still remains a very challenging problem. In fact, practical scenarios in video surveillance can provide continuous video or
multiple images for the same person, which has motivated
the research of multi-shot person re-identification (MsPRID) [10, 27, 31, 35, 22] that utilizes multiple images for
the same person from the same camera-view, expecting to
improve the performance.
One common approach in MsP-RID [31, 10, 35, 27] is
to treat the multiple images as a sequence of consecutive
frames which prefers to utilize the temporal information or
motion to extract more sophisticated features for identification. In practice, the motion information may not be discriminative nor reliable enough for MsP-RID. Firstly, the
dynamic background and temporal misalignment of the image sequences impede the reliable motion pattern estimation [19] (Fig. 1(a)). Secondly, motion patterns may not be
discriminative enough for identification since different persons may walk in the same walking pattern [31] (Fig. 1(d)
and (e)). Because MsP-RID is a non-contextual long-term
identification problem, the same person may exhibit different walking behaviors at different times. As shown in
Fig. 1(b) and (c), a person is walking with luggage cap-

5373

