Geometry-aware Deep Network for Single-Image Novel View Synthesis
Miaomiao Liu
CECS, ANU
Canberra, Australia

Xuming He
ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai, China

Mathieu Salzmann
CVLAB, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

miaomiao.liu@anu.edu.au

hexm@shanghaitech.edu.cn

mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of novel view synthesis
from a single image. In particular, we target real-world
scenes with rich geometric structure, a challenging task
due to the large appearance variations of such scenes and
the lack of simple 3D models to represent them. Modern,
learning-based approaches mostly focus on appearance to
synthesize novel views and thus tend to generate predictions
that are inconsistent with the underlying scene structure.
By contrast, in this paper, we propose to exploit the 3D
geometry of the scene to synthesize a novel view. Specifically, we approximate a real-world scene by a fixed number of planes, and learn to predict a set of homographies
and their corresponding region masks to transform the input image into a novel view. To this end, we develop a new
region-aware geometric transform network that performs
these multiple tasks in a common framework. Our results on
the outdoor KITTI and the indoor ScanNet datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our network in generating highquality synthetic views that respect the scene geometry, thus
outperforming the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Human beings can easily hallucinate what a scene would
look like from a different viewpoint, or, for a dynamic
scene, in the near future. Automatically performing such
a novel view synthesis, however, remains a challenging task
for computer vision systems.
Over the past two decades, the most popular approach to
synthesizing new views has been to reconstruct an exact or
approximate 3D scene model from multiple views [30, 17,
18, 25, 2]. By contrast, view synthesis from a single image, which can be applied to a broader range of problems,
has received much less attention. To overcome the lack of
depth information, early methods have proposed to leverage semantic-based priors [12] and geometric cues, such as
vanishing points [13], which, while effective, tend to be less
robust than their multi-view counterparts.
Inspired by the recent deep learning revolution in computer vision, several works have proposed to exploit Deep

Input view

Ground-truth novel view

[29]

Ours

Figure 1. Novel view synthesis from a single image. Given an
input image of the scene and a relative pose, we seek to predict a
new image of the scene observed from this new viewpoint. To this
end, and in contrast with state-of-the-art methods, we propose to
explicitly rely on 3D geometry within a deep learning paradigm.
As a consequence, and as evidenced by our results, our predictions
better respect the scene structure and are thus more realistic.

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to tackle the novel
view synthesis problem [6, 24, 29]. Whether predicting image pixels directly [24], plane-sweep volumes [6], appearance flow [29], or appearance flow, visibility and the intensity of pixels that were not in the input view [20], these
methods, in essence, all aim to solely leverage appearance
to predict the flow of each pixel from the input view to the
novel view without exploiting the flow of the other pixels.
As such, as shown in Fig. 1, they tend to generate artefacts,
such as distorted local structures in the synthesized images.
In this paper, we propose to explicitly account for 3D geometry, and thus respect 3D scene structure, in the singleimage novel view synthesis process. To this end, we approximate the scene by a fixed number of planes, and learn
to predict corresponding homographies that, once applied to
the input image, generate a set of candidate images for the
novel view. We then learn to predict a selection map corresponding to each homography, which, after warping, is
used to combine the candidate images to generate the novel
view. In essence, our homography-based approach enforces
14616

