TieNet: Text-Image Embedding Network for Common Thorax Disease
Classification and Reporting in Chest X-rays
Xiaosong Wang∗1 , Yifan Peng∗2 , Le Lu1 , Zhiyong Lu2 , Ronald M. Summers1
1
Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Clinical Center,
2
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892
{xiaosong.wang,yifan.peng,luzh,rms}@nih.gov, lel@nvidia.com

Abstract
Chest X-rays are one of the most common radiological examinations in daily clinical routines. Reporting thorax diseases using chest X-rays is often an entry-level task
for radiologist trainees. Yet, reading a chest X-ray image
remains a challenging job for learning-oriented machine
intelligence, due to (1) shortage of large-scale machinelearnable medical image datasets, and (2) lack of techniques that can mimic the high-level reasoning of human
radiologists that requires years of knowledge accumulation
and professional training. In this paper, we show the clinical free-text radiological reportscan be utilized as a priori
knowledge for tackling these two key problems. We propose
a novel Text-Image Embedding network (TieNet) for extracting the distinctive image and text representations. Multilevel attention models are integrated into an end-to-end
trainable CNN-RNN architecture for highlighting the meaningful text words and image regions. We first apply TieNet
to classify the chest X-rays by using both image features
and text embeddings extracted from associated reports. The
proposed auto-annotation framework achieves high accuracy (over 0.9 on average in AUCs) in assigning disease
labels for our hand-label evaluation dataset. Furthermore,
we transform the TieNet into a chest X-ray reporting system.
It simulates the reporting process and can output disease
classification and a preliminary report together. The classification results are significantly improved (6% increase on
average in AUCs) compared to the state-of-the-art baseline
on an unseen and hand-labeled dataset (OpenI).

1. Introduction
In the last decade, challenging tasks in computer vision have gone through different stages, from sole image classification to multi-category multi-instance classi∗ Both authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed automated chest X-ray reporting framework. A multi-level attention model is introduced.

fication/detection/segmentation to more complex cognitive
tasks that involve understanding and describing the relationships of object instances inside the images or videos.
The rapid and significant performance improvement is
partly driven by publicly accessible of the large-scale image and video datasets with quality annotations, e.g., ImageNet [8], PASCAL VOC [10], MS COCO [22], and Visual Genome [18] datasets. In particular, ImageNet pretrained deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models [15, 19, 21] has become an essential basis (indeed an advantage) for many higher level tasks, e.g., Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) based image captioning [34, 17, 30, 11],
Visual Question Answering [36, 42, 38, 27], and instance
relationship extraction [16, 14, 6].
On the contrary, there are few publicly available largescale image datasets in the medical image domain. Conventional means of annotating natural images, e.g crowdsourcing, cannot be applied to medical images due to the
fact that these tasks often require years of professional training and domain knowledge. On the other hand, radiological raw data (e.g., images, clinical annotations, and radio19049

