Image Generation from Scene Graphs
Justin Johnson1,2∗
1

Agrim Gupta1
2

Stanford University

1. Introduction
What I cannot create, I do not understand
– Richard Feynman
The act of creation requires a deep understanding of the
thing being created: chefs, novelists, and filmmakers must
understand food, writing, and film at a much deeper level
than diners, readers, or moviegoers. If our computer vision
systems are to truly understand the visual world, they must
be able not only recognize images but also to generate them.
Aside from imparting deep visual understanding, methods for generating realistic images can also be practically
useful. In the near term, automatic image generation can
aid the work of artists or graphic designers. One day, we
might replace image and video search engines with algorithms that generate customized images and videos in response to the individual tastes of each user.
As a step toward these goals, there has been exciting re∗ Work done during an internship at Google Cloud AI.

Google Cloud AI
Sentence

Abstract
To truly understand the visual world our models should
be able not only to recognize images but also generate them.
To this end, there has been exciting recent progress on generating images from natural language descriptions. These
methods give stunning results on limited domains such as
descriptions of birds or flowers, but struggle to faithfully
reproduce complex sentences with many objects and relationships. To overcome this limitation we propose a method
for generating images from scene graphs, enabling explicitly reasoning about objects and their relationships. Our
model uses graph convolution to process input graphs, computes a scene layout by predicting bounding boxes and segmentation masks for objects, and converts the layout to an
image with a cascaded refinement network. The network is
trained adversarially against a pair of discriminators to ensure realistic outputs. We validate our approach on Visual
Genome and COCO-Stuff, where qualitative results, ablations, and user studies demonstrate our method’s ability to
generate complex images with multiple objects.

Li Fei-Fei1,2

Scene Graph

[47]

StackGAN
[59]

sheep

by

boat

in

standing on

ocean

by

grass

behind

tree

sheep

sky

above

Ours

Figure 1. State-of-the-art methods for generating images from
sentences, such as StackGAN [59], struggle to faithfully depict
complex sentences with many objects. We overcome this limitation by generating images from scene graphs, allowing our method
to reason explicitly about objects and their relationships.

cent progress on text to image synthesis [41, 42, 43, 59] by
combining recurrent neural networks and Generative Adversarial Networks [12] to generate images from natural
language descriptions.
These methods can give stunning results on limited domains, such as fine-grained descriptions of birds or flowers.
However as shown in Figure 1, leading methods for generating images from sentences struggle with complex sentences
containing many objects.
A sentence is a linear structure, with one word following another; however as shown in Figure 1, the information
conveyed by a complex sentence can often be more explicitly represented as a scene graph of objects and their relationships. Scene graphs are a powerful structured representation for both images and language; they have been used
for semantic image retrieval [22] and for evaluating [1] and
improving [31] image captioning; methods have also been
developed for converting sentences to scene graphs [47] and
for predicting scene graphs from images [32, 36, 57, 58].
In this paper we aim to generate complex images with
many objects and relationships by conditioning our generation on scene graphs, allowing our model to reason explicitly about objects and their relationships.
With this new task comes new challenges. We must develop a method for processing scene graph inputs; for this
we use a graph convolution network which passes information along graph edges. After processing the graph, we must
11219

