Unsupervised Sparse Dirichlet-Net for Hyperspectral Image Super-Resolution
Ying Qu1 *,
Hairong Qi1 ,
Chiman Kwan2
1
2
The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN
Applied Research LLC, Rockville, MD
yqu3@vols.utk.edu

hqi@utk.edu

chiman.kwan@arllc.net

Abstract
In many computer vision applications, obtaining images
of high resolution in both the spatial and spectral domains
are equally important. However, due to hardware limitations, one can only expect to acquire images of high resolution in either the spatial or spectral domains. This paper focuses on hyperspectral image super-resolution (HSISR), where a hyperspectral image (HSI) with low spatial
resolution (LR) but high spectral resolution is fused with a
multispectral image (MSI) with high spatial resolution (HR)
but low spectral resolution to obtain HR HSI. Existing deep
learning-based solutions are all supervised that would need
a large training set and the availability of HR HSI, which is
unrealistic. Here, we make the first attempt to solving the
HSI-SR problem using an unsupervised encoder-decoder
architecture that carries the following uniquenesses. First,
it is composed of two encoder-decoder networks, coupled
through a shared decoder, in order to preserve the rich spectral information from the HSI network. Second, the network
encourages the representations from both modalities to follow a sparse Dirichlet distribution which naturally incorporates the two physical constraints of HSI and MSI. Third,
the angular difference between representations are minimized in order to reduce the spectral distortion. We refer to
the proposed architecture as unsupervised Sparse DirichletNet, or uSDN. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
the superior performance of uSDN as compared to the stateof-the-art.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral image (HSI) analysis has become a thriving and active research area in computer vision with a wide
range of applications [7, 5], including, for example, object recognition and classification [24, 12, 53, 31], tracking [44, 13, 42, 43], environmental monitoring [40, 35], and
change detection [25, 6]. Compared to multispectral images
(MSI with around 10 spectral bands) or conventional color
images (RGB with 3 bands), HSI collects hundreds of contiguous bands which provide finer details of spectral signa-

Figure 1. General procedure of HSI-SR.

ture of different materials. However, its spatial resolution
becomes significantly lower than MSI or RGB due to hardware limitations [20, 3]. On the contrary, although MSI or
RGB has high spatial resolution, their spectral resolution is
relatively low. Very often, to yield better recognition and
analysis results, images with both high spectral and spatial resolution are desired [46]. A natural way to generate
such images is to fuse hyperspectral images with multispectral images or conventional color images. This procedure is
referred to as hyperspectral image super-resolution (HSISR) [3, 27, 8] as shown in Fig. 1.
The problem of HSI-SR originates from multispectral
pan-sharpening (MSI-PAN) in the remote sensing field,
where the spatial resolution of MSI is further improved by
a high-resolution panchromatic image (PAN). Note that, in
general, resolution refers to the spatial resolution. Usually,
MSI has much higher resolution than HSI, but PAN has
even higher resolution than MSI. We use LR to denote low
spatial resolution and HR for high spatial resolution. There
are roughly two groups of MSI-PAN methods, namely, the
component substitution (CS) [41, 38, 2] and the multiresolution analysis (MRA) based approaches [1]. Although
MSI-PAN has been well developed through decades of innovations [41, 29, 54], they cannot be readily adopted to
solve the HSI-SR problems. On one hand, the amount of
spectral information to be preserved for HSI-SR is much
higher than that of MSI-PAN, thus it is easier to introduce
spectral distortion, i.e., the output image does not preserve

2511

