Blazingly Fast Video Object Segmentation with Pixel-Wise Metric Learning
Yuhua Chen1
1

Jordi Pont-Tuset1

Alberto Montes1
2

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich

Luc Van Gool1,2

VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven

{yuhua.chen,jponttuset,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch, malberto@student.ethz.ch

Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of video object segmentation, given some user annotation which indicates the object of interest. The problem is formulated as pixel-wise
retrieval in a learned embedding space: we embed pixels of the same object instance into the vicinity of each
other, using a fully convolutional network trained by a modified triplet loss as the embedding model. Then the annotated pixels are set as reference and the rest of the pixels
are classified using a nearest-neighbor approach. The proposed method supports different kinds of user input such as
segmentation mask in the first frame (semi-supervised scenario), or a sparse set of clicked points (interactive scenario). In the semi-supervised scenario, we achieve results
competitive with the state of the art but at a fraction of computation cost (275 milliseconds per frame). In the interactive scenario where the user is able to refine their input iteratively, the proposed method provides instant response to
each input, and reaches comparable quality to competing
methods with much less interaction.

1. Introduction
Immeasurable amount of multimedia data is recorded
and shared in the current era of the Internet. Among it,
video is one of the most common and rich modalities, albeit it is also one of the most expensive to process. Algorithms for fast and accurate video processing thus become
crucially important for real-world applications. Video object segmentation, i.e. classifying the set of pixels of a video
sequence into the object(s) of interest and background, is
among the tasks that despite having numerous and attractive
applications, cannot currently be performed in a satisfactory
quality level and at an acceptable speed. The main objective
of this paper is to fill in this gap: we perform video object
segmentation at the accuracy level comparable to the state
of the art while keeping the processing time at a speed that
even allows for real-time human interaction.
Towards this goal, we model the problem in a simple
and intuitive, yet powerful and unexplored way: we formu-

Figure 1. Interactive segmentation using our method: The
white circles represent the clicks where the user has provided an
annotation, the colored masks show the resulting segmentation in
a subset of the sequence’s frames.

late video object segmentation as pixel-wise retrieval in a
learned embedding space. Ideally, in the embedding space,
pixels belonging to the same object instance are close together and pixels from other objects are further apart. We
build such embedding space by learning a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) as the embedding model, using a
modified triplet loss tailored for video object segmentation,
where no clear correspondence between pixels is given.
Once the embedding model is learned, the inference at testtime only needs to compute the embedding vectors with a
forward pass for each frame, and then perform a per-pixel
nearest neighbor search in the embedding space to find the
most similar annotated pixel. The object, defined by the
user annotation, can therefore be segmented throughout the
video sequence.
There are several main advantages of our formulation:
Firstly, the proposed method is highly efficient as there is no
fine-tuning in test time, and it only requires a single forward
pass through the embedding network and a nearest-neighbor
search to process each frame. Secondly, our method provides the flexibility to support different types of user input
(i.e. clicked points, scribbles, segmentation masks, etc.) in
an unified framework. Moreover, the embedding process is
independent of user input, thus the embedding vectors do
not need to be recomputed when the user input changes,
which makes our method ideal for the interactive scenario.
11189

