Hierarchical Novelty Detection for Visual Object Recognition
Kibok Lee∗

Kimin Lee† Kyle Min∗ Yuting Zhang∗ Jinwoo Shin† Honglak Lee‡∗
∗
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
†
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea
‡
Google Brain, Mountain View, CA, USA
Abstract

Deep neural networks have achieved impressive success
in large-scale visual object recognition tasks with a predefined set of classes. However, recognizing objects of novel
classes unseen during training still remains challenging.
The problem of detecting such novel classes has been addressed in the literature, but most prior works have focused
on providing simple binary or regressive decisions, e.g., the
output would be “known,” “novel,” or corresponding confidence intervals. In this paper, we study more informative
novelty detection schemes based on a hierarchical classification framework. For an object of a novel class, we aim
for finding its closest super class in the hierarchical taxonomy of known classes. To this end, we propose two different
approaches termed top-down and flatten methods, and their
combination as well. The essential ingredients of our methods are confidence-calibrated classifiers, data relabeling,
and the leave-one-out strategy for modeling novel classes
under the hierarchical taxonomy. Furthermore, our method
can generate a hierarchical embedding that leads to improved generalized zero-shot learning performance in combination with other commonly-used semantic embeddings.

1. Introduction
Object recognition in large-scale image datasets has
achieved impressive performance with deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [11, 12, 29, 31]. The standard
CNN architectures are learned to recognize a predefined set
of classes seen during training. However, in practice, a new
type of objects could emerge (e.g., a new kind of consumer
product). Hence, it is desirable to extend the CNN architectures for detecting the novelty of an object (i.e., deciding
if the object does not match any previously trained object
classes). There have been recent efforts toward developing
efficient novelty detection methods [2, 13, 17, 20, 25], but
most of the existing methods measure only the model uncertainty, i.e., confidence score, which is often too ambiguous
for practical use. For example, suppose one trains a classifier on an animal image dataset as in Figure 1. A standard
novelty detection method can be applied to a cat-like image to evaluate its novelty, but such a method would not tell

Test image:

True label:
Prior works:
Ours:

Siamese cat
Siamese cat
Siamese cat

Angola cat
novel
novel cat

Dachshund
novel
novel dog

Pika
novel
novel animal

animal
cat
Persian cat

dog
Siamese cat

Pomeranian

Welsh corgi

Figure 1: An illustration of our proposed hierarchical novelty detection task. In contrast to prior novelty detection
works, we aim to find the most specific class label of a novel
data on the taxonomy built with known classes.
whether the novel object is a new species of cat unseen in
the training set or a new animal species.
To address this issue, we design a new classification
framework for more informative novelty detection by utilizing a hierarchical taxonomy, where the taxonomy can
be extracted from the natural language information, e.g.,
WordNet hierarchy [22]. Our approach is also motivated by
a strong empirical correlation between hierarchical semantic relationships and the visual appearance of objects [5].
Under our scheme, a taxonomy is built with the hypernymhyponym relationships between known classes such that objects from novel classes are expected to be classified into the
most relevant label, i.e., the closest class in the taxonomy.
For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, our goal is to distinguish “new cat,” “new dog,” and “new animal,” which
cannot be achieved in the standard novelty detection tasks.
We call this problem hierarchical novelty detection task.
In contrast to standard object recognition tasks with a
closed set of classes, our proposed framework can be useful
for extending the domain of classes to an open set with taxonomy information (i.e., dealing with any objects unseen in
training). In practical application scenarios, our framework
can be potentially useful for automatically or interactively
organizing a customized taxonomy (e.g., company’s prod11034

