Efficient and Deep Person Re-Identification using Multi-Level Similarity
Yiluan Guo, Ngai-Man Cheung
ST Electronics - SUTD Cyber Security Laboratory
Singapore University of Technology and Design
yiluan guo@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, ngaiman cheung@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Person Re-Identification (ReID) requires comparing two
images of person captured under different conditions. Existing work based on neural networks often computes the similarity of feature maps from one single convolutional layer.
In this work, we propose an efficient, end-to-end fully convolutional Siamese network that computes the similarities
at multiple levels. We demonstrate that multi-level similarity can improve the accuracy considerably using lowcomplexity network structures in ReID problem. Specifically, first, we use several convolutional layers to extract the
features of two input images. Then, we propose Convolution
Similarity Network to compute the similarity score maps for
the inputs. We use spatial transformer networks (STNs) to
determine spatial attention. We propose to apply efficient
depth-wise convolution to compute the similarity. The proposed Convolution Similarity Networks can be inserted into
different convolutional layers to extract visual similarities
at different levels. Furthermore, we use an improved ranking loss to further improve the performance. Our work is the
first to propose to compute visual similarities at low, middle
and high levels for ReID. With extensive experiments and
analysis, we demonstrate that our system, compact yet effective, can achieve competitive results with much smaller
model size and computational complexity.

1. Introduction
In person re-identification (ReID), given one image for
a particular person captured by one camera, we need to reidentify this person from multiple images in a gallery captured by different cameras from different viewpoints. This
task has attracted much attention due to its various applications in video surveillance and image retrieval. Substantial
works have been proposed to accomplish this task, but improvement is still needed. The main challenge is the significant visual appearance changes caused by the illumination
variation, occlusion, viewpoint change, person pose as well
as background clutter. Also, the computation needs to be

efficient to handle large volumes of surveillance videos.
In existing works, Person ReID is solved from two perspectives. One is to develop a powerful representation to
discriminate different identities [40, 43, 20] and the other is
to design an effective distance metric so that the similarity
between different images can be measured [3, 4, 11].
With the great success achieved by deep convolutional
nets (ConvNets) in computer vision [18, 33, 12, 9, 13],
some works have been proposed to address Person ReID
with deep neural networks in an end-to-end fashion. One
approach is to classify the images into different identities
[7, 19, 30]. During testing, each image is represented by
the output of final fully connected layer before the classifier.
This approach may suffer from the fact that, in ReID, there
are only limited images for each identity during training.
[22] formulated Person ReID as a binary classification problem with Siamese network structure. Two images are fed
into the network that determines whether they are matched
or not. This approach alleviated the problem of insufficient
training samples and achieved state-of-the-art results at that
time. The critical component of this formulation is how
to measure the similarity of two input images. [22] measured the similarity by computing the product of horizontal
stripes. [2] extended this idea by taking the neighborhood
into consideration. The similarity is computed as the difference between one pixel on feature maps for one image and
its 5 × 5 neighbors on feature maps for another image. [31]
further enlarged the neighbor search area and computed the
correlation as the similarity.
All these methods have some limitations. First, they only
consider the similarity for the outputs of a certain convolutional layer. However, we argue that for ReID, it is useful
to use multi-level similarity, i.e., similarity of the features
of the bottom convolutional layers that contain low level visual information, and that of the higher layers that contain
semantical information. Figure 1 contains some illustrative
examples. Figure 1(a) and (b) are both non-matching pairs.
For Figure 1(a), similarity based on low-level features that
capture the color of the shorts can identify the difference
of the two persons. For Figure 1(b), the cloth of the two
12335

