Geometry Aware Constrained Optimization Techniques for Deep Learning∗
Soumava Kumar Roy1 , Zakaria Mhammedi1,2 , and Mehrtash Harandi1,2
1

Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
Data61, CSIRO, Canberra, Australia
1
{soumava.kumarroy, zak.mhammedi, mehrtash.harandi}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we generalize the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and RMSProp algorithms to the setting of Riemannian optimization. SGD is a popular method for large
scale optimization. In particular, it is widely used to train
the weights of Deep Neural Networks. However, gradients computed using standard SGD can have large variance, which is detrimental for the convergence rate of the
algorithm. Other methods such as RMSProp and ADAM
address this issue. Nevertheless, these methods cannot be
directly applied to constrained optimization problems. In
this paper, we extend some popular optimization algorithm
to the Riemannian (constrained) setting. We substantiate
our proposed extensions with a range of relevant problems
in machine learning such as incremental Principal Component Analysis, computating the Riemannian centroids of
SPD matrices, and Deep Metric Learning. We achieve competitive results against the state of the art for fine-grained
object recognition datasets.

1. Introduction
The field of machine learning and computer vision is
abundant with problems that can benefit from the use of
constraints to obtain optimal solutions. For example, orthogonality constraints have shown to be very useful in linear dimensionality reduction algorithms such as Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) [4]. Over the past few years,
deep learning has led to tremendous improvement in many
applications such as image and object recognition, speech
recognition, natural language processing, and content based
retrieval systems [33]. Deep Metric Learning (DML) [27],
for example, has received a significant amount of attention
lately, and it is well known that learning a metric can bene∗ This work was supported under the Australian Research Council‘s
Discovery Projects funding scheme (project DP150104645)

fit from the use of orthogonality constraints [41]. However,
most popular optimizers which use a variant of Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) cannot directly be applied to constrained optimization. We attempt to bridge this gap by extending certain popular optimization algorithms to enhance
their capability in handling constraints on the parameter
space. We begin our formulation by studying the popular
class of empirical risk minimization problems in the Riemannian setting, where the objective can take the following
form
n

arg min
θ∈M

1X
J(y i , fθ (xi )),
n i=1

(1)

with (xi , y i ) ∈ Rd × Rℓ refers to the ith data instance, M
is a Riemannian manifold, fθ : Rd → Rℓ is a “prediction”
function (e.g. output of a neural network) parameterized by
θ, and J a positive real-valued objective function to be minimized. Gradient Descent (GD) is a standard technique
used to optimize Equation (1) by updating the parameters
of the model along negative gradient directions. However,
this approach can be fragile when the objective function is
highly non-convex. In this case, the standard GD algorithm
can get stuck in a bad local minima leading to poor performance. The SGD [10], the stochastic variant of GD, was introduced to overcome this drawback. SGD trains the model
on mini-batches of the training data, resulting in faster convergence rates compared to GD.
The Computed gradients during SGD can display large
variances due to the random generation of mini-batches.
This can lead to undesirable oscillations of the model parameters around optimal values [29]. Ensuring that these
oscillations are dampened has been the subject of several
works lately [30, 17]. Two prominent algorithms which address this issue are the Momentum SGD (SGD-M) [29] and
the Stochastic Variance Reduced Gradient (SVRG) [17] and
they have been quite successful in achieving higher convergence rates over SGD and GD.
14460

