Deeply Learned Filter Response Functions for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
Shijie Nie1 , Lin Gu1 , Yinqiang Zheng1 , Antony Lam2 , Nobutaka Ono3 , Imari Sato1
1
National Institute of Informatics, 2 Saitama University, 3 Tokyo Metropolitan University
nsj@nii.ac.jp, ling@nii.ac.jp, yqzheng@nii.ac.jp
antonylam@cv.ics.saitama-u.ac.jp, onono@tmu.ac.jp, imarik@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
Hyperspectral reconstruction from RGB imaging has recently achieved significant progress via sparse coding and
deep learning. However, a largely ignored fact is that existing RGB cameras are tuned to mimic human trichromatic
perception, thus their spectral responses are not necessarily optimal for hyperspectral reconstruction. In this paper,
rather than use RGB spectral responses, we simultaneously
learn optimized camera spectral response functions (to be
implemented in hardware) and a mapping for spectral reconstruction by using an end-to-end network. Our core
idea is that since camera spectral filters act in effect like
the convolution layer, their response functions could be optimized by training standard neural networks. We propose
two types of designed filters: a three-chip setup without spatial mosaicing and a single-chip setup with a Bayer-style
2x2 filter array. Numerical simulations verify the advantages of deeply learned spectral responses compared to existing RGB cameras. More interestingly, by considering
physical restrictions in the design process, we are able to
realize the deeply learned spectral response functions by
using modern film filter production technologies, and thus
construct data-inspired multispectral cameras for snapshot
hyperspectral imaging.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging captures detailed light distribution along the wavelength axis. It is shown to be beneficial
for remote sensing, medical diagnosis, industrial detection,
and so on [12, 24]. For example, the tumor margin, invisible to surgeon’s eyes, could be better visualized in hyperspectral images. Cases of leaked invisible gas may also be
obvious using spectral signals.
Most existing devices to capture hyperspectral images
are scanning based, that is, either to drive a line slit along
one spatial dimension (pushbroom scan) or to continuously
change narrow bandpass filters in front of a grayscale camera (filter scan). The key drawback is that scanning is slow,

which prevents their application to dynamic scenes. Thus
scanning-free, snapshot hyperspectral devices have been
developed, by using for example, fiber bundles [25] and
random/regular aperture masks [32, 13, 7]. Unfortunately,
these devices are extremely limited in spatial resolution.
A computational hyperspectral reconstruction method
from a single RGB image is promising in overcoming the
drawbacks of the aforementioned devices, as evidenced in
recent research on RGB-to-Spectrum reconstruction [26,
28, 4, 17, 30, 3, 33]. However, existing RGB cameras, either using the three-chip beam splitting prism technique or
single-chip Bayer filter array, are designed to mimic human
color perception [19], thus their spectral response functions
are not necessarily optimal for computer vision tasks, i.e.
hyperspectral reconstruction. Very recently, Arad and BenShahar [5] identified the dependence of hyperspectral reconstruction accuracy on the camera’s spectral response. In
[5], they find the best filter combination among a finite set
of candidate filters via brute force search and hit-and-run
evolutionary optimization.
The latest film filter production technologies have allowed us to implement image sensors with any non-negative
and smooth spectral response functions. Therefore, rather
than selecting filters from existing ones, in this paper, we
aim to directly learn optimized spectral response functions
in the infinite space of non-negative and smooth functions.
We then manufacture our learned filter, based on this datadriven approach to construct a multispectral camera for
snapshot hyperspectral imaging (Sec. 6).
Based on our observation that camera spectral filters act
in effect, like the convolution layer in neural networks (details in Sec. 4.2), we are able to optimize them by using
deep learning techniques. We simultaneously learn the optimized filter response functions and the mapping for spectral
reconstruction via a high resolution end-to-end network. Inspired by existing RGB cameras, we consider a three-chip
setup without spatial mosaicing and a single-chip setup with
a Bayer-style 2x2 filter array. Numerical simulations on
publicly available datasets verify the advantages of deeply
learned camera spectral responses over existing RGB cam14767

