Learning to Look Around:
Intelligently Exploring Unseen Environments for Unknown Tasks
Dinesh Jayaraman
UC Berkeley*
Abstract
It is common to implicitly assume access to intelligently
captured inputs (e.g., photos from a human photographer),
yet autonomously capturing good observations is itself a
major challenge. We address the problem of learning to
look around: if an agent has the ability to voluntarily acquire new views to observe its environment, how can it learn
efficient exploratory behaviors to acquire informative visual observations? We propose a reinforcement learning
solution, where the agent is rewarded for actions that reduce its uncertainty about the unobserved portions of its
environment. Based on this principle, we develop a recurrent neural network-based approach to perform active completion of panoramic natural scenes and 3D object shapes.
Crucially, the learned policies are not tied to any recognition task nor to the particular semantic content seen during
training. As a result, 1) the learned “look around” behavior is relevant even for new tasks in unseen environments,
and 2) training data acquisition involves no manual labeling. Through tests in diverse settings, we demonstrate that
our approach learns useful generic policies that transfer to
new unseen tasks and environments.

1. Introduction
Visual perception requires not only making inferences
from observations, but also making decisions about what to
observe. Individual views of an environment afford only a
small fraction of all information relevant to a visual agent.
For instance, an agent with a view of a television screen
in front of it may not know if it is in a living room or a
bedroom. An agent observing a mug from the side may
have to move to see it from above to know what is inside.
An agent surveying a rescue site may need to explore at the
onset to get its bearings.
In principle, complete certainty in perception is only
achieved by making every possible observation—that is,
looking around in all directions, or systematically examining all sides of an object—yet observing all aspects is often
* Work done while at UT Austin.

Kristen Grauman
UT Austin

inconvenient if not intractable. In practice, however, not
all views are equally informative. The natural visual world
contains regularities, suggesting not every view needs to be
sampled for near-perfect perception. For instance, humans
rarely need to fully observe an object to understand its 3D
shape [33,58,59], and one can often understand the primary
contents of a room without literally scanning it [63]. Given
a set of past observations, some new views are more useful
than others. This leads us to investigate the question: how
can a learning system make intelligent decisions about how
to acquire new exploratory visual observations?
Today, much of the computer vision literature deals with
inferring visual properties from a ﬁxed observation. For
instance, there are methods to infer shape from multiple
views [24], depth from monocular views [54], or category
labels of objects [37]. The implicit assumption is that the input visual observation is already appropriately captured. We
contend that this assumption neglects a key part of the challenge: intelligence is often required to obtain proper inputs
in the ﬁrst place. Arbitrarily framed snapshots of the visual
world are ill-suited both for human perception [16, 49] and
for machine perception [3, 70]. Circumventing the acquisition problem is only viable for passive perception algorithms running on disembodied stationary machines, which
are tasked only with processing human-captured imagery.
In contrast, we are interested in learning to observe
efﬁciently—a critical yet understudied problem for autonomous embodied visual agents. An agent ought to be
able to enter a new environment or pick up a new object and
intelligently (non-exhaustively) look around. This capability would be valuable in both task-driven scenarios (e.g., a
drone searches for signs of a particular activity) as well as
scenarios where the task itself unfolds simultaneously with
the agent’s exploratory actions (e.g., a search-and-rescue
robot enters a burning building and dynamically decides its
mission). While there is interesting recent headway in active object recognition [3, 11, 29, 43] and intelligent search
mechanisms for detection [10, 32, 45, 73], such systems are
supervised and task-speciﬁc—limited to accelerating a predeﬁned recognition task.
We address the general setting, where exploration is not
11238

