Teaching Categories to Human Learners with Visual Explanations
Oisin Mac Aodha

Shihan Su
Yuxin Chen
Pietro Perona
California Institute of Technology
A) Image Level

Abstract
We study the problem of computer-assisted teaching with
explanations. Conventional approaches for machine teaching typically only provide feedback at the instance level e.g.,
the category or label of the instance. However, it is intuitive that clear explanations from a knowledgeable teacher
can significantly improve a student’s ability to learn a new
concept. To address these existing limitations, we propose a
teaching framework that provides interpretable explanations
as feedback and models how the learner incorporates this
additional information. In the case of images, we show that
we can automatically generate explanations that highlight
the parts of the image that are responsible for the class label.
Experiments on human learners illustrate that, on average,
participants achieve better test set performance on challenging categorization tasks when taught with our interpretable
approach compared to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Computer-assisted teaching offers the promise of personalized curricula that are tailored to the ability level and
interests of every individual. Providing open access to the
kinds of high-quality teaching that is currently only available to a small percentage of the world’s population has
the potential to transform education. To date, subject areas
such as mathematics [18, 5] and language learning [34] have
benefited from automated teaching systems. However, the
problem of how to best teach visual expertise in fine-grained
domains such as medical diagnosis and species identification
is comparatively less well explored.
In addition to the benefits to human learners from better
teaching methods, automated systems could also take advantage of these improvements. Access to expert time is often
limited, and as a result, there is a need for better techniques
to train crowd workers for image annotation tasks. Once the
workers have effectively learned the task they can provide
higher quality labeled training data. This ‘closing of the
loop’ will enable us to take advantage of humans’ ability to
both generalize across different domains and cope with other
nuisance factors such as pose and lighting changes.

Yisong Yue

B) Interpretable

Viceroy Butterﬂy

Viceroy Butterﬂy

Queen Butterﬂy

Queen Butterﬂy

Figure 1. A) The majority of existing machine teaching algorithms
for visual categories only give feedback to the learner in the form
of the ground truth class label. B) It is much more informative to
display the discriminative regions to help them to determine the
categories present in the images. Here, we see explanations from
our system highlighting the blank band on the Viceroy Butterfly
and the white spots on the Queen Butterfly’s wings. These are field
markings commonly used to identify both species.

Existing approaches to teaching visual knowledge typically pose the problem as choosing the most informative
subset of images to show from a much larger set of possible
options. One of the major limitations of this existing work
is that they only give very limited feedback to students in
the form of the class label, e.g. [31, 16]. In Fig. 1 A) we see
an example of this label only feedback. Providing only the
ground truth class label is a very limited amount of feedback
compared to the rich explanations that one may receive from
a human teacher. A human teacher would likely teach the
student the specific parts and attributes in the image that are
most discriminative for that particular class, Fig. 1 B).
Our hypothesis is that students that are taught with interpretable feedback will learn more effectively than those that
only receive label feedback. Specifically, we propose a novel
teaching algorithm that selects images that are both repre-

3820

