Weakly-Supervised Action Segmentation with
Iterative Soft Boundary Assignment
Li Ding∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Chenliang Xu
University of Rochester

liding@mit.edu

chenliang.xu@rochester.edu

Abstract
In this work, we address the task of weakly-supervised
human action segmentation in long, untrimmed videos. Recent methods have relied on expensive learning models,
such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and Hidden
Markov Models (HMM). However, these methods suffer
from expensive computational cost, thus are unable to be
deployed in large scale. To overcome the limitations, the
keys to our design are efficiency and scalability. We propose a novel action modeling framework, which consists
of a new temporal convolutional network, named Temporal Convolutional Feature Pyramid Network (TCFPN), for
predicting frame-wise action labels, and a novel training
strategy for weakly-supervised sequence modeling, named
Iterative Soft Boundary Assignment (ISBA), to align action
sequences and update the network in an iterative fashion.
The proposed framework is evaluated on two benchmark
datasets, Breakfast and Hollywood Extended, with four different evaluation metrics. Extensive experimental results
show that our methods achieve competitive or superior performance to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
One of the major challenges in video understanding [7,
21, 19, 23, 24, 20, 5] is to localize and classify human actions in long, untrimmed videos, of which usually the requirement is to predict per-frame semantic labels. Recently,
many approaches [22, 9, 12, 17, 4] have been introduced to
address this problem in fully-supervised setting, relying on
the densely-annotated video data such as [8, 2]. However,
such data is usually too tedious to obtain, which makes these
methods not scalable under real-world condition. Furthermore, annotating the precise temporal boundaries between
actions is also a challenge for humans; the resulting data
will be inconsistent and less likely to be relied on for learning in larger scale.
∗ Work performed when the author was with University of Rochester.

video

transcript
take bowl pour cereals pour milk stir cereals

Temporal Convolutional Feature Pyramid Network (TCFPN)

Iterative Soft Boundary Assignment (ISBA)
iterate till meeting
stop criteria

prediction
take bowl

pour cereals

pour milk

stir cereals

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed framework with Iterative Soft
Boundary Assignment (ISBA) and Temporal Convolutional Feature Pyramid Network(TCFPN).

As a result, there is an increasing attention on methods [16, 10, 6, 2] that focus on solving the problem under weaker supervision, e.g. with action transcripts. In this
case, an action transcript refers to a set of action units organized by their occurrence ordering in a video without precisely locating their temporal boundaries. This kind of labeling is much easier to obtain, and can even be automatically generated from other meta information [1, 11, 14].
Our paper aligns with this set of weakly-supervised works
and assumes only access to action transcripts of training.
However, current methods stick to use Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) to encode the video data and use different algorithms, such as Extended Connectionist Temporal Classification (ECTC) [6] and Hidden Markov Model
(HMM) [16, 10], to go through all the possible action sequences and find the one with maximal likelihood. Both
parts, i.e., network and learning model, suffer from expensive computational cost. For example, in [16], videos have
to be cut into small chunks to enable RNN training. Besides, [16, 10] also introduce iterative learning approaches
that train until converge, which do not consider the condition of overfitting.

6508

