Duplex Generative Adversarial Network for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Lanqing Hu1,2
1

Meina Kan1,3

Shiguang Shan1,3

Xilin Chen1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
lanqing.hu@vipl.ict.ac.cn

{kanmeina,sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptation attempts to transfer the knowledge
obtained from the source domain to the target domain, i.e.,
the domain where the testing data are. The main challenge lies in the distribution discrepancy between source
and target domain. Most existing works endeavor to learn
domain invariant representation usually by minimizing a
distribution distance, e.g., MMD and the discriminator
in the recently proposed generative adversarial network
(GAN). Following the similar idea of GAN, this work proposes a novel GAN architecture with duplex adversarial discriminators (referred to as DupGAN), which can achieve
domain-invariant representation and domain transformation. Specifically, our proposed network consists of three
parts, an encoder, a generator and two discriminators. The
encoder embeds samples from both domains into the latent
representation, and the generator decodes the latent representation to both source and target domains respectively
conditioned on a domain code, i.e., achieves domain transformation. The generator is pitted against duplex discriminators, one for source domain and the other for target,
to ensure the reality of domain transformation, the latent
representation domain invariant and the category information of it preserved as well. Our proposed work achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on unsupervised domain
adaptation of digit classification and object recognition.

1. Introduction
The deep learning technique has achieved great success
in many area including the computer vision [26, 45, 22, 16,
5], speech recognition [23, 7, 21, 41, 49], etc. Generally,
the deep models are usually trained on a large scale labeled
training data and tested on the data which share similar distribution as the training one. Otherwise, the performance
degenerates badly when the distribution of the training and
testing data are different. So for a new task, the training data

Figure 1: Illustration of domain adaptation. Domain adaptation
attempts to mitigate the discrepancy between source and target domain. After adaptation, the source and target domains are expected
to share the same or similar distribution, i.e., samples of the same
class from both source and target domains should be close to each
other. The source domain samples are represented by red circles
and target samples are blue ones.

are usually needed to recollect and that is quite expensive,
even impossible. Transfer learning is a preferable technique
that can alleviate the cost of recollecting large scale labeled
data by transferring knowledge from a different but related
sophisticated domain. Domain adaptation is a sub-problem
of the general transfer learning, which pays attention to the
case where the training data (i.e., source domain) and the
testing data (i.e., target domain) share the same task but follow different distributions [37], as shown in Figure 1.
According to the degree to which the data of target domain is labeled, domain adaptation can be categorized into supervised, semi-supervised and unsupervised domain
adaptation. In supervised domain adaptation scenario [25]
and semi-supervised one [9, 27], all or part of the target domain samples are labeled but the number of labeled data is
too limited to learn a satisfactory model for the target domain. In unsupervised domain adaptation scenario [1, 12],
all target domain samples are unlabeled. For all three scenarios, the source domain samples are labeled. This work
mainly focuses on the unsupervised domain adaptation, of
which only related works are reviewed below.
In the early days, most methods deal with the unsupervised domain adaptation problem via instance re-weighting
11498

