VITAL: VIsual Tracking via Adversarial Learning
Yibing Song1 , Chao Ma2∗, Xiaohe Wu3 , Lijun Gong4 , Linchao Bao1 ,
Wangmeng Zuo3 , Chunhua Shen2 , Rynson W.H. Lau5 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang6
1

Tencent AI Lab 2 The University of Adelaide 3 Harbin Institute of Technology
5
City University of Hong Kong 6 University of California, Merced

4

Tencent

https://ybsong00.github.io/cvpr18_tracking/index

Abstract
The tracking-by-detection framework consists of two
stages, i.e., drawing samples around the target object in the
first stage and classifying each sample as the target object
or as background in the second stage. The performance of
existing trackers using deep classification networks is limited by two aspects. First, the positive samples in each
frame are highly spatially overlapped, and they fail to capture rich appearance variations. Second, there exists extreme class imbalance between positive and negative samples. This paper presents the VITAL algorithm to address
these two problems via adversarial learning. To augment
positive samples, we use a generative network to randomly
generate masks, which are applied to adaptively dropout
input features to capture a variety of appearance changes.
With the use of adversarial learning, our network identifies the mask that maintains the most robust features of the
target objects over a long temporal span. In addition, to
handle the issue of class imbalance, we propose a highorder cost sensitive loss to decrease the effect of easy negative samples to facilitate training the classification network.
Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate
that the proposed tracker performs favorably against stateof-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
There has been an increasing need for tracking target
objects in bounding boxes to understand video contents.
Current state-of-the-art trackers are typically based on a
two-stage tracking-by-detection framework. The ﬁrst stage
draws a sparse set of samples around the target object and
the second stage classiﬁes each sample as either the target object or as the background using a deep neural network. Despite the favorable performance on recent tracking
∗ C. Ma is the corresponding author.

#0067

#0156

#0152

#0210

#0003

#0073

DLS-SVM

CNN-SVM

MDNet

VITAL

Figure 1: Tracking results with the comparison to stateof-the-art tracking-by-detection trackers including DLSSVM [39], CNN-SVM [24], and MDNet [38]. Our VITAL
tracker learns to diversify positive samples via adversarial
learning and to balance training samples via cost sensitive
loss. It performs favorably against existing trackers.

benchmarks [59, 60, 31], the performance of the two-stage
methods is limited by two aspects. First, the positive samples are spatially overlapped, and they cannot capture a variety of appearance changes over time. Second, the extreme
foreground-background class imbalance negatively affects
training the classiﬁcation networks. It is of great importance
to investigate how to eliminate these barriers to advance the
tracking-by-detection framework in the deep learning era.
Prior trackers have made limited efforts on increasing
the diversity of training data in learning deep classiﬁers.
Since classiﬁers tend to learn a discriminative boundary between positive and negative samples, they emphasize on the

8990

