Visual Question Answering with Memory-Augmented Networks
Chao Ma, Chunhua Shen∗, Anthony Dick, Qi Wu, Peng Wang, Anton van den Hengel, and Ian Reid
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
The University of Adelaide
c.ma@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we exploit memory-augmented neural networks to predict accurate answers to visual questions, even
when those answers rarely occur in the training set. The
memory network incorporates both internal and external
memory blocks and selectively pays attention to each training exemplar. We show that memory-augmented neural networks are able to maintain a relatively long-term memory
of scarce training exemplars, which is important for visual
question answering due to the heavy-tailed distribution of
answers in a general VQA setting. Experimental results in
two large-scale benchmark datasets show the favorable performance of the proposed algorithm with the comparison to
state of the art.

1. Introduction
Given an open-ended question and a reference image,
the task of visual question answering (VQA) is to predict an answer to the question that is consistent with the
image. Existing VQA systems train deep neural networks to predict answers, where image-question pairs are
jointly embedded as training data, and answers are encoded
as one-hot labels. Despite significant progress in recent
years [2, 8, 22, 28, 13], this approach does not scale well
to completely general, freeform visual question answering.
There are two main reasons for this.
First, deep models trained with gradient based methods learn to respond to the majority of training data rather
than specific scarce exemplars. However, the distribution of
question and answer pairs in natural language tends to be
heavy tailed. By its definition, VQA involves a wide variety of question and answer topics that cannot be predicted
in advance. In fact, the words that human observers are interested in are often unknown or rare [11]. Figure 1 shows
one example, in which baseline VQA systems [2, 20] exclude the rare answer cucumber from training set and there∗ C. Shen is the corresponding author.

Q: What is the dark green vegetable?
A: Cucumber (Ours) A: Broccoli [20]

A: Lettuce [2]

Figure 1. An example on the VQA benchmark [2]. Given an input
question and the reference image, our method takes both visual
attention and textual attention into account, and predicts a more
accurate answer than recent baseline systems. We highlight the
top 3 textual weights by red, blue, and cyan.

fore fail to predict a reasonable answer for the test question
What it the dark green vegetable?. Despite the rare words
being very important to human observers, when evaluating
error on a per-answer basis, excluding the rare words from
training sets altogether can often improve the overall performance. Because of this, existing approaches mark rare
words in questions as meaningless unknown tokens (e.g.,
unk) and simply exclude rare answers from training set.
Second, existing VQA systems learn about the properties of objects from question-answer pairs, sometimes independently of the image. Taking the question How many
zebras are in the image? as an example, VQA algorithms
are subject to bias in human language without the underlying models truly understanding the visual content. For
instance, the number of zebras, which has appeared in training answers, provides a strong prior in predicting answers.
While it would be desirable to learn to count from images,
this remains an open problem. In the meantime, being able
to better exploit words and concepts from the heavy tails
of the textual question and answer distributions would enable more accurate question answering involving these less
common words. It is therefore of great importance to selectively pay more attention to the heavy-tailed answers during
the training stage as shown in Figure 2.

6975

