Rolling Shutter and Radial Distortion are Features for High Frame Rate
Multi-camera Tracking
Akash Bapat, True Price, Jan-Michael Frahm
Department of Computer Science, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{akash,jtprice,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Traditionally, camera-based tracking approaches have
treated rolling shutter and radial distortion as imaging artifacts that have to be overcome and corrected for in order
to apply standard camera models and scene reconstruction
methods. In this paper, we introduce a novel multi-camera
tracking approach that for the first time jointly leverages the
information introduced by rolling shutter and radial distortion as a feature to achieve superior performance with respect to high-frequency camera pose estimation. In particular, our system is capable of attaining high tracking rates
that were previously unachievable. Our approach explicitly leverages rolling shutter capture and radial distortion
to process individual rows, rather than entire image frames,
for accurate camera motion estimation. We estimate a perrow 6 DoF pose of a rolling shutter camera by tracking multiple points on a radially distorted row whose rays span a
curved surface in 3D space. Although tracking systems for
rolling shutter cameras exist, we are the first to leverage radial distortion to measure a per-row pose – enabling us to
use less than half the number of cameras required by the
previous state of the art. We validate our system on both
synthetic and real imagery.

1. Introduction
The recent resurgence of Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality (AR/VR) has provided challenging computer
vision problems of drastically higher requirements. For example, recent state-of-the-art low-latency rendering techniques [38, 24] assume that very high-frequency (>30 kHz)
tracking is available. However, commercial AR/VR systems like Google’s Daydream and Cardboard products and
Samsung VR, provide only rotational tracking, which limits the immersive experience. The Oculus Rift and the HTC
Vive provide full 6-DoF (i.e. rotation and translation) tracking at ∼1 kHz frequencies. This full 6-DoF tracking comes
at a cost by requiring external lighthouses or IR cameras.

Figure 1: Due to radial distortion, rows of rolling shutter images correspond to rays which span a curve in space.
Rolling shutter further provides a dense sampling of the
scene in time. This combination of high frequency and
curved sampling of the scene provides us more information
than traditional pinhole cameras. The highlighted region reflects per-row image region corresponding to the curve.

Microsoft’s HoloLens provides inside-out tracking without
requiring any external apparatus, but still incurs tracking errors; see Sec. 4.3 for a more detailed analysis. It is well understood that high tracking rates are critical for immersive
experiences in AR/VR systems [31]. We present a full 6DoF tracking system using multiple cameras that can track
at extremely high frequencies up to 86.4kHz using commodity rolling shutter cameras.
Many commercial AR/VR systems rely on camera-based
tracking, but for cost reasons use standard cameras with
frames rates of a few tens of frames per second: e.g., the
Oculus Rift uses a 60 Hz external IR camera. In order
to achieve the higher frame rates required for tracking,
they rely on gyroscope data to improve the tracking frame
rate. However, positional tracking still remains difficult to
achieve, as IMUs drift [23]. Even using high frame-rate
global shutter cameras is not the solution, as the high frame
rates required lead to a decrease in the maximum possi14824

