Structure from Recurrent Motion: From Rigidity to Recurrency
Xiu Li1,2

Hongdong Li2,3

Tsinghua University1

Hanbyul Joo2

Carnegie Mellon University2

Abstract
This paper proposes a new method for Non-Rigid
Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM) from a long monocular
video sequence observing a non-rigid object performing recurrent and possibly repetitive dynamic action. Departing
from the traditional idea of using linear low-order or lowrank shape model for the task of NRSfM, our method exploits the property of shape recurrency (i.e., many deforming shapes tend to repeat themselves in time). We show that
recurrency is in fact a generalized rigidity. Based on this,
we reduce NRSfM problems to rigid ones provided that certain recurrency condition is satisfied. Given such a reduction, standard rigid-SfM techniques are directly applicable
(without any change) to the reconstruction of non-rigid dynamic shapes. To implement this idea as a practical approach, this paper develops efficient algorithms for automatic recurrency detection, as well as camera view clustering via a rigidity-check. Experiments on both simulated
sequences and real data demonstrate the effectiveness of the
method. Since this paper offers a novel perspective on rethinking structure-from-motion, we hope it will inspire other
new problems in the field.

Yebin Liu1

Yaser Sheikh2

Australian National University3

in rapid deformation, which are however common in reality.
This paper presents a new method for non-rigid structure from motion. Contrary to the traditional wisdom for
NRSfM, we do not make a linear model assumption. Instead, we describe how to exploit shape recurrency for the
task of non-rigid reconstruction. Specifically, we observe
that in our physical world many deforming objects (and
their shapes) tend to repeat themselves from time to time,
or even only occasionally. In the context of SfM if a shape
reoccurs in the video we say it is recurrent.
This observation of recurrency enables us to use the existing knowledge of multi-view geometry to reconstruct a
shape. Given a video sequence, if one is able to recognize
a shape that was seen before, then these two instances of
images can be used as a virtual stereo pair of the same rigid
object in a space. Therefore one can simply apply standard
rigid SfM techniques to reconstruct a non-rigid object, without developing new methods. For instance, the techniques
used in rigid SfM [12] such as the use of the fundamental matrix, computing camera poses by the Perspective-nPoint (PnP) algorithm, triangulating 3D points, bundle adjustment, and rigid factorization can be used without modifications. We conducted experiments on both synthetic and
real data, showing the efficacy of our method.

1. Introduction

2. The Key Insight

Structure-from-Motion (SfM) has been a success story in
computer vision. Given multiple images of a rigidly moving object, one is able to recover the 3D shape of the object as well as camera locations by using geometrical multiview constraints. Recent research focus in SfM has been extended to the reconstruction of non-rigid dynamic objects or
scenes from multiple images, leading to “Non-Rigid Structure from Motion” (or NRSfM in short).
Despite remarkable progresses made in NRSfM, existing
methods suffer from serious limitations. Notably, they often assume simple linear models, either over the non-rigid
shape [7] or over motion trajectories [1], or both [9]. These
linear models, while they are useful for characterizing certain classes of deforming objects (e.g, face, human pose, or
clothing), are unable to capture a variety of dynamic objects

Rigidity is a fundamental property that underpins almost
all work in rigid Structure-from-Motion (SfM). We say an
object is rigid if its shape remains constant over time. For
this reason, multiple images of the same object, taken from
different viewpoints, can be viewed as redundant observations of the same target, making the task of rigid SfM mathematically well-posed and solvable. In contrast, the shape
of a non-rigid object changes over time, violating the rigidity assumption and rendering NRSfM ill-posed.
In this paper, we show that shape recurrency is in fact
a generalized rigidity. At first glance, finding rigid-pairs
can be thought as a restrictive condition; however, satisfying this condition is far easier. Recurrent motions are
ubiquitous in our surroundings, including human’s walking,
animal’s running, leaves’ waving, clock’s pendulum sway13032

