Neural Motifs: Scene Graph Parsing with Global Context
Rowan Zellers1 Mark Yatskar1,2 Sam Thomson3 Yejin Choi1,2
1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
{rowanz, my89, yejin}@cs.washington.edu, sthomson@cs.cmu.edu

https://rowanzellers.com/neuralmotifs

Abstract
We investigate the problem of producing structured
graph representations of visual scenes. Our work analyzes the role of motifs: regularly appearing substructures
in scene graphs. We present new quantitative insights on
such repeated structures in the Visual Genome dataset. Our
analysis shows that object labels are highly predictive of
relation labels but not vice-versa. We also find that there
are recurring patterns even in larger subgraphs: more than
50% of graphs contain motifs involving at least two relations. Our analysis motivates a new baseline: given object detections, predict the most frequent relation between
object pairs with the given labels, as seen in the training
set. This baseline improves on the previous state-of-the-art
by an average of 3.6% relative improvement across evaluation settings. We then introduce Stacked Motif Networks, a
new architecture designed to capture higher order motifs in
scene graphs that further improves over our strong baseline
by an average 7.1% relative gain. Our code is available at
github.com/rowanz/neural-motifs.

1. Introduction
We investigate scene graph parsing: the task of producing graph representations of real-world images that provide
semantic summaries of objects and their relationships. For
example, the graph in Figure 1 encodes the existence of key
objects such as people (“man” and “woman”), their possessions (“helmet” and “motorcycle”, both possessed by
the woman), and their activities (the woman is “riding”
the “motorcycle”). Predicting such graph representations
has been shown to improve natural language based image
tasks [17, 43, 51] and has the potential to significantly expand the scope of applications for computer vision systems.
Compared to object detection [36, 34] , object interactions
[48, 3] and activity recognition [13], scene graph parsing
poses unique challenges since it requires reasoning about
the complex dependencies across all of these components.
Elements of visual scenes have strong structural regu-

shirt
helmet

has

has
man

woman
glove

has
boot
shorts

has
has

has
motorcycle

riding

has
has

wheel
wheel
seat

Figure 1. A ground truth scene graph containing entities, such as
woman, bike or helmet, that are localized in the image with
bounding boxes, color coded above, and the relationships between
those entities, such as riding, the relation between woman and
motorcycle or has the relation between man and shirt.

larities. For instance, people tend to wear clothes, as can
be seen in Figure 1. We examine these structural repetitions, or motifs, using the Visual Genome [22] dataset,
which provides annotated scene graphs for 100k images
from COCO [28], consisting of over 1M instances of objects and 600k relations. Our analysis leads to two key findings. First, there are strong regularities in the local graph
structure such that the distribution of the relations is highly
skewed once the corresponding object categories are given,
but not vice versa. Second, structural patterns exist even in
larger subgraphs; we find that over half of images contain
previously occurring graph motifs.
Based on our analysis, we introduce a simple yet powerful baseline: given object detections, predict the most frequent relation between object pairs with the given labels, as
seen in the training set. The baseline improves over prior
state-of-the-art by 1.4 mean recall points (3.6% relative),
suggesting that an effective scene graph model must capture both the asymmetric dependence between objects and

5831

