MoCoGAN: Decomposing Motion and Content for Video Generation
Sergey Tulyakov,
Snap Research

Ming-Yu Liu,

Xiaodong Yang,
NVIDIA

Jan Kautz

stulyakov@snap.com

{mingyul,xiaodongy,jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract

Content subspace

Motion subspace

Motion 1

Motion 2

Visual signals in a video can be divided into content and
motion. While content specifies which objects are in the
video, motion describes their dynamics. Based on this prior,
we propose the Motion and Content decomposed Generative Adversarial Network (MoCoGAN) framework for video
generation. The proposed framework generates a video by
mapping a sequence of random vectors to a sequence of
video frames. Each random vector consists of a content part
and a motion part. While the content part is kept fixed, the
motion part is realized as a stochastic process. To learn motion and content decomposition in an unsupervised manner,
we introduce a novel adversarial learning scheme utilizing both image and video discriminators. Extensive experimental results on several challenging datasets with qualitative and quantitative comparison to the state-of-the-art
approaches, verify effectiveness of the proposed framework.
In addition, we show that MoCoGAN allows one to generate videos with same content but different motion as well as
videos with different content and same motion. Our code is
available at https://github.com/sergeytulyakov/mocogan.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have recently received an increasing amount of attention, not only because they provide
a means to learn deep feature representations in an unsupervised manner that can potentially leverage all the unlabeled
images on the Internet for training, but also because they
can be used to generate novel images necessary for various
vision applications. As steady progress toward better image
generation is made, it is also important to study the video
generation problem. However, the extension from generating images to generating videos turns out to be a highly
challenging task, although the generated data has just one
more dimension – the time dimension.
We argue video generation is much harder for the following reasons. First, since a video is a spatio-temporal
recording of visual information of objects performing various actions, a generative model needs to learn the plausible physical motion models of objects in addition to learn-

Figure 1: MoCoGAN adopts a motion and content decomposed representation for video generation. It uses an image
latent space (each latent code represents an image) and divides the latent space into content and motion subspaces.
By sampling a point in the content subspace and sampling
different trajectories in the motion subspace, it generates
videos of the same object performing different motion. By
sampling different points in the content subspace and the
same motion trajectory in the motion subspace, it generates
videos of different objects performing the same motion.
ing their appearance models. If the learned object motion
model is incorrect, the generated video may contain objects
performing physically impossible motion. Second, the time
dimension brings in a huge amount of variations. Consider
the amount of speed variations that a person can have when
performing a squat movement. Each speed pattern results
in a different video, although the appearances of the human
in the videos are the same. Third, as human beings have
evolved to be sensitive to motion, motion artifacts are particularly perceptible.
Recently, a few attempts to approach the video generation problem were made through generative adversarial networks (GANs) [12]. Vondrick et al. [41] hypothesize that a
video clip is a point in a latent space and proposed a VGAN
11526

