End-to-end Recovery of Human Shape and Pose
Angjoo Kanazawa1 , Michael J. Black2 , David W. Jacobs3 , Jitendra Malik1
1
University of California, Berkeley
2
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany, 3 University of Maryland, College Park
{kanazawa,malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu, black@tuebingen.mpg.de, djacobs@umiacs.umd.edu

Input

Reconstruction

Side and top down view Part Segmentation

Input

Reconstruction

Side and top down view

Part Segmentation

Figure 1: Human Mesh Recovery (HMR): End-to-end adversarial learning of human pose and shape. We describe a
real time framework for recovering the 3D joint angles and shape of the body from a single RGB image. The first two rows
show results from our model trained with some 2D-to-3D supervision, the bottom row shows results from a model that is
trained in a fully weakly-supervised manner without using any paired 2D-to-3D supervision. We infer the full 3D body even
in case of occlusions and truncations. Note that we capture head and limb orientations.

Abstract
We describe Human Mesh Recovery (HMR), an end-toend framework for reconstructing a full 3D mesh of a human body from a single RGB image. In contrast to most
current methods that compute 2D or 3D joint locations, we
produce a richer and more useful mesh representation that
is parameterized by shape and 3D joint angles. The main
objective is to minimize the reprojection loss of keypoints,
which allows our model to be trained using in-the-wild images that only have ground truth 2D annotations. However,
the reprojection loss alone is highly underconstrained. In
this work we address this problem by introducing an adversary trained to tell whether human body shape and pose
parameters are real or not using a large database of 3D
human meshes. We show that HMR can be trained with

and without using any paired 2D-to-3D supervision. We do
not rely on intermediate 2D keypoint detections and infer
3D pose and shape parameters directly from image pixels.
Our model runs in real-time given a bounding box containing the person. We demonstrate our approach on various
images in-the-wild and out-perform previous optimizationbased methods that output 3D meshes and show competitive
results on tasks such as 3D joint location estimation and
part segmentation.

1. Introduction
We present an end-to-end framework for recovering a
full 3D mesh of a human body from a single RGB image. We use the generative human body model, SMPL [24],
which parameterizes the mesh by 3D joint angles and a low17122

