Deep Marching Cubes: Learning Explicit Surface Representations
Yiyi Liao1,2
Simon Donné1,3
Andreas Geiger1,4
1
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
2
Institute of Cyber-Systems and Control, Zhejiang University
3
4
imec - IPI - Ghent University
CVG Group, ETH Zürich
{yiyi.liao,simon.donne,andreas.geiger}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Existing learning based solutions to 3D surface prediction cannot be trained end-to-end as they operate on intermediate representations (e.g., TSDF) from which 3D surface meshes must be extracted in a post-processing step
(e.g., via the marching cubes algorithm). In this paper, we
investigate the problem of end-to-end 3D surface prediction. We first demonstrate that the marching cubes algorithm is not differentiable and propose an alternative differentiable formulation which we insert as a final layer into
a 3D convolutional neural network. We further propose
a set of loss functions which allow for training our model
with sparse point supervision. Our experiments demonstrate that the model allows for predicting sub-voxel accurate 3D shapes of arbitrary topology. Additionally, it learns
to complete shapes and to separate an object’s inside from
its outside even in the presence of sparse and incomplete
ground truth. We investigate the benefits of our approach
on the task of inferring shapes from 3D point clouds. Our
model is flexible and can be combined with a variety of
shape encoder and shape inference techniques.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction is a core problem in computer vision,
yet despite its long history many problems remain unsolved.
Ambiguities or noise in the input require the integration of
strong geometric priors about our 3D world. Towards this
goal, many existing approaches formulate 3D reconstruction as inference in a Markov random field [2, 21, 41, 46]
or as a variational problem [17, 47]. Unfortunately, the expressiveness of such prior models is limited to simple local
smoothness assumptions [2, 17, 21, 47] or very specialized
shape models [1, 15, 16, 42]. Neither can such simple priors resolve strong ambiguities, nor are they able to reason
about missing or occluded parts of the scene. Hence, existing 3D reconstruction systems work either in narrow domains where specialized shape knowledge is available, or

Encoder

Point
Generation

Observation

Meshing

Point set

Explicit surface

(a) Sparse Point Prediction (e.g., [12])

Encoder

Decoder

Marching
Cubes

Observation

Implicit surface

Explicit surface

(b) Implicit Surface Prediction (e.g., [35, 45])

Encoder

Observation

Decoder

Occupancy

Geometry

Explicit surface

(c) Explicit Surface Prediction (ours)

Figure 1: Illustration comparing point prediction (a), implicit surface prediction (b) and explicit surface prediction
(c). The encoder is shared across all approaches and depends on the input (we use point clouds in this paper). The
decoder is specific to the output representation. All trainable components are highlighted in yellow. Note that only
(c) can be trained end-to-end for the surface prediction task.
require well captured and highly-textured environments.
However, the recent success of deep learning [19, 20, 38]
and the availability of large 3D datasets [5, 6, 9, 26, 37]
nourishes hope for models that are able to learn powerful
3D shape representations from data, allowing reconstruction even in the presence of missing, noisy and incomplete observations. And indeed, recent advances in this
area [7, 12, 18, 24, 34, 36, 39, 40] suggest that this goal can
ultimately be achieved.
Existing 3D representation learning approaches can be
classified into two categories: voxel based methods and
point based methods, see Fig. 1 for an illustration. Voxel
12916

