Learning Facial Action Units from Web Images with
Scalable Weakly Supervised Clustering
Kaili Zhao1
Wen-Sheng Chu2
Aleix M. Martinez3
1
School of Comm. and Info. Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecom.
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University
Abstract
We present a scalable weakly supervised clustering approach to learn facial action units (AUs) from large, freely
available web images. Unlike most existing methods (e.g.,
CNNs) that rely on fully annotated data, our method exploits web images with inaccurate annotations. Specifically, we derive a weakly-supervised spectral algorithm that
learns an embedding space to couple image appearance
and semantics. The algorithm has efficient gradient update, and scales up to large quantities of images with a
stochastic extension. With the learned embedding space,
we adopt rank-order clustering to identify groups of visually and semantically similar images, and re-annotate these
groups for training AU classifiers. Evaluation on the 1 millon EmotioNet dataset demonstrates the effectiveness of our
approach: (1) our learned annotations reach on average
91.3% agreement with human annotations on 7 common
AUs, (2) classifiers trained with re-annotated images perform comparably to, sometimes even better than, its supervised CNN-based counterpart, and (3) our method offers
intuitive outlier/noise pruning instead of forcing one annotation to every image. Code is available.1

1. Introduction
Facial action unit (AU) analysis has been a long-standing
problem in computer vision and psychology [9, 30]. Automated AU annotation enables numerous applications such
as human-robot interaction, digital marketing, psychological and behavioral research. Most existing approaches
to AU detection rely on either supervised methods (i.e.,
training on fully annotated data) or semi-supervised methods (i.e., training on partly annotated data). Although the
amount of online facial images has been growing at an exponential rate, it remains unclear how AU detectors can
benefit from large, freely available web images with inaccurate annotations (i.e., annotations with errors). The need
for alleviating the constraints of annotations, therefore, has
increased considerably.
1 https://github.com/zkl20061823

Weak annotation:

pos,

Feature space

neg

Re-annotation:

pos,

neg

Weakly supervised clustering

Figure 1. An illustration of weakly-supervised clustering: Unlike
the original feature space (left) that encloses different semantics
and noisy annotations in neighboring images, weakly supervised
clustering (right) finds a new embedding space where image clusters possess visual-semantic coherence. The proposed approach
scales up to a large number of images, and offers outlier/noise
pruning by design. Each cluster is re-annotated as the same class
by majority voting, and will be included for training AU detectors.

Reviewing the literature, an AU detector can be trained
with full supervision using methods based on either static
models (e.g., boosting [25], SVM [50], DBN [44], CNN
[14, 51]), dynamic models (e.g., HMM [23], CRF [5],
LSTM [45]), or their combinations (e.g., [11, 24]). Given
different degrees in the number of samples, these methods
impose regularization in space and/or time during learning
to improve model generalizability. Another trend of model
regularization belongs to semi-supervised learning (SSL),
which makes use of partial supervision by considering additional unannotated data. To our best knowledge, most
SSL approaches resort to unannotated test samples due to
their availability at prediction time. The test samples are
often predicted by personalized classifiers (e.g., [7, 47]) or
removing a person’s identity [37, 46]. We refer interested
readers to [29, 35, 38] for more comprehensive reviews.
Training AU detectors with either fully or partly annotated data encounters several limitations. First, collecting
AU annotations requires labor-intensive coding processes
by FACS experts. With an experienced coder, manually
coding 1 AU for a one-minute video can take 30 minutes or
more. Due to this demanding coding process, datasets in the
literature (e.g., CK+ [27], SEMAINE [41], AM-FED [32],
12090

