Learning Transferable Architectures for Scalable Image Recognition
Barret Zoph
Google Brain

Vijay Vasudevan
Google Brain

Jonathon Shlens
Google Brain

Quoc V. Le
Google Brain

barretzoph@google.com

vrv@google.com

shlens@google.com

qvl@google.com

Abstract

Developing neural network image classification models
often requires significant architecture engineering. In this
paper, we study a method to learn the model architectures
directly on the dataset of interest. As this approach is expensive when the dataset is large, we propose to search for
an architectural building block on a small dataset and then
transfer the block to a larger dataset. The key contribution of this work is the design of a new search space (which
we call the “NASNet search space”) which enables transferability. In our experiments, we search for the best convolutional layer (or “cell”) on the CIFAR-10 dataset and
then apply this cell to the ImageNet dataset by stacking together more copies of this cell, each with their own parameters to design a convolutional architecture, which we name
a “NASNet architecture”. We also introduce a new regularization technique called ScheduledDropPath that significantly improves generalization in the NASNet models. On
CIFAR-10 itself, a NASNet found by our method achieves
2.4% error rate, which is state-of-the-art. Although the cell
is not searched for directly on ImageNet, a NASNet constructed from the best cell achieves, among the published
works, state-of-the-art accuracy of 82.7% top-1 and 96.2%
top-5 on ImageNet. Our model is 1.2% better in top-1 accuracy than the best human-invented architectures while having 9 billion fewer FLOPS – a reduction of 28% in computational demand from the previous state-of-the-art model.
When evaluated at different levels of computational cost,
accuracies of NASNets exceed those of the state-of-the-art
human-designed models. For instance, a small version of
NASNet also achieves 74% top-1 accuracy, which is 3.1%
better than equivalently-sized, state-of-the-art models for
mobile platforms. Finally, the image features learned from
image classification are generically useful and can be transferred to other computer vision problems. On the task of object detection, the learned features by NASNet used with the
Faster-RCNN framework surpass state-of-the-art by 4.0%
achieving 43.1% mAP on the COCO dataset.

1. Introduction
Developing neural network image classification models
often requires significant architecture engineering. Starting
from the seminal work of [32] on using convolutional architectures [17, 34] for ImageNet [11] classification, successive advancements through architecture engineering have
achieved impressive results [53, 59, 20, 60, 58, 68].
In this paper, we study a new paradigm of designing convolutional architectures and describe a scalable method to
optimize convolutional architectures on a dataset of interest, for instance the ImageNet classification dataset. Our
approach is inspired by the recently proposed Neural Architecture Search (NAS) framework [71], which uses a reinforcement learning search method to optimize architecture configurations. Applying NAS, or any other search
methods, directly to a large dataset, such as the ImageNet
dataset, is however computationally expensive. We therefore propose to search for a good architecture on a proxy
dataset, for example the smaller CIFAR-10 dataset, and then
transfer the learned architecture to ImageNet. We achieve
this transferrability by designing a search space (which we
call “the NASNet search space”) so that the complexity of
the architecture is independent of the depth of the network
and the size of input images. More concretely, all convolutional networks in our search space are composed of convolutional layers (or “cells”) with identical structure but different weights. Searching for the best convolutional architectures is therefore reduced to searching for the best cell
structure. Searching for the best cell structure has two main
benefits: it is much faster than searching for an entire network architecture and the cell itself is more likely to generalize to other problems. In our experiments, this approach
significantly accelerates the search for the best architectures
using CIFAR-10 by a factor of 7× and learns architectures
that successfully transfer to ImageNet.
Our main result is that the best architecture found on
CIFAR-10, called NASNet, achieves state-of-the-art accuracy when transferred to ImageNet classification without much modification. On ImageNet, NASNet achieves,
among the published works, state-of-the-art accuracy of
82.7% top-1 and 96.2% top-5. This result amounts to a
18697

