Dimensionality’s Blessing: Clustering Images by Underlying Distribution
Wen-Yan Lin
Advanced Digital Sciences Center

Siying Liu
Institute of Infocomm Research

linwenyan.daniel@gmail.com

szewinglau@gmail.com

Jian-Huang Lai
Sun Yat-Sen University

Yasuyuki Matsushita
Osaka University

stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

yasumat@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Many high dimensional vector distances tend to a constant. This is typically considered a negative “contrastloss” phenomenon that hinders clustering and other machine learning techniques. We reinterpret “contrast-loss”
as a blessing. Re-deriving “contrast-loss” using the law
of large numbers, we show it results in a distribution’s instances concentrating on a thin “hyper-shell”. The hollow center means apparently chaotically overlapping distributions are actually intrinsically separable. We use this
to develop distribution-clustering, an elegant algorithm for
grouping of data points by their (unknown) underlying distribution. Distribution-clustering, creates notably clean
clusters from raw unlabeled data, estimates the number
of clusters for itself and is inherently robust to “outliers”
which form their own clusters. This enables trawling for
patterns in unorganized data and may be the key to enabling
machine intelligence.

Distribution-clusters from a subset of Flickr11k [43]

1. Introduction
Who is thy neighbor? The question is universal and old
as the Bible. In computer vision, images are typically converted into a high-dimensional vector known as image descriptors. Neigborness of images is defined as distances
between their respective descriptors. This approach has
had mixed success. Descriptors excel at nearest-neighbors
retrieval applications. However, descriptor distances are
rarely effective in other neighbor based machine learning
tasks like clustering.
Conventional wisdom suggests poor clustering performance is due to two intrinsic factors. a) Images are the
product of a complex interplay of geometric, illumination
and occlusion factors. These are seldom constant, causing even images of the same location to vary significantly
from each other. The extreme variability makes clustering

Affinity matrix before and after clustering
Figure 1: Distribution-clustering on a set of random images.
Our technique captures even highly variable distributions
like flowers and scenery. The post-clustering affinity matrix
displays distinctive blocky patterns predicted by our theory.

difficult. This can be understood mathematically as each
image being an instance of some distribution. The variability causes image data-sets to be chaotic. Here, chaotic is
defined as having distributions whose mean separation is
15784

