Multi-task Learning by Maximizing Statistical Dependence
Youssef A. Mejjati
University of Bath

Darren Cosker
University of Bath

Abstract
We present a new multi-task learning (MTL) approach that
can be applied to multiple heterogeneous task estimators. Our
motivation is that the best task estimator could change depending on the task itself. For example, we may have a deep neural
network for the first task and a Gaussian process for the second
task. Classical MTL approaches cannot handle this case, as they
require the same model or even the same parameter types for all
tasks. We tackle this by considering task-specific estimators as
random variables. Then, the task relationships are discovered
by measuring the statistical dependence between each pair of
random variables. By doing so, our model is independent of
the parametric nature of each task, and is even agnostic to the
existence of such parametric formulation. We compare our algorithm with existing MTL approaches on challenging real world
ranking and regression datasets, and show that our approach
achieves comparable or better performance without knowing the
parametric form.

1. Introduction
Many real world visual learning applications involve learning
several tasks. Instead of learning them separately, multi-task
learning (MTL) [6] aims to learn them simultaneously with the
hope of discovering inherent relationships or latent structures
that help improve the overall generalization performance for
each task. When applicable, MTL often outperforms single-task
learning [3], even when the tasks are seemingly unrelated. This
is due to the introduction of regularization techniques that help
discover task relationships while avoiding negative transfer in
an optimal way. These regularization methods are generally
applied to the model parameters, for example, by enforcing a
low rank or group sparsity structure. However, what happens if
the parameters of the estimator are unknown, or if the parametric
form of the estimator is different from one task to another?
Our motivation is that, depending on the task, the best learning
strategy and estimator forms may differ. For example, the best
estimator for the first task might be a Gaussian process (GP)
regression, while for the second task it might be a deep neural
network (DNNs). Classical MTL approaches cannot handle this
situation as they would require the same estimator architecture or
even shared parametric forms for all tasks. Furthermore, once the
estimators are parametrized, the task relationships are measured

Kwang In Kim
University of Bath

only via these parameterizations. Therefore, strengthening
the task relationships in MTL does not directly reflect the
underlying data generating probability distributions. In general,
such distributions are non-uniform and, therefore, MTL could
benefit from selectively emphasizing the task dependence, e.g.
in high-density regions in the data space.
We present a new MTL formulation to tackle these limitations.
Our approach is agnostic to the parametric formulation of each
task; it does not even assume the existence of such a parametric
form. Further, it is inherently adaptive to the underlying data
distributions. We approach this challenging case by considering
the estimator of each task as a random variable and discovering
task relationships via the statistical dependence estimated by
evaluating these estimator random variables on datasets. We use
a recently proposed statistically consistent dependence estimator
to discover such relationships—the finite set independence
criterion (FSIC)—and combine it with a lasso regularizer to
enforce sparsity such that the dependencies are maximized only
for related tasks. Our algorithm is instantiated as an energy
functional that is optimized based on the efficient alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMM) approach.
We test our algorithm on several challenging visual ranking
and benchmark regression datasets, and against state-of-the-art
MTL techniques. We find that our approach achieves comparable
or better performance than existing approaches.

2. Related work
Most existing MTL algorithms can be regarded as instances
of an energy minimization framework:
O({wi}L
i=1 )=

L
L
X
X
i
i
L (w )+λ1 R1(wi)+λ2R2({wi}L
i=1 ),
i=1

i=1

(1)
where Li is the task-specific training loss, e.g., mean classification, regression, or ranking errors on a training dataset, wi is the
parameter of the i-th estimator f i, and R1 and R2 are regularizers with the corresponding regularization parameters λ1,λ2 ≥0.
For instance, for linear estimators, f i is explicitly represented
as f i(x)=x⊤wi and the individual regularizer R1 often takes
the squared L2 parameter norm R1(wi) = kwik2. Different
MTL algorithms are specified based on the multi-task regularizer
R2, which characterizes, enforces, and penalizes how different
tasks are related. For instance, Evgeniou and Pontil’s regularized
13465

