A Common Framework for Interactive Texture Transfer
Yifang Men, Zhouhui Lian∗, Yingmin Tang, Jianguo Xiao
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China

Figure 1: Representative results generated using our interactive structure-guided texture transfer framework. The stylized
images are synthesized with the guidance of corresponding user-specified semantic maps. The proposed common framework
is capable of multiple challenging user-controlled texture transfer tasks: (a) turning doodles into artworks, (b) editing decorative patterns, (c) generating texts in special effect, (d) controlling effect distribution in text images, (e) swapping textures.
Source image credits: (a) Van Gogh; (b,c,d) Zcool [1]; (e) Luan et al. [35]

Abstract
In this paper, we present a general-purpose solution to
interactive texture transfer problems that better preserves
both local structure and visual richness. It is challenging
due to the diversity of tasks and the simplicity of required
user guidance. The core idea of our common framework is
to use multiple custom channels to dynamically guide the
synthesis process. For interactivity, users can control the spatial distribution of stylized textures via semantic channels. The structure guidance, acquired by two stages of automatic extraction and propagation of structure information,
provides a prior for initialization and preserves the salient structure by searching the nearest neighbor fields (NNF) with structure coherence. Meanwhile, texture coherence
is also exploited to maintain similar style with the source
image. In addition, we leverage an improved PatchMatch
with extended NNF and matrix operations to obtain trans* Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn

formable source patches with richer geometric information
at high speed. We demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our method on a variety of scenes through extensive
comparisons with state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Texture transfer is a classic problem in areas of Computer Vision and Computer Graphics. With this technique, we
can automatically transfer the stylized texture from a given
sample to the target image. A number of algorithms capable
of creating impressive stylization effects have been reported
over these years. Champandard et al. [8] proposed Neural
Doodle, a technique turning doodles painted by users into
fine artworks with provided samples. DecoBrush [33], an
extension of Realbrush [32] and Helpinghand [34] allows
designers to draw structured decorative patterns simply with
selected styles. More recently, Yang et al. [43] achieved text effect transfer which enables to migrate the effect from a
16353

