AttnGAN: Fine-Grained Text to Image Generation
with Attentional Generative Adversarial Networks
Tao Xu∗1 , Pengchuan Zhang2 , Qiuyuan Huang2 ,
Han Zhang3 , Zhe Gan4 , Xiaolei Huang1 , Xiaodong He5
1

Lehigh University

2

Microsoft Research

3

Rutgers University

4

Duke University

5

JD AI Research

{tax313, xih206}@lehigh.edu, {penzhan, qihua, xiaohe}@microsoft.com
han.zhang@cs.rutgers.edu, zhe.gan@duke.edu, xiaodong.he@jd.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an Attentional Generative Adversarial Network (AttnGAN) that allows attention-driven,
multi-stage refinement for fine-grained text-to-image generation. With a novel attentional generative network, the AttnGAN can synthesize fine-grained details at different subregions of the image by paying attentions to the relevant
words in the natural language description. In addition, a
deep attentional multimodal similarity model is proposed to
compute a fine-grained image-text matching loss for training the generator. The proposed AttnGAN significantly outperforms the previous state of the art, boosting the best reported inception score by 14.14% on the CUB dataset and
170.25% on the more challenging COCO dataset. A detailed analysis is also performed by visualizing the attention layers of the AttnGAN. It for the first time shows that
the layered attentional GAN is able to automatically select
the condition at the word level for generating different parts
of the image.

1. Introduction
Automatically generating images according to natural
language descriptions is a fundamental problem in many
applications, such as art generation and computer-aided design. It also drives research progress in multimodal learning
and inference across vision and language, which is one of
the most active research areas in recent years [20, 18, 36,
19, 41, 4, 30, 5, 1, 31, 33, 32]
Most recently proposed text-to-image synthesis methods
are based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [6].
A commonly used approach is to encode the whole text description into a global sentence vector as the condition for
GAN-based image generation [20, 18, 36, 37]. Although
impressive results have been presented, conditioning GAN
∗ work was performed when was an intern with Microsoft Research

this bird is red with white and has a very short beak

10:short

3:red

11:beak

9:very

8:a

3:red

5:white

1:bird

10:short

0:this

Figure 1. Example results of the proposed AttnGAN. The first row
gives the low-to-high resolution images generated by G0 , G1 and
G2 of the AttnGAN; the second and third row shows the top-5
most attended words by F1attn and F2attn of the AttnGAN, respectively. Here, images of G0 and G1 are bilinearly upsampled
to have the same size as that of G2 for better visualization.

only on the global sentence vector lacks important finegrained information at the word level, and prevents the generation of high quality images. This problem becomes even
more severe when generating complex scenes such as those
in the COCO dataset [14].
To address this issue, we propose an Attentional Generative Adversarial Network (AttnGAN) that allows attentiondriven, multi-stage refinement for fine-grained text-toimage generation. The overall architecture of the AttnGAN
is illustrated in Figure 2. The model consists of two novel
components. The first component is an attentional generative network, in which an attention mechanism is developed for the generator to draw different sub-regions of the
11316

