Human Semantic Parsing for Person Re-identification
Mahdi M. Kalayeh1*

Emrah Basaran2*

Muhittin Gökmen3

mahdi@eecs.ucf.edu

basaranemrah@itu.edu.tr

gokmenm@mef.edu.tr

1

Mustafa E. Kamasak2

Mubarak Shah1

kamasak@itu.edu.tr

shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
2
Dept. of Computer Engineering, Istanbul Technical University
3
Dept. of Computer Engineering, MEF University

Abstract
Person re-identification is a challenging task mainly due
to factors such as background clutter, pose, illumination
and camera point of view variations. These elements hinder the process of extracting robust and discriminative representations, hence preventing different identities from being successfully distinguished. To improve the representation learning, usually local features from human body parts
are extracted. However, the common practice for such a
process has been based on bounding box part detection.
In this paper, we propose to adopt human semantic parsing which, due to its pixel-level accuracy and capability
of modeling arbitrary contours, is naturally a better alternative. Our proposed SPReID integrates human semantic
parsing in person re-identification and not only considerably outperforms its counter baseline, but achieves stateof-the-art performance. We also show that, by employing
a simple yet effective training strategy, standard popular
deep convolutional architectures such as Inception-V3 and
ResNet-152, with no modification, while operating solely
on full image, can dramatically outperform current stateof-the-art. Our proposed methods improve state-of-the-art
person re-identification on: Market-1501 [48] by ∼17% in
mAP and ∼6% in rank-1, CUHK03 [24] by ∼4% in rank-1
and DukeMTMC-reID [50] by ∼24% in mAP and ∼10% in
rank-1.

1. Introduction
Given a query image, person re-identification is the problem of retrieving all the images of the same identity from a
large gallery, where query and gallery images are captured
* Authors contributed equally

by distinctively different cameras which may or may not
have any field-of-view overlap. Hence it can be seen as a
cross-camera data association problem.
Person re-identification is a very challenging task. First,
when a single person is captured by two different cameras,
the illumination conditions, background clutter, occlusion,
observable human body parts, and perceived posture of the
person can be dramatically different. Second, even within
a single camera, the aforementioned conditions can vary
through time as the person moves and engages in different
actions (e.g suddenly taking something out of a bag while
walking). Third, gallery itself usually consists of diverse
images of a single person from multiple cameras, which
given the above factors, generates a huge intra-class variation impeding the generalization of the learned representations. Fourth, compared to problems such as object recognition or detection, images in person re-identification benchmarks are usually of lower resolution, making it difficult
to extract distinctive attributes to distinguish one identity
from another. Considering the above challenges, an effective person re-identification system is obliged to learn representations that are identity-specific, context-invariant and
agnostic with respect to the camera point of view.
In recent past, improving global (image-level) representation by leveraging local (part-level) features extracted
from human body parts has been the main theme of person re-identification research. While an image-level representation is prone to background clutter and occlusion,
part-level representations are supposed to be more robust.
However, part detection in low resolution images has its
very own challenges and any error in that stage can propagate to the entire person re-identification system. That is
why some research works prefer to simply extract representations from multiple image patches, often horizontal strips,
that are loosely associated to human body parts. On the
11062

