High-order Tensor Regularization with Application to Attribute Ranking
Kwang In Kim
University of Bath

Juhyun Park
Lancaster University

Abstract
When learning functions on manifolds, we can improve performance by regularizing with respect to the intrinsic manifold
geometry rather than the ambient space. However, when regularizing tensor learning, calculating the derivatives along this
intrinsic geometry is not possible, and so existing approaches
are limited to regularizing in Euclidean space. Our new method
for intrinsically regularizing and learning tensors on Riemannian manifolds introduces a surrogate object to encapsulate the
geometric characteristic of the tensor. Regularizing this instead
allows us to learn non-symmetric and high-order tensors. We
apply our approach to the relative attributes problem, and we
demonstrate that explicitly regularizing high-order relationships
between pairs of data points improves performance.

James Tompkin
Brown University

served in practice, our strategy is to introduce a surrogate object—
a kernel function—that encapsulate the geometric characteristic
of the tensor. We estimate this kernel function from a point
cloud sampled from M, and regularize this instead. In contrast
to existing approaches for intrinsic tensor regularization which
can only learn symmetric positive definite tensors [18], we can
learn general non-symmetric tensors and high-order tensors.
To help the novice reader, our supplemental material
provides an introduction to regularization on Riemannian
manifolds, compares Euclidean and manifold regularization,
and discusses the challenge of regularizing tensors directly.

1.1. Application to relative attribute ranking.
We demonstrate our approach by learning a linear ordering,
which can be defined by specifying pairwise relations between
all data points, and can be represented by a second-order
anti-symmetric tensor.

1. Introduction
Learning tensors from data has many applications in function
learning. Regression, classification, and clustering pose the function as a zeroth-order tensor; vector field learning poses the vector as a first-order tensor [41, 35]; and metric or covariance learning pose the metric as a symmetric second-order tensor [39, 37].
The generalization performance of the learned tensor h
depends crucially on how it is regularized—how the spatial
smoothness of h is enforced. In many problems, data lie on
low-dimensional manifolds [29, 25, 32], for which it helps
to regularize h with respect to the intrinsic geometry of the
data generating manifold M: to enforce smoothness along M
rather than in the ambient (Euclidean) space on which M is
embedded. This has shown improvement for semi-supervised
learning, and spectral embedding and clustering [36, 3, 6].
While Stokes’ theorem allows us to perform intrinsic regularization of zeroth-order tensors (functions) on manifolds M,
extending this idea to higher-order tensors is not straightforward:
as M itself is not directly observed, calculating the covariant
derivatives—the derivatives along M—is not possible. Thus, existing tensor regularization approaches are limited to the special
case of Euclidean space [35, 30, 11, 12], the solutions to which
cannot be simply applied to general manifold-structured data.
We present a method to intrinsically regularize and learn tensors on Riemannian manifolds. As manifolds are not directly ob-

Problem description. Binary labels which describe the
presence or absence of image objects or attributes are often
insufficient for many tasks [20, 40]. Imagine shopping for
shoes: there is no clear boundary between ‘pointy’ and ‘not
pointy’ shoes even though it is easy for a human to state that
one shoe is ‘pointier’ than another. Thus, measuring relative
attributes [28] broadens attribute-based image analysis to
abstract and non-categorical labels.
This is accomplished by asking users to describe the relationship between pairs of data points, either as equal or with an order
(greater/less than): image x(i) and x(j) share the same amount
of attribute A; or, x(i) exhibits a stronger/weaker presence of attribute A than x(j). While Parikh and Grauman focus on binary
classification [28], the technique can be thought of as implicitly
introducing a linear ordering to a dataset for a given attribute:
an ordering function f is learned such that f(x(i)) > f(x(j))
implies that the rank of x(i) is higher than that of x(j).
Relation to existing techniques. Rank learning relates to
the classical data retrieval problem of matching a query to a
database (Agresti [1] and Liu [24] survey the field). While
data retrieval is framed as the binary attribute problem of
splitting matches from non-matches, constructing a perfect
binary classifier is challenging. As such, it is commonly solved
14349

