VirtualHome: Simulating Household Activities via Programs
Xavier Puig1∗, Kevin Ra2∗, Marko Boben3∗, Jiaman Li4 , Tingwu Wang4 ,
Sanja Fidler4 , Antonio Torralba1
1
2
MIT
McGill University 3 University of Ljubljana 4 University of Toronto
{xavierpuig,torralba}@csail.mit.edu

kevin.ra@mail.mcgill.ca

marko.boben@fri.uni-lj.si

{tingwuwang,ljm,fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

1. Introduction
Autonomous agents need to know the sequences of actions that need to be performed in order to achieve certain
goals. For example, we might want a robot to clean our room,
make the bed, or cook dinner. One can define activities with
procedural recipes or programs that describe how one can
accomplish the task. A program contains a sequence of simple symbolic instructions, each referencing an atomic action
(e.g. “sit”) or interaction (e.g. “pick-up object”) and a number of objects that the action refers to (e.g., “pick-up juice”).
Assuming that an agent knows how to execute the atomic
actions, programs provide an effective means of “driving” a
robot to perform different, more complex tasks. Programs
∗ Denotes equal contribution

Knowledge Base of Household Tasks

Work on computer

Descrip#on: Turn on your computer and
sit in front of it. Type on the keyboard,
grab the mouse to scroll.

Ac#on:

Make coﬀee

Descrip#on: Go to the kitchen and
swith on the coﬀee machine. Wait un#l
it’s done and pour the coﬀee into a cup.

Ac#on:

Read a book

Descrip#on: Sit down in recliner. Pick up
a novel oﬀ of coﬀee table. Open novel to
last read page. Read.

VirtualHome
robot playground

program

In this paper, we are interested in modeling complex activities that occur in a typical household. We propose to use
programs, i.e., sequences of atomic actions and interactions,
as a high level representation of complex tasks. Programs
are interesting because they provide a non-ambiguous representation of a task, and allow agents to execute them.
However, nowadays, there is no database providing this type
of information. Towards this goal, we first crowd-source
programs for a variety of activities that happen in people’s
homes, via a game-like interface used for teaching kids how
to code. Using the collected dataset, we show how we can
learn to extract programs directly from natural language
descriptions or from videos. We then implement the most
common atomic (inter)actions in the Unity3D game engine,
and use our programs to “drive” an artificial agent to execute tasks in a simulated household environment. Our
VirtualHome simulator allows us to create a large activity
video dataset with rich ground-truth, enabling training and
testing of video understanding models. We further showcase
examples of our agent performing tasks in our VirtualHome
based on language descriptions.

Robots
Ac#on:

video

Abstract

Figure 1: We first crowdsource a large knowledge base of household
tasks, (top). Each task has a high level name, and a natural language instruction. We then collect “programs” for these tasks, (middle left), where
the annotators “translate” the instruction into simple code. We implement
the most frequent (inter)actions in a 3D simulator, called VirtualHouse,
allowing us to drive an agent to execute tasks defined by programs. We propose methods to generate programs automatically from text (top) and video
(bottom), thus driving an agent via language and a video demonstration.
can also be used as an internal representation of an activity
shown in a video or described by a human (or another agent).
Our goal in this paper is to automatically generate programs
from natural language descriptions, as well as from video
demonstrations, potentially allowing naive users to teach
their robot a wide variety of novel tasks.
Towards this goal, one important missing piece is the
lack of a database describing activities composed of multiple steps. We first crowdsource common-sense information
about typical activities that happen in people’s homes, forming the natural language know-how of how these activities
are performed. We then adapt the Scratch [1] interface used
for teaching kids how to code in order to collect programs
that formalize the activity as described in the knowledge
base. Note that these programs include all the steps required
for the robot to accomplish a task, even those that are not
mentioned in the language descriptions. We then implement
the most common atomic (inter)actions in the Unity3D game
engine, such as pick-up, switch on/off, sit, stand-up. By exploiting the physics, navigation and kinematic models in the

8494

