Multi-Task Learning Using Uncertainty to Weigh Losses
for Scene Geometry and Semantics
Alex Kendall
University of Cambridge
agk34@cam.ac.uk

Yarin Gal
University of Cambridge
yg279@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Numerous deep learning applications benefit from multitask learning with multiple regression and classification objectives. In this paper we make the observation that the
performance of such systems is strongly dependent on the
relative weighting between each task’s loss. Tuning these
weights by hand is a difficult and expensive process, making multi-task learning prohibitive in practice. We propose a principled approach to multi-task deep learning
which weighs multiple loss functions by considering the homoscedastic uncertainty of each task. This allows us to simultaneously learn various quantities with different units
or scales in both classification and regression settings. We
demonstrate our model learning per-pixel depth regression,
semantic and instance segmentation from a monocular input image. Perhaps surprisingly, we show our model can
learn multi-task weightings and outperform separate models trained individually on each task.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning aims to improve learning efficiency
and prediction accuracy by learning multiple objectives
from a shared representation [7]. Multi-task learning is
prevalent in many applications of machine learning – from
computer vision [27] to natural language processing [11] to
speech recognition [23].
We explore multi-task learning within the setting of visual scene understanding in computer vision. Scene understanding algorithms must understand both the geometry and
semantics of the scene at the same time. This forms an interesting multi-task learning problem because scene understanding involves joint learning of various regression and
classification tasks with different units and scales. Multitask learning of visual scene understanding is of crucial
importance in systems where long computation run-time is
prohibitive, such as the ones used in robotics. Combining
all tasks into a single model reduces computation and allows

Roberto Cipolla
University of Cambridge
rc10001@cam.ac.uk

these systems to run in real-time.
Prior approaches to simultaneously learning multiple
tasks use a naı̈ve weighted sum of losses, where the loss
weights are uniform, or manually tuned [38, 27, 15]. However, we show that performance is highly dependent on an
appropriate choice of weighting between each task’s loss.
Searching for an optimal weighting is prohibitively expensive and difficult to resolve with manual tuning. We observe
that the optimal weighting of each task is dependent on the
measurement scale (e.g. meters, centimetres or millimetres)
and ultimately the magnitude of the task’s noise.
In this work we propose a principled way of combining
multiple loss functions to simultaneously learn multiple objectives using homoscedastic uncertainty. We interpret homoscedastic uncertainty as task-dependent weighting and
show how to derive a principled multi-task loss function
which can learn to balance various regression and classification losses. Our method can learn to balance these weightings optimally, resulting in superior performance, compared
with learning each task individually.
Specifically, we demonstrate our method in learning
scene geometry and semantics with three tasks. Firstly, we
learn to classify objects at a pixel level, also known as semantic segmentation [32, 3, 42, 8, 45]. Secondly, our model
performs instance segmentation, which is the harder task of
segmenting separate masks for each individual object in an
image (for example, a separate, precise mask for each individual car on the road) [37, 18, 14, 4]. This is a more
difficult task than semantic segmentation, as it requires not
only an estimate of each pixel’s class, but also which object
that pixel belongs to. It is also more complicated than object detection, which often predicts object bounding boxes
alone [17]. Finally, our model predicts pixel-wise metric
depth. Depth by recognition has been demonstrated using
dense prediction networks with supervised [15] and unsupervised [16] deep learning. However it is very hard to estimate depth in a way which generalises well. We show that
we can improve our estimation of geometry and depth by
using semantic labels and multi-task deep learning.
In existing literature, separate deep learning models
17482

