Towards Effective Low-bitwidth Convolutional Neural Networks
Bohan Zhuang1,2 , Chunhua Shen1,2∗, Mingkui Tan3 , Lingqiao Liu1 , Ian Reid1,2
1
The University of Adelaide, Australia, 2 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
3
South China University of Technology, China
{bohan.zhuang,chunhua.shen,lingqiao.liu,ian.reid}@adelaide.edu.au, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of training a deep convolutional neural network with both low-precision weights
and low-bitwidth activations. Optimizing a low-precision
network is very challenging since the training process can
easily get trapped in a poor local minima, which results in
substantial accuracy loss. To mitigate this problem, we propose three simple-yet-effective approaches to improve the
network training. First, we propose to use a two-stage
optimization strategy to progressively find good local minima. Specifically, we propose to first optimize a net with
quantized weights and then quantized activations. This is
in contrast to the traditional methods which optimize them
simultaneously. Second, following a similar spirit of the
first method, we propose another progressive optimization
approach which progressively decreases the bit-width from
high-precision to low-precision during the course of training. Third, we adopt a novel learning scheme to jointly train
a full-precision model alongside the low-precision one. By
doing so, the full-precision model provides hints to guide
the low-precision model training. Extensive experiments
on various datasets (i.e., CIFAR-100 and ImageNet) show
the effectiveness of the proposed methods. To highlight, using our methods to train a 4-bit precision network leads
to no performance decrease in comparison with its fullprecision counterpart with standard network architectures
(i.e., AlexNet and ResNet-50).

1. Introduction
The state-of-the-art deep neural networks [9,17,26] usually involve millions of parameters and need billions of
FLOPs during computation. Those memory and computational cost can be unaffordable for mobile hardware device
or especially implementing deep neural networks on chips.
To improve the computational and memory efficiency, various solutions have been proposed, including pruning net∗ C. Shen is the corresponding author.

work weights [7, 8], low rank approximation of weights
[16,34], and training a low-bit-precision network [4,36–38].
In this work, we follow the idea of training a low-precision
network and our focus is to improve the training process
of such a network. Note that in the literature, many works
adopt this idea but only attempt to quantize the weights of
a network while keeping the activations to 32-bit floating
point [4, 19, 36, 38]. Although this treatment leads to lower
performance decrease comparing to its full-precision counterpart, it still needs substantial amount of computational resource requirement to handle the full-precision activations.
Thus, our work targets the problem of training network with
both low-bit quantized weights and activations.
The solutions proposed in this paper contain three components. They can be applied independently or jointly. The
first method is to adopt a two-stage training process. At the
first stage, only the weights of a network is quantized. After obtaining a sufficiently good solution of the first stage,
the activation of the network is further required to be in
low-precision and the network will be trained again. Essentially, this progressive approach first solves a related subproblem, i.e., training a network with only low-bit weights
and the solution of the sub-problem provides a good initial
point for training our target problem. Following the similar
idea, we propose our second method by performing progressive training on the bit-width aspect of the network.
Specifically, we incrementally train a serial of networks
with the quantization bit-width (precision) gradually decreased from full-precision to the target precision. The third
method is inspired by the recent progress of mutual learning [35] and information distillation [1, 11, 22, 24, 32]. The
basic idea of those works is to train a target network alongside another guidance network. For example, The works
in [1,11,22,24,32] propose to train a small student network
to mimic the deeper or wider teacher network. They add an
additional regularizer by minimizing the difference between
student’s and teacher’s posterior probabilities [11] or intermediate feature representations [1, 24]. It is observed that
by using the guidance of the teacher model, better performance can be obtained with the student model than directly

7920

