Nonlinear 3D Face Morphable Model
Luan Tran, Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{tranluan, liuxm}@msu.edu
Abstract
As a classic statistical model of 3D facial shape and texture, 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) is widely used in facial
analysis, e.g., model fitting, image synthesis. Conventional
3DMM is learned from a set of well-controlled 2D face images with associated 3D face scans, and represented by two
sets of PCA basis functions. Due to the type and amount
of training data, as well as the linear bases, the representation power of 3DMM can be limited. To address these
problems, this paper proposes an innovative framework to
learn a nonlinear 3DMM model from a large set of unconstrained face images, without collecting 3D face scans.
Specifically, given a face image as input, a network encoder
estimates the projection, shape and texture parameters. Two
decoders serve as the nonlinear 3DMM to map from the
shape and texture parameters to the 3D shape and texture,
respectively. With the projection parameter, 3D shape, and
texture, a novel analytically-differentiable rendering layer
is designed to reconstruct the original input face. The entire network is end-to-end trainable with only weak supervision. We demonstrate the superior representation power
of our nonlinear 3DMM over its linear counterpart, and its
contribution to face alignment and 3D reconstruction. 1

1. Introduction
3D Morphable Model (3DMM) is a statistical model of
3D facial shape and texture in a space where there are explicit correspondences [4]. The morphable model framework provides two key benefits: first, a point-to-point correspondence between the reconstruction and all other models,
enabling morphing, and second, modeling underlying transformations between types of faces (male to female, neutral
to smile, etc.). 3DMM has been widely applied in numerous
areas, such as computer vision [4, 43], graphics [1], human
behavioral analysis [2] and craniofacial surgery [34].
3DMM is learnt through supervision by performing dimension reduction, normally Principal Component Anal1 Project page: http://cvlab.cse.msu.edu/project-nonlinear-3dmm.html

Training Data

Linear

Reconstruction

3DMM Model
Ƚ/Ⱦ

FC

S/T

fS/fT

DNN

S/T

Nonlinear

Face Alignment

Face Reconstruction

…

Face Editing

Figure 1: Conventional 3DMM employs linear bases models for
shape/texture, which are trained with 3D face scans and associated
controlled 2D images. We propose a nonlinear 3DMM to model
shape/texture via deep neural networks (DNNs). It can be trained
from in-the-wild face images without 3D scans, and also better
reconstructs the original images due to the inherent nonlinearity.

ysis (PCA), on a training set of face images/scans. To
model highly variable 3D face shapes, a large amount of
high-quality 3D face scans is required. However, this requirement is expensive to fulfill. The first 3DMM [4] was
built from scans of 200 subjects with a similar ethnicity/age
group. They were also captured in well-controlled conditions, with only neutral expressions. Hence, it is fragile to
large variances in the face identity. The widely used Basel
Face Model (BFM) [26] is also built with only 200 subjects
in neutral expressions. Lack of expression can be compensated using expression bases from FaceWarehouse [9] or
BD-3FE [42]. After more than a decade, almost all models
use less than 300 training scans. Such a small training set is
far from adequate to describe the full variability of human
faces [8]. Only recently, Booth et al. [8] spent a significant
effort to build 3DMM from scans of ∼10, 000 subjects.
Second, the texture model of 3DMM is normally built
with a small number of 2D face images co-captured with 3D
scans, under well-controlled conditions. Therefore, such a
model is only learnt to represent the facial texture in similar conditions, rather than in-the-wild environments. This
substantially limits the application scenarios of 3DMM.
17346

