Motion-Guided Cascaded Refinement Network for Video Object Segmentation
Ping Hu†

Gang Wang‡
†

Xiangfei Kong†

Jason Kuen†
‡

Nanyang Technological University

Yap-Peng Tan†

Alibaba AI Labs

{phu005, xfkong, jkuen001, eyptan}@ntu.edu.sg, gangwang6@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep CNNs have achieved superior performance in
many tasks of computer vision and image understanding.
However, it is still difficult to effectively apply deep CNNs to video object segmentation(VOS) since treating video
frames as separate and static will lose the information hidden in motion. To tackle this problem, we propose a Motionguided Cascaded Refinement Network for VOS. By assuming the object motion is normally different from the background motion, for a video frame we first apply an active
contour model on optical flow to coarsely segment objects
of interest. Then, the proposed Cascaded Refinement Network(CRN) takes the coarse segmentation as guidance to
generate an accurate segmentation of full resolution. In
this way, the motion information and the deep CNNs can
well complement each other to accurately segment objects from video frames. Furthermore, in CRN we introduce
a Single-channel Residual Attention Module to incorporate
the coarse segmentation map as attention, making our network effective and efficient in both training and testing. We
perform experiments on the popular benchmarks and the
results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance at a much faster speed.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is an important problem in computer vision, since it benefits other tasks like
object tracking [72], video retrieval [26], activity recognition [20], video editing [38] and so on. Due to
the strong spatiotemporal correlation between consecutive
video frames, motion plays a key role in many state-of-theart methods for video object segmentation [61, 68, 1, 62,
36, 15]. Motion estimations like optical flow [2, 27, 25]
and pixel trajectory [52, 57] reveal the pixel correspondence between frames and enable the propagation of foreground/background labels from one frame to the next. Furthermore, motion contains rich spatiotemporal structure information which can benefit the segmentation of moving

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Examples of our method. (a) Input frame and the initial
active contour. (b) Optical flow. (c) Segmentation by evolving the
active contour on (b). (d) Final results with (c) as guidance.

objects. However, motion estimation itself is still a very
difficult task and often produces inaccurate results. Some
common situations like noise, blurring, deformation, and
occlusion can further exacerbate the difficulty.
Different from previous methods which mainly rely on
motion, recent attempts based on CNNs[63, 8, 3, 54, 59,
30, 45, 11, 19] tackle the problem of VOS by learning. Due
to the powerful learning ability and the large amounts of
training data, deep CNNs have achieved very good performance in static image segmentation [7, 39]. While for VOS,
the annotated training data is lacking and treating frames as
static will lose the information hidden in motion. It has been
shown in [3, 63] that after finetuning on the first frame, deep
CNNs can ”recognize” the object with similar appearance
from subsequent frames. However, only relying on ”memorizing” the appearance of the target object may suffer from
several limitations. For example, the object’s appearance
may change along with the time, and objects in the background may share similar appearance to the target object.
To utilize the spatiotemporal structure information hidden in motion and the superior learning ability of CNNs,
in this paper we propose a motion-guided cascaded refinement network for video object segmentation. The proposed
method is composed of two parts: optical flow-based moving object segmentation and Cascaded Refinement Network
(CRN). Specifically, for an input frame, a coarse segmenta11400

