Min-Entropy Latent Model for Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Fang Wan, Pengxu Wei, Jianbin Jiao, Zhenjun Han and Qixiang Ye†
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{wanfang13,weipengxu11}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {jiaojb,hanzhj,qxye}@ucas.ac.cn

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) solely requires image category annotations indicating the presence
or absence of a class of objects in images, which significantly reduces human efforts when preparing training
samples. Despite supervised object detection having become more reliable [10, 14, 15, 25, 26, 29, 30], WSOD remains an open problem, as often indicated by low detection rates of less than 50 percent for state-of-the-art approaches [12, 18, 33, 38]. Due to the lack of location annotations, WSOD approaches require learning latent objects
from thousands of proposals in each image, as well as learning detectors that compromise the appearance of various ob† Corresponding author.

Object Probability

Learned Objects

Epoch 4

Epoch 2

Epoch 1

Initialization

Learned Objects

Epoch 9

Weakly supervised object detection is a challenging task
when provided with image category supervision but required to learn, at the same time, object locations and object detectors. The inconsistency between the weak supervision and learning objectives introduces randomness to object locations and ambiguity to detectors. In this paper, a
min-entropy latent model (MELM) is proposed for weakly
supervised object detection. Min-entropy is used as a metric to measure the randomness of object localization during learning, as well as serving as a model to learn object locations. It aims to principally reduce the variance of
positive instances and alleviate the ambiguity of detectors.
MELM is deployed as two sub-models, which respectively
discovers and localizes objects by minimizing the global
and local entropy. MELM is unified with feature learning
and optimized with a recurrent learning algorithm, which
progressively transfers the weak supervision to object locations. Experiments demonstrate that MELM significantly
improves the performance of weakly supervised detection,
weakly supervised localization, and image classification,
against the state-of-the-art approaches.

Object Probability

Final Epoch

Abstract

WSDDN

Ours

Figure 1: Evolution of object locations during learning
(from top to bottom). Red boxes denote proposals of high
object probability, and green ones detected objects. It shows
that our approach reduces localization randomness and improves localization accuracy. Best viewed in color.
jects in training images.
In the learning procedure of weakly supervised deep detection networks (WSDDN) [6], a representative WSOD
approach, object locations evolved with great randomness,
e.g., switching among different object parts, Fig. 1. Various
object parts were capable of optimizing the learning objective, i.e., minimizing image classification loss, but experienced difficulty in optimizing object detectors due to their
appearance ambiguity. The phenomenon resulted from the
inconsistency between data annotations and learning objectives, i.e., image-level annotations and object-level models.
It typically requires introducing latent variables and solving non-convex optimization in vast solution spaces, e.g.,
thousands of images and thousands of object proposals for

1297

