Learning to Adapt Structured Output Space for Semantic Segmentation
Yi-Hsuan Tsai1∗ Wei-Chih Hung2∗ Samuel Schulter1 Kihyuk Sohn1
Ming-Hsuan Yang2 Manmohan Chandraker1,3
1
NEC Laboratories America 2 University of California, Merced 3 University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Convolutional neural network-based approaches for semantic segmentation rely on supervision with pixel-level
ground truth, but may not generalize well to unseen image
domains. As the labeling process is tedious and labor intensive, developing algorithms that can adapt source ground
truth labels to the target domain is of great interest. In this
paper, we propose an adversarial learning method for domain adaptation in the context of semantic segmentation.
Considering semantic segmentations as structured outputs
that contain spatial similarities between the source and target domains, we adopt adversarial learning in the output
space. To further enhance the adapted model, we construct a multi-level adversarial network to effectively perform output space domain adaptation at different feature
levels. Extensive experiments and ablation study are conducted under various domain adaptation settings, including synthetic-to-real and cross-city scenarios. We show that
the proposed method performs favorably against the stateof-the-art methods in terms of accuracy and visual quality.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to assign each pixel a semantic label, e.g., person, car, road or tree, in an image.
Recently, methods based on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have achieved significant progress in semantic segmentation [2, 21, 23, 24, 38, 40, 41] with applications for
autonomous driving [9] and image editing [35]. The crux
of CNN-based approaches is to annotate a large number of
images that cover possible scene variations. However, this
trained model may not generalize well to unseen images,
especially when there is a domain gap between the training
(source) and test (target) images. For instance, the distribution of appearance for objects and scenes may vary in different cities, and even weather and lighting conditions can
change significantly in the same city. In such cases, rely∗ Both authors contribute equally to this work.

Figure 1. Our motivation of learning adaptation in the output
space. While images may be very different in appearance, their
outputs are structured and share many similarities, such as spatial
layout and local context.

ing only on the supervised model that requires re-annotating
per-pixel ground truths in different scenarios would entail
prohibitively high labor cost.
To address this issue, knowledge transfer or domain
adaptation techniques have been proposed to close the gap
between source and target domains, where annotations are
not available in the target domain. For image classification,
one effective approach is to align features across two domains [8, 25] such that the adapted features can generalize
to both domains. Similar efforts have been made for semantic segmentation via adversarial learning in the feature
space [3, 13]. However, different from the image classification task, feature adaptation for semantic segmentation
may suffer from the complexity of high-dimensional features that needs to encode diverse visual cues, including
appearance, shape and context. This motivates us to develop an effective method for adapting pixel-level prediction tasks rather than using feature adaptation. In semantic
segmentation, we note that the output space contains rich
information, both spatially and locally. For instance, even
if images from two domains are very different in appearance, their segmentation outputs share a significant amount
of similarities, e.g., spatial layout and local context (see Figure 1). Based on this observation, we address the pixellevel domain adaptation problem in the output (segmentation) space.
17472

