Detach and Adapt: Learning Cross-Domain Disentangled Deep Representation
Yen-Cheng Liu1 , Yu-Ying Yeh1 , Tzu-Chien Fu2 , Sheng-De Wang1 ,
Wei-Chen Chiu3 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Northwestern University, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
{r04921003, b99202023}@ntu.edu.tw, tcfu@u.northwestern.edu, sdwang@ntu.edu.tw,
walon@cs.nctu.edu.tw, ycwang@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
While representation learning aims to derive interpretable features for describing visual data, representation
disentanglement further results in such features so that particular image attributes can be identified and manipulated.
However, one cannot easily address this task without observing ground truth annotation for the training data. To address this problem, we propose a novel deep learning model
of Cross-Domain Representation Disentangler (CDRD). By
observing fully annotated source-domain data and unlabeled target-domain data of interest, our model bridges the
information across data domains and transfers the attribute
information accordingly. Thus, cross-domain feature disentanglement and adaptation can be jointly performed. In the
experiments, we provide qualitative results to verify our disentanglement capability. Moreover, we further confirm that
our model can be applied for solving classification tasks of
unsupervised domain adaptation, and performs favorably
against state-of-the-art image disentanglement and translation methods.

1. Introduction
The development of deep neural networks benefits a variety of areas such as computer vision, machine learning,
and natural language processing, which results in promising
progresses in realizing artificial intelligence environments.
However, as pointed out in [1], it is fundamental and desirable for understanding the observed information around us.
To be more precise, the above goal is achieved by identifying and disentangling the underlying explanatory factors
hidden in the observed data and the derived learning models. Therefore, the challenge of representation learning is to
have the learned latent element explanatory and disentangled from the derived abstract representation.

Figure 1: Illustration of cross-domain representation disentanglement. With attributes observed only in the source domain, we are able to disentangle, adapt, and manipulate the
data across domains with particular attributes of interest.

With the goal of discovering the underlying factors of
data representation associated with particular attributes of
interest, representation disentanglement is the learning task
which aims at deriving a latent feature space that decomposes the derived representation so that the aforementioned
attributes (e.g., face identity/pose, image style, etc.) can be
identified and described. Several works have been proposed
to tackle this task in unsupervised [3, 10], semi-supervised
[14, 24], or fully supervised settings [16, 25]. Once attribute
of interest properly disentangled, one can produce the output images with particular attribute accordingly.
However, like most machine learning algorithms, representation disentanglement is not able to achieve satisfactory
performances if the data to be described/manipulated are
very different from the training ones. This is known as the
problem of domain shift (or domain/dataset bias), and re18867

