Learning deep structured active contours end-to-end
Diego Marcos, Devis Tuia, Benjamin Kellenberger
University of Wageningen, Netherlands

Lisa Zhang, Min Bai, Renjie Liao, Raquel Urtasun
University of Toronto, Canada

name.surname@wur.nl

{lczhang,mbai,rjliao,urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
The world is covered with millions of buildings, and
precisely knowing each instance’s position and extents is
vital to a multitude of applications. Recently, automated
building footprint segmentation models have shown superior detection accuracy thanks to the usage of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). However, even the latest
evolutions struggle to precisely delineating borders, which
often leads to geometric distortions and inadvertent fusion
of adjacent building instances. We propose to overcome
this issue by exploiting the distinct geometric properties
of buildings. To this end, we present Deep Structured Active Contours (DSAC), a novel framework that integrates
priors and constraints into the segmentation process, such
as continuous boundaries, smooth edges, and sharp corners. To do so, DSAC employs Active Contour Models
(ACM), a family of constraint- and prior-based polygonal
models. We learn ACM parameterizations per instance using a CNN, and show how to incorporate all components
in a structured output model, making DSAC trainable endto-end. We evaluate DSAC on three challenging building
instance segmentation datasets, where it compares favorably against state-of-the-art. Code will be made available
on https://github.com/dmarcosg/DSAC.

1. Introduction
Accurate footprints of individual buildings are of
paramount importance for a wide range of applications,
such as census studies [33], disaster response after earthquakes [25] and developmental assistances like malaria control [11]. Automating large-scale building footprint segmentation has thus been an active research field, and the
emergence of high-capacity models like fully convolutional
networks (FCNs) [13], together with vast training data [32],
has led to promising improvements in this field.
Most studies address semantic segmentation of buildings, which consists of inferring a class label (e.g. “building”) densely for each pixel over the overhead image of interest [16, 20, 21, 30]. While this approach may provide

GT

Init.

Result

Figure 1. DSAC uses a CNN to predict the energy function used
by an Active Contour Model (ACM) to modify an initial instance
polygon using learned geometric priors. Left: image from the
TorontoCity validation dataset with ground truth polygons, center:
initial polygons provided by [2], right: results of DSAC.

global statistics such as building area coverage estimation,
it comes short at yielding estimations at the instance level.
In computer vision, this problem is known as instance segmentation, where models provide a segmentation mask on a
per-object instance basis. Solving this task is far more challenging than semantic segmentation, since the model has to
understand whether any two building pixels belong to the
same building or not. Precise delineation of object borders,
with sharp corners and straight walls in the case of buildings, is a task that CNNs generally perform poorly at [9]:
as a result, building segmentations from CNNs commonly
have a high detection rate, but fail in terms of spatial coverage and geometric correctness.
Active Contour Models (ACM [17]), also called snakes,
may be considered to address this issue. ACMs augment
bottom-up boundary detectors with high-level geometric
constraints and priors. They work by constraining the possible outputs to a family of curves (e.g. closed polygons with
a fixed number of vertices), and optimizing them by means
of energy minimization based on both the image features
and a set of shape priors such as boundary continuity and
18877

