Pose-Robust Face Recognition via Deep Residual Equivariant Mapping
Kaidi Cao2∗ Yu Rong1,2∗ Cheng Li2

Xiaoou Tang1

Chen Change Loy1

1

CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research
{ry017, ccloy, xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
{caokaidi, chengli}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Face recognition achieves exceptional success thanks to
the emergence of deep learning. However, many contemporary face recognition models still perform relatively poor in
processing profile faces compared to frontal faces. A key
reason is that the number of frontal and profile training
faces are highly imbalanced - there are extensively more
frontal training samples compared to profile ones. In addition, it is intrinsically hard to learn a deep representation that is geometrically invariant to large pose variations. In this study, we hypothesize that there is an inherent mapping between frontal and profile faces, and consequently, their discrepancy in the deep representation space
can be bridged by an equivariant mapping. To exploit this
mapping, we formulate a novel Deep Residual EquivAriant
Mapping (DREAM) block, which is capable of adaptively
adding residuals to the input deep representation to transform a profile face representation to a canonical pose that
simplifies recognition. The DREAM block consistently enhances the performance of profile face recognition for many
strong deep networks, including ResNet models, without deliberately augmenting training data of profile faces. The
block is easy to use, light-weight, and can be implemented
with a negligible computational overhead 1 .

1. Introduction
The emergence of deep learning greatly advances the
frontier of face recognition [29, 30]. The main focus tends
to center around near-frontal faces while there can be no
assurance of view consistency when face recognition is
conducted in unconstrained environments. Although human performance only drops slightly from frontal-frontal
∗ indicates shared first authorship
1 Codes and models are available at http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.
edu.hk/projects/DREAM/

False
Positives

False
Negatives

Figure 1. A state-of-the-art face recognition model [34] tested on
a challenging frontal-profile faces dataset [26]. It is observed that
profile faces of different persons are easily to be mismatched (false
positives), and profile and frontal faces of the same identity may
not trigger a match leading to false negatives.

to frontal-profile face verification, many existing algorithms
can suffer a drop of over 10% [26]. Thus, large pose variation remains to be a significant challenge that confronts
real-world face recognition.
We provide an example in Figure 1 to show the failure modes of a state-of-the-art face verification model. We
trained the same ResNet-18 model as reported in [34]. This
model achieves a high accuracy of 99.3% on the LFW
benchmark [12]. Despite the strong model, it tends to
falsely match profile faces of different identities yielding
a number of false positives. In addition, the model is also
likely to miss frontal and profile faces of the same identity
leading to false negatives.
Why does face recognition work poorly on profile faces?
Modern deep learning is heavily data-driven [11, 7]. The
generalization power of deep models is usually proportional
to the training data size. Given an uneven distribution of
profile and frontal faces in the dataset, deeply learned features tend to bias on distinguishing frontal faces rather than
profile faces. When it is infeasible to collect a massive
dataset that covers all possible poses with even distribution,

5187

