Deep Photo Enhancer: Unpaired Learning for Image Enhancement from
Photographs with GANs

Yu-Sheng Chen

Yu-Ching Wang

Man-Hsin Kao

Yung-Yu Chuang∗

National Taiwan University

Abstract
This paper proposes an unpaired learning method for
image enhancement. Given a set of photographs with the
desired characteristics, the proposed method learns a photo
enhancer which transforms an input image into an enhanced image with those characteristics. The method is
based on the framework of two-way generative adversarial networks (GANs) with several improvements. First, we
augment the U-Net with global features and show that it
is more effective. The global U-Net acts as the generator in our GAN model. Second, we improve Wasserstein
GAN (WGAN) with an adaptive weighting scheme. With
this scheme, training converges faster and better, and is less
sensitive to parameters than WGAN-GP. Finally, we propose to use individual batch normalization layers for generators in two-way GANs. It helps generators better adapt to
their own input distributions. All together, they significantly
improve the stability of GAN training for our application.
Both quantitative and visual results show that the proposed
method is effective for enhancing images.

1. Introduction
Photographs record valuable moments of our life. With
the popularization of mobile phone cameras, users enjoy
taking photographs even more. However, current cameras
have limitations. They have to reconstruct a complete and
high-quality image from a set incomplete and imperfect
samples of the scene. The samples are often noisy, incomplete in color and limited in the resolution and the dynamic
range. In addition, the camera sensor responds linearly to
the incoming light while human perception performs more
sophisticated non-linear mapping. Thus, users could be
disappointed with photographs they take because the pho∗ This work was supported by Ministry of Science and Technology
(MOST) and MediaTek Inc. under grants MOST 105-2622-8-002-002 and
MOST 104-2628-E-002-003-MY3.

tographs do not match their expectations and visual experience. The problem is even aggravated for mobile cameras
because of their small sensors and compact lenses.
Image enhancement methods attempt to address the issues with color rendition and image sharpness. There are
interactive tools and semi-automatic methods for this purpose. Most interactive software provides elementary tools
such as histogram equalization, sharpening, contrast adjustment and color mapping, and some advanced functions such
as local and adaptive adjustments. The quality of the results
however highly depends on skills and aesthetic judgement
of the users. In addition, it often takes a significant amount
of time to reach satisfactory retouching results. The semiautomatic methods facilitate the process by only requiring
adjustments of a few parameters. However, the results could
be very sensitive to parameters. In addition, these methods
are often based on some heuristic rules about human perception such as enhancing details or stretching contrast. Thus,
they could be brittle and lead to bad results.
This paper proposes a method for image enhancement
by learning from photographs. The method only requires
a set of “good” photographs as the input. They have the
characteristics that the user would like to have for their
photographs. They can be collected easily from websites
or any stock of photographs. We treat the image enhancement problem as an image-to-image translation problem in
which an input image is transformed into an enhanced image with the characteristics embedded in the set of training
photographs. Thus, we tackle the problem with a two-way
GAN whose structure is similar to CycleGAN [26]. However, GANs are notorious for their instability. For addressing the issue and obtaining high-quality results, we propose a few improvements along the way of constructing our
two-way GAN. First, for the design of the generator, we
augment the U-Net [20] with global features. The global
features capture the notion of scene setting, global lighting
condition or even subject types. They are helpful for determining what local operations should be performed. Second,
we propose an adaptive weighting scheme for Wasserstein
16306

