Attentive Fashion Grammar Network for
Fashion Landmark Detection and Clothing Category Classification
Wenguan Wang∗1,2 , Yuanlu Xu∗2 , Jianbing Shen†1 , and Song-Chun Zhu2
1

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA

Abstract
This paper proposes a knowledge-guided fashion network to solve the problem of visual fashion analysis, e.g.,
fashion landmark localization and clothing category classification. The suggested fashion model is leveraged with
high-level human knowledge in this domain. We propose
two important fashion grammars: (i) dependency grammar
capturing kinematics-like relation, and (ii) symmetry grammar accounting for the bilateral symmetry of clothes. We introduce Bidirectional Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks (BCRNNs) for efficiently approaching message passing over grammar topologies, and producing regularized
landmark layouts. For enhancing clothing category classification, our fashion network is encoded with two novel
attention mechanisms, i.e., landmark-aware attention and
category-driven attention. The former enforces our network to focus on the functional parts of clothes, and learns
domain-knowledge centered representations, leading to a
supervised attention mechanism. The latter is goal-driven,
which directly enhances task-related features and can be
learned in an implicit, top-down manner. Experimental results on large-scale fashion datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our fashion grammar network.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of electronic commerce and
the boom of online shopping, visual clothing analysis has
attracted lots of interests in computer vision. More re∗ Wenguan Wang and Yuanlu Xu contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen (shenjianbing@bit.edu.cn).
This work was supported by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4182056, the Fok Ying Tung Education Foundation under Grant
141067, and the Specialized Fund for Joint Building Program of Beijing Municipal Education Commission. This work was also supported by
ONR MURI project N00014-16-1-2007, DARPA XAI Award N66001-172-4029, and NSF IIS 1423305.

cently, benefited from the availability of large-scale fashion datasets, deep learning based models gained astonishing
success in this area, such as clothing item retrieval [13, 19],
and fashion image classification [38, 25, 28], to name a few.
In this paper, we address two key problems in visual
fashion analysis, namely fashion landmark localization and
clothing category classification. The success of previous
deep learning based fashion models [19, 25, 22, 9] has
proven the potential of applying neural network in this area.
However, few of them attacked how to inject high-level
human knowledge (such as geometric relationships among
landmarks) into fashion models. In this paper, we propose
a fashion grammar model that combines the learning power
of neural network and domain-specific grammars that capture the kinematic and symmetric relations between clothing landmarks. For modeling the massage passing process over fashion grammars, we introduce a novel network
architecture, Bidirectional Convolutional Recurrent Neural
Network (BCRNN), which is flexible to our tree-structured
models and generates more reasonable landmark layouts
with global grammar constraints. Crucially, our whole deep
grammar model is fully differentiable and can be trained in
end-to-end manner.
This work also proposes two important attention mechanisms for boosting fashion image classification. The first
one is fashion landmark-aware, which leverages the strong
representation ability of fashion landmarks and can be
learnt in supervised manner. This attention is able to generate landmark-aligned clothing features, which makes our
model look for the informative semantic parts of garments.
The second attention is clothing category-driven and trained
in goal-driven way. Such attention mechanism learns to
directly enhance task-related features and thus improves
the classification performance. The attentions provide the
model with more robust clothing representations and filter
out useless information.
Comprehensive evaluations on two large-scale datasets
14271

