Image Restoration by Estimating Frequency Distribution of Local Patches
Jaeyoung Yoo1,2,∗

Sang-ho Lee1,∗
1
Seoul National University
2
NALBI Inc.

Nojun Kwak1

{yoojy31|shlee223|nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a method to solve the image
restoration problem, which tries to restore the details of a
corrupted image, especially due to the loss caused by JPEG
compression. We have treated an image in the frequency
domain to explicitly restore the frequency components lost
during image compression. In doing so, the distribution in
the frequency domain is learned using the cross entropy
loss. Unlike recent approaches, we have reconstructed the
details of an image without using the scheme of adversarial
training. Rather, the image restoration problem is treated as
a classification problem to determine the frequency coefficient for each frequency band in an image patch. In this paper, we show that the proposed method effectively restores a
JPEG-compressed image with more detailed high frequency
components, making the restored image more vivid.

1. Introduction
As multimedia and the Internet have become indispensable in our ordinary life, low quality compressed images are
used more often because the quality of images and the consumption of data resource are highly correlated. In this environment, tasks such as compression artifact removal that removes artifact from a lossy-compressed image and restoration of a high quality image have recently become important
areas of computer vision.
Among various image formats, JPEG is the most commonly used lossy image compression format. A lossy compression like this reduces the volume of data by permanently removing some of its information. Thus, the reverse
process of restoration of an image is basically a problem of
generating information that the input image does not have,
and is therefore an ill-posed problem. In most cases, there
are several possible output images corresponding to a given
input image and the problem can be seen as a task of select∗ J. Yoo and S. Lee equally contributed to this work.
This work was supported by NRF of Korea (2017M3C4A7077582) and
NALBI Inc.

Figure 1: From top to bottom, the first image is a JPEG
compressed image with quality factor 10, the second is a
restored result by our baseline method that uses a typical
encoder-decoder model whose loss function is pixel-wise
MSE. The third is a restored result of our method, which
utilizes the classifier network, trained to predict frequency
distribution of possible outputs. Our result has more detail
than that of the baseline.

ing the most proper one from all the possible outputs. That
is, the image restoration problem can be formulated as the
problem of estimating the distribution conditioned on the
input image.
Since convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
actively applied in the field of computer vision, there have
been many attempts to recover the lost information of an image due to compression, using CNN. These methods mainly
approximate the mapping function from the input image to
the output image using CNNs in a supervised manner. In

6684

