Customized Image Narrative Generation via
Interactive Visual Question Generation and Answering
Andrew Shin1
1

Yoshitaka Ushiku1
Tatsuya Harada1,2
2
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN

{andrew,ushiku,harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Image description task has been invariably examined in
a static manner with qualitative presumptions held to be
universally applicable, regardless of the scope or target of
the description. In practice, however, different viewers may
pay attention to different aspects of the image, and yield
different descriptions or interpretations under various contexts. Such diversity in perspectives is difficult to derive
with conventional image description techniques. In this paper, we propose a customized image narrative generation
task, in which the users are interactively engaged in the
generation process by providing answers to the questions.
We further attempt to learn the user’s interest via repeating such interactive stages, and to automatically reflect the
interest in descriptions for new images. Experimental results demonstrate that our model can generate a variety of
descriptions from single image that cover a wider range of
topics than conventional models, while being customizable
to the target user of interaction.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in visual language field enabled by deep
learning techniques have succeeded in bridging the gap between vision and language in a variety of tasks, ranging
from describing the image [14, 7, 26, 27] to answering questions about the image [2, 5]. Such achievements were possible under the premise that there exists a set of ground truth
references that are universally applicable regardless of the
target, scope, or context. In real-world setting, however,
image descriptions are prone to an infinitely wide range of
variabilities, as different viewers may pay attention to different aspects of the image in different contexts, resulting
in a variety of descriptions or interpretations. Due to its
subjective nature, such diversity is difficult to obtain with
conventional image description techniques.
In this paper, we propose a customized image narrative
generation task, in which we attempt to actively engage the

This is a marketplace.
People are standing.
Apples are ….
Oranges are ...
Strawberries are ...
Potatoes are …

Watermelons are
on the table.
There are 3
watermelons.
They seem to be in
good condition.

Figure 1: Example of conventional image description (top)
and customized image narrative (bottom).
users in the description generation process by asking questions and directly obtaining their answers, thus learning and
reflecting their interest in the description. We use the term
image narrative to differentiate our image description from
conventional one, in which the objective is fixed as depicting factual aspects of global elements. In contrast, image
narratives in our model cover a much wider range of topics, including subjective, local, or inferential elements.
We first describe a model for automatic image narrative
generation from single image without user interaction. We
develop a self Q&A model to take advantage of wide array
of contents available in visual question answering (VQA)
task, and demonstrate that our model can generate image
descriptions that are richer in contents than previous models. We then apply the model to interactive environment
by directly obtaining the answers to the questions from the
users. Through a wide range of experiments, we demonstrate that such interaction enables us not only to customize
the image description by reflecting the user’s choice in the
current image of interest, but also to automatically apply the
learned preference to new images (Figure 1 ).
18925

