CVM-Net: Cross-View Matching Network for Image-Based Ground-to-Aerial
Geo-Localization
Sixing Hu

Mengdan Feng Rang M. H. Nguyen
National University of Singapore

{hu.sixing,fengmengdan}@u.nus.edu

{nguyenho,gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Ground Query

Abstract

Local feature network + Global descriptor network

Global representation distance

2.32

0.32

1.38

1.65

Local feature network + Global descriptor network

Nearest in
feature space

Satellite Map

The problem of localization on a geo-referenced
aerial/satellite map given a query ground view image remains challenging due to the drastic change in viewpoint
that causes traditional image descriptors based matching
to fail. We leverage on the recent success of deep learning to propose the CVM-Net for the cross-view image-based
ground-to-aerial geo-localization task. Specifically, our
network is based on the Siamese architecture to do metric
learning for the matching task. We first use the fully convolutional layers to extract local image features, which are
then encoded into global image descriptors using the powerful NetVLAD. As part of the training procedure, we also
introduce a simple yet effective weighted soft margin ranking loss function that not only speeds up the training convergence but also improves the final matching accuracy. Experimental results show that our proposed network significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches on two
existing benchmarking datasets. Our code and models are
publicly available on the project website1 .

Gim Hee Lee

Figure 1. An illustration of the image based ground-to-aerial geolocalization problem, and our proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Image-based geo-localization has drawn a lot of attention over the past years in the computer vision community
due to its potential applications in autonomous driving [26]
and augmented reality [27]. Traditional image-based geolocalization is normally done in the context where both the
query and geo-tagged reference images in the database are
taken from the ground view [16, 52, 33, 45]. One of the
major drawbacks of such approaches is that the database images, which are commonly obtained from crowd-sourcing,
e.g. geo-tagged photos from Flickr etc, usually do not
have a comprehensive coverage of the area. This is because the photo collections are most likely to be biased
towards famous touristy areas. Consequently, ground-to1 https://github.com/david-husx/crossview_
localisation.git

ground geo-localization approaches tend to fail in locations where reference images are not available. In contrast,
aerial imagery taken from devices with bird’s eye view, e.g.
satellites and drones, densely covers the Earth. As a result, matching ground view photos to aerial imagery gradually becomes an increasingly popular geo-localization approach [5, 22, 37, 23, 49, 50, 46, 41, 53, 43]. However,
cross-view matching still remains challenging because of
the drastic change in viewpoint between ground and aerial
images. This causes cross-view matching with traditional
handcrafted features like SIFT [25] and SURF [7] to fail.
With the recent success of deep learning in many computer vision tasks, most of the existing works on cross-view
image matching [49, 50, 46, 53] adopt the convolutional
neural network (CNN) to learn representations for matching between ground and aerial images. To compensate for
17258

