Deflecting Adversarial Attacks with Pixel Deflection
Aaditya Prakash, Nick Moran, Solomon Garber, Antonella DiLillo, James Storer
Brandeis University
{aprakash,nemtiax,solomongarber,dilant,storer}@brandeis.edu

Deflections=500

Deflections=2000

CNNs are poised to become integral parts of many critical systems. Despite their robustness to natural variations,
image pixel values can be manipulated, via small, carefully
crafted, imperceptible perturbations, to cause a model to
misclassify images. We present an algorithm to process an
image so that classification accuracy is significantly preserved in the presence of such adversarial manipulations.
Image classifiers tend to be robust to natural noise, and
adversarial attacks tend to be agnostic to object location.
These observations motivate our strategy, which leverages
model robustness to defend against adversarial perturbations by forcing the image to match natural image statistics.
Our algorithm locally corrupts the image by redistributing
pixel values via a process we term pixel deflection. A subsequent wavelet-based denoising operation softens this corruption, as well as some of the adversarial changes. We
demonstrate experimentally that the combination of these
techniques enables the effective recovery of the true class,
against a variety of robust attacks. Our results compare
favorably with current state-of-the-art defenses, without requiring retraining or modifying the CNN.

Deflections=100

Abstract

Image with PD

Diff with original

Diff after WD

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Impact of Pixel Deflection on a natural image and
subsequent denoising using wavelet transform. Left: Image with given number of pixels deflected. Middle: Difference between clean image and deflected image. Right:
Difference between clean image and deflected image after
denoising. Enlarge to see details.

Image classification convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have become a part of many critical real-world systems. For example, CNNs can be used by banks to read
the dollar amount of a check [4], or by self-driving cars to
identify stop signs [32].
The critical nature of these systems makes them targets
for adversarial attacks. Recent work has shown that classifiers can be tricked by small, carefully-crafted, imperceptible perturbations to a natural image. These perturbations
can cause a CNN to misclassify an image into a different
class (e.g. a “1” into a “9” or a stop sign into a yield sign).
Thus, defending against these vulnerabilities will be critical to the further adoption of advanced computer vision
systems. Here, we consider white-box attacks, in which an

adversary can see the weights of the classification model.
Most of these attacks work by taking advantage of the differentiable nature of the classification model, i.e. taking the
gradient of the output class probabilities with respect to a
particular pixel. Several previous works propose defense
mechanisms that are differentiable transformations applied
to an image before classification. These differentiable defenses appear to work well at first, but attackers can easily circumvent these defenses by “differentiating through
them”, i.e. by taking the gradient of a class probability with
respect to an input pixel through both the CNN and the
transformation.
In this work, we present a defense method which com-

Code: github.com/iamaaditya/pixel-deflection

8571

