Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation Network with
Deep Seeded Region Growing

1

Zilong Huang1 , Xinggang Wang1∗, Jiasi Wang1 , Wenyu Liu1 , and Jingdong Wang2
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{hzl,xgwang,wangjiasi,liuwy}@hust.edu.cn jingdw@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of learning image semantic segmentation networks only using image-level labels as
supervision, which is important since it can significantly
reduce human annotation efforts. Recent state-of-the-art
methods on this problem first infer the sparse and discriminative regions for each object class using a deep classification network, then train semantic a segmentation network
using the discriminative regions as supervision. Inspired
by the traditional image segmentation methods of seeded
region growing, we propose to train a semantic segmentation network starting from the discriminative regions and
progressively increase the pixel-level supervision using by
seeded region growing. The seeded region growing module
is integrated in a deep segmentation network and can benefit from deep features. Different from conventional deep networks which have fixed/static labels, the proposed weaklysupervised network generates new labels using the contextual information within an image. The proposed method
significantly outperforms the weakly-supervised semantic
segmentation methods using static labels, and obtains the
state-of-the-art performance, which are 63.2% mIoU score
on the PASCAL VOC 2012 test set and 26.0% mIoU score
on the COCO dataset.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN) have
achieved great successes on the image semantic segmentation problem [5, 18] thanks to a large amount of fullyannotated images. However, collecting large-scale accurate pixel-level annotation is time-consuming and typically
requires substantial financial investments. Unlabeled and
weakly-labeled visual data, however, can be collected in
large amounts in a relatively fast and cheap manner. Therefore, a promising direction in the computer vision research
∗ Corresponding author.

Person
Horse

Training Data

Prediction

Ground Truth

Epoch #0

Epoch #6

Epoch #12

Figure 1. The top row orderly shows a training image with
the image-level labels, the segmentation result of our proposed
method only using image-level supervision, and the ground truth.
Our segmentation result is very close to the ground truth annotated by human. The bottom row shows the dynamic supervision in several epochs during the training of the proposed weaklysupervised semantic segmentation network. (The black represents
background and the white represents unlabeled/ignore pixels).

is to develop object recognition methods that can learn from
unlabeled or weakly labeled images [14, 32].
In this paper, we study the problem of learning semantic segmentation networks from weakly-labeled images.
Among various settings of weak label, image-level annotation is one of the most economical and most efficient setting. In this context, every training image has its image
class/category labels. It means objects belonging to the
class labels appear in the image. However, the locations
of the objects are unknown. We need to infer the pixel-level
locations of the objects. Thus, the main problem in training
weakly-supervised semantic segmentation networks is how
to accurately assign image-level labels to their corresponding pixels.
To establish the desired pixel-label correspondence

7014

