3D Semantic Segmentation with Submanifold Sparse Convolutional Networks
Benjamin Graham
Facebook AI Research

Martin Engelcke∗
University of Oxford

Laurens van der Maaten
Facebook AI Research

benjamingraham@fb.com

martin@robots.ox.ac.uk

lvdmaaten@fb.com

Abstract
Convolutional networks are the de-facto standard for analyzing spatio-temporal data such as images, videos, and
3D shapes. Whilst some of this data is naturally dense (e.g.,
photos), many other data sources are inherently sparse. Examples include 3D point clouds that were obtained using
a LiDAR scanner or RGB-D camera. Standard “dense”
implementations of convolutional networks are very inefficient when applied on such sparse data. We introduce new
sparse convolutional operations that are designed to process spatially-sparse data more efficiently, and use them
to develop spatially-sparse convolutional networks. We
demonstrate the strong performance of the resulting models, called submanifold sparse convolutional networks (SSCNs), on two tasks involving semantic segmentation of 3D
point clouds. In particular, our models outperform all prior
state-of-the-art on the test set of a recent semantic segmentation competition.

1. Introduction
Convolutional networks (ConvNets) constitute the stateof-the art method for a wide range of tasks that involve
the analysis of data with spatial and/or temporal structure, such as photos, videos, or 3D surface models. While
such data frequently comprises a densely populated (2D or
3D) grid, other datasets are naturally sparse. For instance,
handwriting is made up of one-dimensional lines in twodimensional space, pictures made by RGB-D cameras are
three-dimensional point clouds, and polygonal mesh models form two-dimensional surfaces in 3D space.
The curse of dimensionality applies, in particular, to data
that lives on grids that have three or more dimensions: the
number of points on the grid grows exponentially with its
dimensionality. In such scenarios, it becomes increasingly
important to exploit data sparsity whenever possible in order to reduce the computational resources needed for data
processing. Indeed, exploiting sparsity is paramount when
∗ Work done while interning at Facebook AI Research

Figure 1: Examples of 3D point clouds of objects from the
ShapeNet part-segmentation challenge [23]. The colors of
the points represent the part labels.

analyzing, e.g., RGB-D videos which are sparsely populated 4D structures.
Traditional convolutional network implementations are
optimized for data that lives on densely populated grids,
and cannot process sparse data efficiently. More recently,
a number of convolutional network implementations have
been presented that are tailored to work efficiently on sparse
data [3, 4, 18]. Mathematically, some of these implementations are identical to regular convolutional networks,
but they require fewer computational resources in terms of
FLOPs and/or memory [3, 4]. Prior work uses a sparse version of the im2col operation that restricts computation
and storage to “active” sites [4], or uses the voting algorithm from [22] to prune unnecessary multiplications by zeros [3]. OctNets [18] modify the convolution operator to
produce “averaged” hidden states in parts of the grid that
are outside the region of interest.
One of the downsides of prior sparse implementations of
convolutional networks is that they “dilate” the sparse data
in every layer by applying “full” convolutions. In this work,

9224

