Gibson Env: Real-World Perception for Embodied Agents
Fei Xia∗1

Amir R. Zamir∗1,2
1

Zhiyang He∗1

Stanford University

2

Alexander Sax1

Jitendra Malik2

Silvio Savarese1

University of California, Berkeley

http://gibson.vision/

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: Two agents in Gibson Environment for real-world perception. The agent is active, embodied, and subject to constraints of physics and space
(a,b). It receives a constant stream of visual observations as if it had an on-board camera (c). It can also receive additional modalities, e.g. depth, semantic
labels, or normals (d,e,f). The visual observations are from real-world rather than an artificially designed space.

Abstract
Developing visual perception models for active agents
and sensorimotor control in the physical world are cumbersome as existing algorithms are too slow to efficiently
learn in real-time and robots are fragile and costly. This
has given rise to learning-in-simulation which consequently
casts a question on whether the results transfer to realworld. In this paper, we investigate developing real-world
perception for active agents, propose Gibson Environment
1
for this purpose, and showcase a set of perceptual tasks
learned therein. Gibson is based upon virtualizing real
spaces, rather than artificially designed ones, and currently
includes over 1400 floor spaces from 572 full buildings.
The main characteristics of Gibson are: I. being from the
real-world and reflecting its semantic complexity, II. having an internal synthesis mechanism “Goggles” enabling
deploying the trained models in real-world without needing
domain adaptation, III. embodiment of agents and making
them subject to constraints of physics and space.
1 Named after JJ Gibson, the author of Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception, 1979. “We must perceive in order to move, but we must also
move in order to perceive” – JJ Gibson [36]
∗ Authors contributed equally.

1. Introduction
We would like our robotic agents to have compound
perceptual and physical capabilities: a drone that autonomously surveys buildings, a robot that rapidly finds
victims in a disaster area, or one that safely delivers our
packages, just to name a few. Apart from the application perspective, the findings supportive of a close relationship between visual perception and motion are prevalent
on various fronts: evolutionary and computational biologists have hypothesized a key role for intermixing perception and locomotion in development of complex behaviors
and species [61, 91, 22]; neuroscientists have extensively
argued for a hand in hand relationship between developing perception and being active [83, 42]; pioneer roboticists
have similarly advocated entanglement of the two [14, 15].
This all calls for developing principled perception models
specifically with active agents in mind.
By perceptual active agent, we are generally referring to
an agent that receives a visual observation from the environment and accordingly effectuates a set of actions which can
lead a physical change in the environment (∼manipulation)
and/or the agent’s own particulars (∼locomotion). Developing such perceptual agents entails the questions of how
and where to do so.
19068

