Quantization and Training of Neural Networks for Efficient
Integer-Arithmetic-Only Inference
Benoit Jacob
Skirmantas Kligys
Bo Chen
Matthew Tang
Andrew Howard
Hartwig Adam

Menglong Zhu
Dmitry Kalenichenko

{benoitjacob,skligys,bochen,menglong,
mttang,howarda,hadam,dkalenichenko}@google.com

Google Inc.

Abstract
The rising popularity of intelligent mobile devices and
the daunting computational cost of deep learning-based
models call for efficient and accurate on-device inference
schemes. We propose a quantization scheme that allows
inference to be carried out using integer-only arithmetic,
which can be implemented more efficiently than floating
point inference on commonly available integer-only hardware. We also co-design a training procedure to preserve
end-to-end model accuracy post quantization. As a result,
the proposed quantization scheme improves the tradeoff between accuracy and on-device latency. The improvements
are significant even on MobileNets, a model family known
for run-time efficiency, and are demonstrated in ImageNet
classification and COCO detection on popular CPUs.

1. Introduction
Current state-of-the-art Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) are not well suited for use on mobile devices. Since
the advent of AlexNet [20], modern CNNs have primarily
been appraised according to classification / detection accuracy. Thus network architectures have evolved without regard to model complexity and computational efficiency. On
the other hand, successful deployment of CNNs on mobile
platforms such as smartphones, AR/VR devices (HoloLens,
Daydream), and drones require small model sizes to accommodate limited on-device memory, and low latency to maintain user engagement. This has led to a burgeoning field of
research that focuses on reducing the model size and inference time of CNNs with minimal accuracy losses.
Approaches in this field roughly fall into two categories. The first category, exemplified by MobileNet [10],
SqueezeNet [16], ShuffleNet [32], and DenseNet [11], designs novel network architectures that exploit computation
/ memory efficient operations. The second category quan-

tizes the weights and / or activations of a CNN from 32
bit floating point into lower bit-depth representations. This
methodology, embraced by approaches such as Ternary
weight networks (TWN [22]), Binary Neural Networks
(BNN [14]), XNOR-net [27], and more [8, 21, 26, 33, 34,
35], is the focus of our investigation. Despite their abundance, current quantization approaches are lacking in two
respects when it comes to trading off latency with accuracy.
First, prior approaches have not been evaluated on a
reasonable baseline architecture. The most common baseline architectures, AlexNet [20], VGG [28] and GoogleNet
[29], are all over-parameterized by design in order to extract
marginal accuracy improvements. Therefore, it is easy to
obtain sizable compression of these architectures, reducing
quantization experiments on these architectures to proofof-concepts at best. Instead, a more meaningful challenge
would be to quantize model architectures that are already efficient at trading off latency with accuracy, e.g. MobileNets.
Second, many quantization approaches do not deliver
verifiable efficiency improvements on real hardware. Approaches that quantize only the weights ([2, 4, 8, 33]) are
primarily concerned with on-device storage and less with
computational efficiency. Notable exceptions are binary,
ternary and bit-shift networks [14, 22, 27]. These latter
approaches employ weights that are either 0 or powers of
2, which allow multiplication to be implemented by bit
shifts. However, while bit-shifts can be efficient in custom hardware, they provide little benefit on existing hardware with multiply-add instructions that, when properly
used (i.e. pipelined), are not more expensive than additions alone. Moreover, multiplications are only expensive
if the operands are wide, and the need to avoid multiplications diminishes with bit depth once both weights and activations are quantized. Notably, these approaches rarely provide on-device measurements to verify the promised timing
improvements. More runtime-friendly approaches quantize
both the weights and the activations into 1 bit representa12704

