Disentangling Features in 3D Face Shapes
for Joint Face Reconstruction and Recognition∗
Feng Liu1 , Ronghang Zhu1 , Dan Zeng1 , Qijun Zhao1,†, and Xiaoming Liu2
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University

Abstract
This paper proposes an encoder-decoder network to
disentangle shape features during 3D face reconstruction
from single 2D images, such that the tasks of reconstructing accurate 3D face shapes and learning discriminative
shape features for face recognition can be accomplished
simultaneously. Unlike existing 3D face reconstruction
methods, our proposed method directly regresses dense 3D
face shapes from single 2D images, and tackles identity
and residual (i.e., non-identity) components in 3D face
shapes explicitly and separately based on a composite 3D
face shape model with latent representations. We devise
a training process for the proposed network with a joint
loss measuring both face identification error and 3D face
shape reconstruction error. To construct training data we
develop a method for fitting 3D morphable model (3DMM)
to multiple 2D images of a subject. Comprehensive experiments have been done on MICC, BU3DFE, LFW and
YTF databases. The results show that our method expands
the capacity of 3DMM for capturing discriminative shape
features and facial detail, and thus outperforms existing
methods both in 3D face reconstruction accuracy and in
face recognition accuracy.

1. Introduction
3D face shapes reconstructed from 2D images have
been proven to benefit many tasks, e.g., face alignment
or facial landmark localization [18, 41], face animation [9,
13], and face recognition [5, 12]. Many prior work have
been devoted to reconstructing 3D face shapes from a
single 2D image, including shape from shading (SFS)-based
methods [14, 20], 3D morphable model (3DMM) fitting∗ This work is supported by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China (2017YFB0802300) and the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (61773270, 61703077).
† Corresponding author. Email: qjzhao@scu.edu.cn.

Figure 1. Comparison between the learning process of (a) existing
methods and (b) our proposed method. GT denotes Ground Truth.
(d) and (e) are 3D face shapes and disentangled identity shapes
reconstructed by our method for the images in (c) from LFW [15].

based methods [4, 5], and recently proposed regressionbased methods [22, 23]. These methods mostly aim to
recover 3D face shapes that are loyal to the input 2D images
or retain as much facial detail as possible (see Fig. 1).
Few of them explicitly consider the identity-sensitive and
identity-irrelevant features in the reconstructed 3D faces.
Consequently, very few studies have been reported about
recognizing faces using the reconstructed 3D face either by
itself or by fusing with legacy 2D face recognition [5, 33].
Using real 3D face shapes acquired by 3D face scanners

5216

