Tell Me Where to Look: Guided Attention Inference Network
Kunpeng Li1 , Ziyan Wu3 , Kuan-Chuan Peng3 , Jan Ernst3 and Yun Fu1,2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA
2
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA
3
Siemens Corporate Technology, Princeton, NJ
{kunpengli,yunfu}@ece.neu.edu, {ziyan.wu, kuanchuan.peng, jan.ernst}@siemens.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised learning with only coarse labels can
obtain visual explanations of deep neural network such as
attention maps by back-propagating gradients. These attention maps are then available as priors for tasks such
as object localization and semantic segmentation. In one
common framework we address three shortcomings of previous approaches in modeling such attention maps: We (1)
make attention maps an explicit and natural component of
the end-to-end training for the first time, (2) provide selfguidance directly on these maps by exploring supervision
from the network itself to improve them, and (3) seamlessly
bridge the gap between using weak and extra supervision if
available. Despite its simplicity, experiments on the semantic segmentation task demonstrate the effectiveness of our
methods. We clearly surpass the state-of-the-art on PASCAL VOC 2012 test and val. sets. Besides, the proposed
framework provides a way not only explaining the focus of
the learner but also feeding back with direct guidance towards specific tasks. Under mild assumptions our method
can also be understood as a plug-in to existing weakly supervised learners to improve their generalization performance.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised learning [3, 26, 33, 36] has recently
gained much attention as a popular solution to address labeled data scarcity in computer vision. Using only image
level labels for example, one can obtain attention maps for a
given input with back-propagation on a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). These maps relate to the network’s response given specific patterns and tasks it was trained for.
The value of each pixel on an attention map reveals to what
extent the same pixel on the input image contributes to the
final output of the network. It has been shown that one
can extract localization and segmentation information from
such attention maps without extra labeling effort [39].

Self-Exploration
“Other parts
belong to boat?”

End-to-end training
Extra Supervision

Input

Attention Maps

Improved Attention Maps

Figure 1. The proposed Guided Attention Inference Network
(GAIN) makes the network’s attention on-line trainable and can
plug in different kinds of supervision directly on attention maps in
an end-to-end way. We explore the self-guided supervision from
the network itself and propose GAINext when extra supervision
are available. These guidance can optimize attention maps towards
the task of interest.

However, supervised by only classification loss, attention maps often only cover small and most discriminative
regions of object of interest [11, 28, 39]. While these attention maps can still serve as reliable priors for tasks like
segmentation [12], having attention maps covering the target foreground objects as complete as possible can further
boost the performance. To this end, several recent works either rely on combining multiple attention maps from a network via iterative erasing steps [31] or consolidating attention maps from multiple networks [11]. Instead of passively
exploiting trained network attention, we envision an end-toend framework with which task-specific supervision can be
directly applied to attention maps during training stage.
On the other hand, as an effective way to explain the
network’s decision, attention maps can help to find restrictions of the training network. For instance in an object
categorization task with only image-level object class labels, we may encounter a pathological bias in the training
data when the foreground object incidentally always correlates with the same background object (also pointed out

9215

