Attention-Aware Compositional Network for Person Re-identification
Jing Xu1
Rui Zhao1,2∗
1
SenseNets Technology Limited

Feng Zhu1
Huaming Wang1
Wanli Ouyang3
2
3
SenseTime Group Limited
The University of Sydney

eudoraxj@gmail.com, zhaorui@sensetime.com, zhufengx@mail.ustc.edu.cn
huamingwang2014@gmail.com, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Person re-identification (ReID) is to identify pedestrians
observed from different camera views based on visual appearance. It is a challenging task due to large pose variations, complex background clutters and severe occlusions.
Recently, human pose estimation by predicting joint locations was largely improved in accuracy. It is reasonable to
use pose estimation results for handling pose variations and
background clutters, and such attempts have obtained great
improvement in ReID performance. However, we argue that
the pose information was not well utilized and hasn’t yet
been fully exploited for person ReID.
In this work, we introduce a novel framework called
Attention-Aware Compositional Network (AACN) for person ReID. AACN consists of two main components: Poseguided Part Attention (PPA) and Attention-aware Feature
Composition (AFC). PPA is learned and applied to mask
out undesirable background features in pedestrian feature
maps. Furthermore, pose-guided visibility scores are estimated for body parts to deal with part occlusion in the proposed AFC module. Extensive experiments with ablation
analysis show the effectiveness of our method, and stateof-the-art results are achieved on several public datasets,
including Market-1501, CUHK03, CUHK01, SenseReID,
CUHK03-NP and DukeMTMC-reID.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) targets on identifying the
same individual across different camera views. Given an
image containing a target person (as query) and a large
set of images (gallery set), a ReID system is expected to
rank the images from gallery according to visual similarity
with the query image. It has many important applications
in video surveillance by saving large amount of human efforts in exhaustively searching for a target person from large
amount of video sequences. For example, finding missing
∗ Rui Zhao is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Part alignment challenges in person ReID. (a-c): Describing body parts by bounding boxes may introduce many irrelevant regions from background and other parts. Matching between
features extracted from loose boxes in (a) and tight boxes in (b)
would deteriorate the matching accuracy. A finer part region representation in (c) would help alleviate this problem. (d-f): The
importance of different parts should be adaptively adjusted. Upper body is occluded by forearms in (d), the two forearms are all
occluded in (e). Features from occluded part should be eliminated
during matching, while salient visual cues like yellow backpack in
(f) need to be emphasized.

elderly and children, and suspect tracking, etc.
Many research works have been proposed to improve the
state-of-the-art performance of public ReID benchmarks.
However, identifying the same individual across different
camera views is still an unsolved task in intelligent video
surveillance. It is difficult in that pedestrian images often
suffer from complex background clutters, varying illumination conditions, uncontrollable camera settings, severe occlusions and large pose variations.
Viewpoint changes and pose variations cause uncontrolled misalignment between pedestrian images. As the
improvement of human pose estimation [2, 6], recent works
[37, 49, 54] utilized pose estimation results to align body

2119

