Lose The Views: Limited Angle CT Reconstruction via Implicit Sinogram
Completion

Rushil Anirudh, Hyojin Kim, Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan, K. Aditya Mohan,
Kyle Champley, Timo Bremer
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

Abstract
Computed Tomography (CT) reconstruction is a fundamental component to a wide variety of applications ranging
from security, to healthcare. The classical techniques require measuring projections, called sinograms, from a full
180° view of the object. However, obtaining a full-view is
not always feasible, such as when scanning irregular objects that limit flexibility of scanner rotation. The resulting limited angle sinograms are known to produce highly
artifact-laden reconstructions with existing techniques. In
this paper, we propose to address this problem using CTNet
– a system of 1D and 2D convolutional neural networks,
that operates directly on a limited angle sinogram to predict the reconstruction. We use the x-ray transform on this
prediction to obtain a “completed” sinogram, as if it came
from a full 180°view. We feed this to standard analytical
and iterative reconstruction techniques to obtain the final
reconstruction. We show with extensive experimentation on
a challenging real world dataset that this combined strategy
outperforms many competitive baselines. We also propose
a measure of confidence for the reconstruction that enables
a practitioner to gauge the reliability of a prediction made
by CTNet. We show that this measure is a strong indicator of quality as measured by the PSNR, while not requiring
ground truth at test time. Finally, using a segmentation experiment, we show that our reconstruction also preserves
the 3D structure of objects better than existing solutions.

1. Introduction
Computed Tomography (CT) is one of the most common
imaging modalities used in industrial, healthcare, and security settings today. In a typical parallel-beam CT imaging
system, x-ray measurements obtained from all viewing angles are effectively combined to produce a cross-sectional
Corresponding author: anirudh1@llnl.gov.

Ground Truth

Proposed

FBP

Figure 1. We show the proposed limited angle reconstruction from just
half the views (0-90°), in comparison to Filtered Back Projection (FBP)
and ground truth. These are intensity normalized images.

image of 3D objects [16]. These x-ray measurements are
collectively referred to as a Sinogram. The inverse problem
of reconstructing cross-sectional images (or slices) from
raw sinograms has been extensively studied by imaging researchers for several decades (Chapter 3 in [16]), the most
popular technique being the Filtered Back Projection (FBP),
which is derived from a discretization of the closed-form
solution for the inverse x-ray transform. Alternatively, iterative techniques such as weighted least squares (WLS) have
also been developed that improve upon FBP, in some cases,
by making successive approximations of increasing accuracy to obtain the final image. In the traditional CT setting,
one assumes access to measurements collected from the full
range of views of an object, i.e. θ ∈ [0, 180◦ ], but increasingly newer techniques are being developed that can recover
images when a part of the views are missing, i.e. when
θ ∈ [0, θmax ], θmax < 180◦ . These are referred to as limited angle projections, and reconstruction in such cases is
highly ill-posed, as evidenced by the inferior performance
of existing methods.
Need for Limited Angle Scans: The advantage of such a
setup is that it can drastically reduce scan time by restricting the physical movement of the scanner. CT scans are
being used to study organs such as the heart, and objects
that are highly dynamic, implying that a slightly longer scan
time introduces a lot of blurring into the image [26, 8]. Further, the limited angle setting can help limit the area of the
16343

