Semantic Visual Localization
Johannes L. Schönberger1
1

Marc Pollefeys1,3

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich

2

Andreas Geiger1,2

Autonomous Vision Group, MPI Tübingen

{jsch,pomarc,sattlert}@inf.ethz.ch

1. Introduction
Visual localization is the problem of determining the
camera pose of one or multiple query images in a database
scene. This problem is highly relevant for a wide range of
applications, including autonomous robots [58] and augmented reality (AR) [32, 43], loop closure detection [18,
20, 81] and re-localization [38, 51] in SLAM [36, 46], and
Structure-from-Motion (SFM) [54, 57] systems.
There are three types of approaches to the localization
problem: Structure-based methods represent the scene by a
3D model and estimate the pose of a query image by directly
matching 2D features to 3D points [11, 37, 51, 66, 80] or by
matching 3D features to 3D points, if depth information is
available [30,81]. Image-based methods model the scene as
a database of images [14,18,53,65,68]. They use image retrieval techniques to identify the database images most relevant to the query, which are then used to estimate the pose
from 2D-3D matches. Learning-based methods represent
the scene by a learned model, which either predicts matches
for pose estimation [7, 8, 59, 69] or directly regresses the
pose [29, 70]. This paper follows the structure-based ap-

3

Microsoft

andreas.geiger@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Robust visual localization under a wide range of viewing conditions is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Handling the difficult cases of this problem is not
only very challenging but also of high practical relevance,
e.g., in the context of life-long localization for augmented
reality or autonomous robots. In this paper, we propose a
novel approach based on a joint 3D geometric and semantic understanding of the world, enabling it to succeed under
conditions where previous approaches failed. Our method
leverages a novel generative model for descriptor learning,
trained on semantic scene completion as an auxiliary task.
The resulting 3D descriptors are robust to missing observations by encoding high-level 3D geometric and semantic information. Experiments on several challenging large-scale
localization datasets demonstrate reliable localization under extreme viewpoint, illumination, and geometry changes.

Torsten Sattler1

Query Images

Semantic Map

Cross
Viewpoint
Database Image

Opposite

Orthogonal

Fall Morning

Winter Noon

Viewpoints

Summer
Evening

Cross
Time

Figure 1: We propose a semantic localization technique which is
able to match features over extreme appearance changes across
viewpoints and time. In this example, the database contains only
images captured in summer and from one particular viewpoint,
yet our method correctly localizes images with strong viewpoint,
illumination, and seasonal changes.

proach and represents the database scene by a semantic 3D
map. Given a query image together with its semantic segmentation and depth map, we construct a 3D semantic query
map from which we extract local descriptors. Using 3D-3D
matches between query and database descriptors, we align
the maps to obtain the query pose estimate.
All of the approaches, including ours, explicitly or implicitly measure the (visual or structural) similarity between
a query image and the database scene representation. Thus,
they assume that the query and database images depict the
scene under sufficiently similar conditions in viewpoint, illumination, and scene geometry. As shown in Fig. 1, these
assumptions are easily violated in practice. Different illumination within a single day causes strong variation in appearance while seasonal changes significantly affect the scene
geometry. Similarly, strong viewpoint changes lead to severe perspective distortion and often result in little structural
overlap between the query and the database. Yet, robustness
against such changes is important, e.g., for AR devices or
robots to re-localize robustly in a changing environment.
The main challenge in this setting is successful data association between the query and the database. Existing
image- and structure-based methods use local features designed to be discriminative, e.g., [30, 60, 61, 81], such that

6896

