Deep Cross-media Knowledge Transfer
Xin Huang and Yuxin Peng∗
Institute of Computer Science and Technology,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
huangxin 14@pku.edu.cn, pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-media retrieval is a research hotspot in multimedia area, which aims to perform retrieval across different
media types such as image and text. The performance of
existing methods usually relies on labeled data for model
training. However, cross-media data is very labor consuming to collect and label, so how to transfer valuable knowledge in existing data to new data is a key problem towards
application. For achieving the goal, this paper proposes
deep cross-media knowledge transfer (DCKT) approach,
which transfers knowledge from a large-scale cross-media
dataset to promote the model training on another smallscale cross-media dataset. The main contributions of DCKT
are: (1) Two-level transfer architecture is proposed to
jointly minimize the media-level and correlation-level domain discrepancies, which allows two important and complementary aspects of knowledge to be transferred: intramedia semantic and inter-media correlation knowledge. It
can enrich the training information and boost the retrieval
accuracy. (2) Progressive transfer mechanism is proposed to iteratively select training samples with ascending
transfer difficulties, via the metric of cross-media domain
consistency with adaptive feedback. It can drive the transfer
process to gradually reduce vast cross-media domain discrepancy, so as to enhance the robustness of model training.
For verifying the effectiveness of DCKT, we take the largescale dataset XMediaNet as source domain, and 3 widelyused datasets as target domain for cross-media retrieval.
Experimental results show that DCKT achieves promising
improvement on retrieval accuracy.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of computer and digital transition technology, multimedia data such as image, text,
video and audio can be found everywhere and exists as a
whole to reshape our lives. Human can naturally receive
∗ Corresponding author.

DNA studies have provided a
wide range of possible
divergence dates, from 15,000
to 40,000 years ago, to as
much as 100,000 to 140,000
years ago.
Horses were historically used
in warfare, from which a wide
variety of riding and driving
techniques developed, using
many different styles of
equipment and methods of
control.

The
size
of
horses varies by
breed, but also is
influenced
by
nutrition.

Query image

The domestic dog (Canis
lupus fami-liaris and
Canis lupus dingo) is a
domesticated form of the
gray wolf...

Query text

An animal 14.2 h
or over is usually
considered to be
a horse and one
less than 14.2 h a
pony.

Image query results
Some breeds
which typically
produce
individuals
both under and
over 14.2 h
consider
all
animals

Prior
to
this
Belgian discovery,
the earliest dog
fossils were two
large skulls from
Russia

The dog may have been the
first
animal
to
be
domesticated, and has been
the most widely kept
working,
hunting,
and
companion
animal
in
human history.

Cross-media data

Some estimates of
divergence
dates
from DNA evidence
use an estimated
wolf-coyote
divergence...
The word "dog"
may also mean the
male of a canine
species, as opposed
to the word "bitch"
for the female of the
species.

Text query results

Figure 1: An example of cross-media retrieval.

information from different sensory channels, such as vision
and auditory. However, it has been indicated that the importances of sensory channels differ among people, resulting
in different learning styles [6]. For example, when students
take in information with all the senses, such as seeing pictures and reading texts, they will have the highest efficiency
of studying [6]. If relevant multimedia data can be conveniently retrieved and provided, it will be very helpful to increase the efficiency of information acquisition for human.
Cross-media retrieval [28] is such a kind of technique
to flexibly provide data of different media types, with one
query of any media type. Figure 1 shows an example of
cross-media retrieval, which includes two media types: image and text. As a highlighting research hotspot, crossmedia retrieval has the advantage for realizing the coordination of different media types compared with traditional
single-media retrieval. To perform cross-media retrieval,
we have to deal with “heterogeneity gap”. This means
that different media types have inconsistent representation
forms, so the similarity of them cannot be directly measured
in their original feature spaces. Intuitively, the mainstream
methods of cross-media retrieval are common representation learning, which aim to project data of different media
types into an intermediate common space [10, 27, 35, 44].
Among them, deep neural network (DNN) based methods
have currently become an active topic, which take DNN

8837

