AVA: A Video Dataset of Spatio-temporally Localized Atomic Visual Actions
Chunhui Gu∗
Yeqing Li∗

Chen Sun∗
David A. Ross∗
Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan∗

Rahul Sukthankar∗

Carl Vondrick∗
George Toderici∗

Cordelia Schmid† ∗

Caroline Pantofaru∗
Susanna Ricco∗

Jitendra Malik‡ ∗

Abstract
This paper introduces a video dataset of spatiotemporally localized Atomic Visual Actions (AVA). The AVA
dataset densely annotates 80 atomic visual actions in 437
15-minute video clips, where actions are localized in space
and time, resulting in 1.59M action labels with multiple
labels per person occurring frequently. The key characteristics of our dataset are: (1) the definition of atomic
visual actions, rather than composite actions; (2) precise
spatio-temporal annotations with possibly multiple annotations for each person; (3) exhaustive annotation of these
atomic actions over 15-minute video clips; (4) people temporally linked across consecutive segments; and (5) using
movies to gather a varied set of action representations. This
departs from existing datasets for spatio-temporal action
recognition, which typically provide sparse annotations for
composite actions in short video clips.
AVA, with its realistic scene and action complexity, exposes the intrinsic difficulty of action recognition. To benchmark this, we present a novel approach for action localization that builds upon the current state-of-the-art methods, and demonstrates better performance on JHMDB and
UCF101-24 categories. While setting a new state of the art
on existing datasets, the overall results on AVA are low at
15.8% mAP, underscoring the need for developing new approaches for video understanding.

1. Introduction
We introduce a new annotated video dataset, AVA, to advance action recognition research (see Fig. 1). The annotation is person-centric at a sampling frequency of 1 Hz.
Every person is localized using a bounding box and the attached labels correspond to (possibly multiple) actions being performed by the actor: one action corresponding to
the actor’s pose (orange text) — standing, sitting, walking,
swimming etc. — and there may be additional actions corresponding to interactions with objects (red text) or inter∗ Google Research
† Inria, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, Grenoble, France
‡ University of California at Berkeley, USA

Figure 1. The bounding box and action annotations in sample
frames of the AVA dataset. Each bounding box is associated with
1 pose action (in orange), 0–3 interactions with objects (in red),
and 0–3 interactions with other people (in blue). Note that some
of these actions require temporal context to accurately label.

actions with other persons (blue text). Each person in a
frame containing multiple actors is labeled separately.
To label the actions performed by a person, a key choice
is the annotation vocabulary, which in turn is determined by
the temporal granularity at which actions are classified. We
use short segments (±1.5 seconds centered on a keyframe)
to provide temporal context for labeling the actions in the
middle frame. This enables the annotator to use movement cues for disambiguating actions such as pick up or put
down that cannot be resolved in a static frame. We keep the
temporal context relatively brief because we are interested
in (temporally) fine-scale annotation of physical actions,
which motivates “Atomic Visual Actions” (AVA). The vocabulary consists of 80 different atomic visual actions. Our
dataset is sourced from the 15th to 30th minute time intervals of 437 different movies, which given the 1 Hz sampling
frequency gives us 900 keyframes for each movie. In each
keyframe, every person is labeled with (possibly multiple)
actions from the AVA vocabulary. Each person is linked
to the consecutive keyframes to provide short temporal sequences of action labels (Section 4.3). We now motivate the

6047

