Learning and Using the Arrow of Time
Donglai Wei1 , Joseph Lim2 , Andrew Zisserman3 and William T. Freeman4,5
1
Harvard University 2 University of Southern California
3
University of Oxford 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 5 Google Research
donglai@seas.harvard.edu, limjj@usc.edu, az@robots.ox.ac.uk, billf@mit.edu

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Seeing these ordered frames from videos, can you tell whether each video is playing forward or backward? (answer
below1 ). Depending on the video, solving the task may require (a) low-level understanding (e.g. physics), (b) high-level
reasoning (e.g. semantics), or (c) familiarity with very subtle effects or with (d) camera conventions. In this work, we learn
and exploit several types of knowledge to predict the arrow of time automatically with neural network models trained on
large-scale video datasets.

Abstract
We seek to understand the arrow of time in videos – what
makes videos look like they are playing forwards or backwards? Can we visualize the cues? Can the arrow of time
be a supervisory signal useful for activity analysis? To this
end, we build three large-scale video datasets and apply a
learning-based approach to these tasks.
To learn the arrow of time efficiently and reliably, we design a ConvNet suitable for extended temporal footprints
and for class activation visualization, and study the effect of artificial cues, such as cinematographic conventions, on learning. Our trained model achieves state-of-theart performance on large-scale real-world video datasets.
Through cluster analysis and localization of important regions for the prediction, we examine learned visual cues
that are consistent among many samples and show when
and where they occur. Lastly, we use the trained ConvNet
for two applications: self-supervision for action recognition, and video forensics – determining whether Hollywood
film clips have been deliberately reversed in time, often used
as special effects.

1. Introduction
We seek to learn to see the arrow of time – to tell whether
a video sequence is playing forwards or backwards. At a
small scale, the world is reversible–the fundamental physics
equations are symmetric in time. Yet at a macroscopic scale,
time is often irreversible and we can identify certain motion
patterns (e.g., water flows downward) to tell the direction
of time. But this task can be challenging: some motion
patterns seem too subtle for human to determine if they are
playing forwards or backwards, as illustrated in Figure 1.
For example, it is possible for the train to move in either
direction with acceleration or deceleration (Figure 1d).
Furthermore, we are interested in how the arrow of time
manifests itself visually. We ask: first, can we train a reliable arrow of time classifier from large-scale natural videos
while avoiding artificial cues (i.e. cues introduced during
video production, not from the visual world); second, what
does the model learn about the visual world in order to solve
this task; and, last, can we apply such learned commonsense
knowledge to other video analysis tasks?
1 Forwards: (b), (c); backwards: (a), (d). Though in (d) the train can
move in either direction.

8052

