Towards Open-Set Identity Preserving Face Synthesis
Jianmin Bao1 , Dong Chen2 , Fang Wen2 , Houqiang Li1 , Gang Hua2
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Microsoft Research
jmbao@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{doch, fangwen, ganghua}@microsoft.com

lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
identity

We propose a framework based on Generative Adversarial Networks to disentangle the identity and attributes
of faces, such that we can conveniently recombine different identities and attributes for identity preserving face
synthesis in open domains. Previous identity preserving
face synthesis processes are largely confined to synthesizing faces with known identities that are already in the training dataset. To synthesize a face with identity outside the
training dataset, our framework requires one input image
of that subject to produce an identity vector, and any other input face image to extract an attribute vector capturing,
e.g., pose, emotion, illumination, and even the background.
We then recombine the identity vector and the attribute vector to synthesize a new face of the subject with the extracted
attribute. Our proposed framework does not need to annotate the attributes of faces in any way. It is trained with an
asymmetric loss function to better preserve the identity and
stabilize the training process. It can also effectively leverage large amounts of unlabeled training face images to further improve the fidelity of the synthesized faces for subjects
that are not presented in the labeled training face dataset.
Our experiments demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed
framework. We also present its usage in a much broader set
of applications including face frontalization, face attribute
morphing, and face adversarial example detection.

1. Introduction
Realistic face image synthesis has many real-world applications, such as face super-resolution, frontalization, and
morphing, among others. With the emergence of deep generative models, such as the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [10] and the Variational Auto-encoder [16],
we have made tremendous progress in building deep networks for synthesizing realistic faces [34, 19, 33, 19]. However, identity preserving face synthesis remains a challenge,
especially when the identity of the face is not presented among the training face images.
Many previous works have attempted to synthesize face

(input)

(output)

identity

(input)

(output)

Figure 1. Our method can disentangle identity and attributes from
a single face image. With the extracted identity and attributes from
two input images A and B, we can generate two new face images
A′ and B ′ by recombining the identities and attributes.

images of a specific person. For example, TP-GAN [14]
and FF-GAN [36] attempt to synthesize the frontal view of
a face from a single face image. DR-GAN [33] can change
the pose of an input face image. However, these methods
can only manipulate limited types of attributes, such as poses. These methods also require full annotation of attributes
for training the models. More recent work, such as CVAEGAN [4], can produce a variety of attribute changes. Nevertheless, it is not able to synthesize a face with an identity
outside the training dataset.
In view of the limitation of CVAE-GAN, we attempt to
solve the problem of open-set identity preserving face synthesis. Our goal is to be able to synthesize face images with
any specific identity, no matter if the identity is presented
in the training dataset or not. To synthesize a face with an
identity outside the training dataset, we require one input
image of that subject to prodce an identity vector, and any
other input face image to extract an attribute vector capturing, e.g., pose, emotion, illumination, and even background.
We then combine the identity vector and the attribute vector
to synthesize a new face of the subject with the extracted
attribute.
To this end, we propose a framework based on Generative Adversarial Networks to disentangle identity and attributes given a face image, and recombine different identities and attributes for identity preserving face synthesis.
16713

