Dynamic Few-Shot Visual Learning without Forgetting
Spyros Gidaris
University Paris-Est, LIGM
Ecole des Ponts ParisTech

Nikos Komodakis
University Paris-Est, LIGM
Ecole des Ponts ParisTech

spyros.gidaris@enpc.fr

nikos.komodakis@enpc.fr

Abstract
The human visual system has the remarkably ability to
be able to effortlessly learn novel concepts from only a few
examples. Mimicking the same behavior on machine learning vision systems is an interesting and very challenging
research problem with many practical advantages on real
world vision applications. In this context, the goal of our
work is to devise a few-shot visual learning system that
during test time it will be able to efficiently learn novel categories from only a few training data while at the same
time it will not forget the initial categories on which it was
trained (here called base categories). To achieve that goal
we propose (a) to extend an object recognition system with
an attention based few-shot classification weight generator,
and (b) to redesign the classifier of a ConvNet model as the
cosine similarity function between feature representations
and classification weight vectors. The latter, apart from unifying the recognition of both novel and base categories, it
also leads to feature representations that generalize better on
“unseen” categories. We extensively evaluate our approach on
Mini-ImageNet where we manage to improve the prior stateof-the-art on few-shot recognition (i.e., we achieve 56.20%
and 73.00% on the 1-shot and 5-shot settings respectively)
while at the same time we do not sacrifice any accuracy
on the base categories, which is a characteristic that most
prior approaches lack. Finally, we apply our approach on
the recently introduced few-shot benchmark of Bharath and
Girshick [4] where we also achieve state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, deep convolutional neural networks [9, 21, 23, 5] (ConvNets) have achieved impressive
results on image classification tasks, such as object recognition [18] or scene classification [27]. In order for a ConvNet
This work was supported by the ANR SEMAPOLIS project, an INTEL
gift, and hardware donation by NVIDIA.

to successfully learn to recognize a set of visual categories
(e.g., object categories or scene types), it requires to manually collect and label thousands of training examples per
target category and to apply on them an iterative gradient
based optimization routine [10] that is extremely computationally expensive, e.g., it can consume hundreds or even
thousands of GPU hours. Moreover, the set of categories that
the ConvNet model can recognize remains fixed after training. In case we would like to expand the set of categories
that the ConvNet can recognize, then we need to collect training data for the novel categories (i.e., those that they were
not in the initial training set) and restart the aforementioned
computationally costly training procedure this time on the
enhanced training set such that we will avoid catastrophic
interference. Even more, it is of crucial importance to have
enough training data for the novel categories (e.g., thousands
of examples per category) otherwise we risk overfitting on
them.
In contrast, the human visual system exhibits the remarkably ability to be able to effortlessly learn novel concepts
from only one or a few examples and reliably recognize them
later on. It is assumed that the reason the human visual
system is so efficient when learning novel concepts is that it
exploits its past experiences about the (visual) world. For example, a child, having accumulated enough knowledge about
mammal animals and in general the visual world, can easily
learn and generalize the visual concept of “rhinoceros” from
only a single image. Mimicking that behavior on artificial vision systems is an interesting and very challenging research
problem with many practical advantages, such as developing
real-time interactive vision applications for portable devices
(e.g., cell-phones).
Research on this subject is usually termed few-shot learning. However, most prior methods neglect to fulfill two very
important requirements for a good few-shot learning system:
(a) the learning of the novel categories needs to be fast, and
(b) to not sacrifice any recognition accuracy on the initial
categories that the ConvNet was trained on, i.e., to not “forget” (from now on we will refer to those initial categories by
calling them base categories). Motivated by this observation,

4367

