Learning Multi-Instance Enriched Image Representations via Non-Greedy Ratio
Maximization of the ℓ1 -Norm Distances
Kai Liu† , Hua Wang†∗, Feiping Nie‡ , Hao Zhang†
Department of Computer Science, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, Colorado 80401, U.S.A.
‡
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P. R. China
†

kaliu@mines.edu, huawangcs@gmail.com, feipingnie@gmail.com, hzhang@mines.edu

Abstract
Multi-instance learning (MIL) has demonstrated its usefulness in many real-world image applications in recent
years. However, two critical challenges prevent one from effectively using MIL in practice. First, existing MIL methods
routinely model the predictive targets using the instances of
input images, but rarely utilize an input image as a whole.
As a result, the useful information conveyed by the holistic
representation of an input image could be potentially lost.
Second, the varied numbers of the instances of the input images in a data set make it infeasible to use traditional learning models that can only deal with single-vector inputs. To
tackle these two challenges, in this paper we propose a novel image representation learning method that can integrate
the local patches (the instances) of an input image (the bag)
and its holistic representation into one single-vector representation. Our new method first learns a projection to preserve both global and local consistencies of the instances of
an input image. It then projects the holistic representation
of the same image into the learned subspace for information
enrichment. Taking into account the content and characterization variations in natural scenes and photos, we develop
an objective that maximizes the ratio of the summations of
a number of ℓ1 -norm distances, which is difficult to solve
in general. To solve our objective, we derive a new efficient
non-greedy iterative algorithm and rigorously prove its convergence. Promising results in extensive experiments have
demonstrated improved performances of our new method
that validate its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Learning images representations plays an important role
in many real-world applications due to the overwhelming
∗ Corresponding author. This work was partially supported by NSF-IIS
1423591 and NSF-IIS 1652943.

amount of images and videos nowadays brought by modern
technologies. Recently, image representation techniques
using semi-local, or patch-based, features, such as SIFT and
geometric blur, have demonstrated some of the best performance in image retrieval and object recognition applications. These algorithms choose a set of patches in an image, and
for each patch compute a fixed-length feature vector. This
gives a set of vectors per image, where the size of the set can
vary from image to image. Armed with these patch-based
features, image categorization and retrieval are recently formulated as a multi-instance learning (MIL) problem with
improved retrieval, indexing and annotation performances
[19, 3, 40, 30, 28, 31]. Under the framework of MIL, an
image is viewed as a bag, which contains a number of instances corresponding to the patches in the image. For example, in the image in Figure 1 there exist a total of four
patches (surrounded by the yellow bounding boxes) that
represent a set of four different objects, including a car, a
bicycle, and two persons (one person is riding the bicycle
and the other one is standing aside). The image thereby is
a bag and each of the four patches, represented as a vector, in the image is consider as an instance. If any of these
instances is related to a semantic concept, the entire image
will be annotated with the corresponding semantic label.
Despite a number of successes in applying MIL in image learning, there exist two critical challenges that prevent
one from effectively using available visual information in
an image as much as possible.
First, most, if not all, existing MIL methods only use
the instances of an input image to model the semantic concepts, but not the entire image. For example, when a MIL
method [19, 3, 40, 30, 28, 31, 24, 35, 38] is used to study
the image in Figure 1, only the four instances are associated with some semantic concepts. However, these four
patches only occupy a small percent of the area of the entire image, while the remained areas of the image that are
outside of the yellow bounding boxes are completely dis-

7727

