DiverseNet: When One Right Answer is not Enough
Michael Firman 1*

Neill D. F. Campbell 2
Lourdes Agapito 1
Gabriel J. Brostow 1*
1
2
University College London
University of Bath
http://visual.cs.ucl.ac.uk/pubs/DiverseNet

Abstract
Many structured prediction tasks in machine vision have
a collection of acceptable answers, instead of one definitive
ground truth answer. Segmentation of images, for example,
is subject to human labeling bias. Similarly, there are multiple possible pixel values that could plausibly complete occluded image regions. State-of-the art supervised learning
methods are typically optimized to make a single test-time
prediction for each query, failing to find other modes in the
output space. Existing methods that allow for sampling often sacrifice speed or accuracy.
We introduce a simple method for training a neural network, which enables diverse structured predictions to be
made for each test-time query. For a single input, we learn
to predict a range of possible answers. We compare favorably to methods that seek diversity through an ensemble of
networks. Such stochastic multiple choice learning faces
mode collapse, where one or more ensemble members fail
to receive any training signal. Our best performing solution can be deployed for various tasks, and just involves
small modifications to the existing single-mode architecture, loss function, and training regime. We demonstrate
that our method results in quantitative improvements across
three challenging tasks: 2D image completion, 3D volume
estimation, and flow prediction.

1. Introduction
Computer vision systems are typically trained to make
a single output prediction from a given input. However, in
many cases, there is more than one correct answer. Consider the case of 3D projection in Figure 1. We wish to infer
what 3D shape projected to form a given 2D silhouette. The
training data suggests that there should be more than one answer: some users identify the circle as being produced by a
sphere, while others hypothesized different sized cylinders,
viewed head-on. We assert that each of these interpretations is correct, and, depending on the application scenario,
different outputs may be required. However, a typical neu∗ MF is now with Niantic, Inc. GB is now with UCL and Niantic, Inc.

Possible
interpretations

2D Image

(a) Many prediction tasks have ambiguous interpretations. For example,
giving a 2D rendering to a human, there are different possible 3D interpretations.
CNN

DiverseNet

c = {0, 1, 2, … }

(b) Standard CNNs trained under multi-modal labels tend to blur together
or ignore the distinct modes. We introduce a modification to standard neural networks that gives the user a control parameter c. Different values of
c produce diverse structured outputs for the same input.

Figure 1: Our easy modification enhances typical loss functions,
producing networks that predict multiple good answers, not just
one best-majority-fit output. Access to “minority” outputs is especially useful in applications dealing with ambiguous completions
or human preferences.

ral network predictor might make a single prediction which
averages together the modes present (Figure 1(b), top).
While many machine learning systems are able to produce samples at test time (e.g. [9, 17, 34]), we propose a
method which explicitly exploits diversity in training labels
to learn how to make a range of possible structured predictions at test time. Our system is an add-on modification
of the loss function and training schedule that is compati15598

