OLÉ: Orthogonal Low-rank Embedding,
A Plug and Play Geometric Loss for Deep Learning
José Lezama1∗
1

Qiang Qiu2

Pablo Musé1

IIE, Universidad de la República, Uruguay

Abstract
Deep neural networks trained using a softmax layer at
the top and the cross-entropy loss are ubiquitous tools for
image classification. Yet, this does not naturally enforce
intra-class similarity nor inter-class margin of the learned
deep representations. To simultaneously achieve these two
goals, different solutions have been proposed in the literature, such as the pairwise or triplet losses. However, these
carry the extra task of selecting pairs or triplets, and the
extra computational burden of computing and learning for
many combinations of them. In this paper, we propose a
plug-and-play loss term for deep networks that explicitly
reduces intra-class variance and enforces inter-class margin simultaneously, in a simple and elegant geometric manner. For each class, the deep features are collapsed into a
learned linear subspace, or union of them, and inter-class
subspaces are pushed to be as orthogonal as possible. Our
proposed Orthogonal Low-rank Embedding (OLÉ) does not
require carefully crafting pairs or triplets of samples for
training, and works standalone as a classification loss, being the first reported deep metric learning framework of its
kind. Because of the improved margin between features of
different classes, the resulting deep networks generalize better, are more discriminative, and more robust. We demonstrate improved classification performance in general object recognition, plugging the proposed loss term into existing off-the-shelf architectures. In particular, we show the
advantage of the proposed loss in the small data/model scenario, and we significantly advance the state-of-the-art on
the Stanford STL-10 benchmark.

1. Introduction
In the last few years the representational power of Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) has been thoroughly demonstrated, with impressive results in learning useful representations for difficult tasks such as object classification
∗ Corresponding author jlezama@fing.edu.uy

2

Guillermo Sapiro2

ECE, Duke University, USA

and detection [9, 11, 14, 18, 32] and face identification
and verification [25, 31, 38], to name just a few examples. DNNs typically consist of a sequence of convolutional and/or fully-connected layers with non-linear activation functions, which produce a “deep” feature vector,
which is then classified in the last layer with a linear classifier [11, 14, 18, 32]. This linear classifier typically uses
the softmax function with the cross-entropy loss. The combination of these two will be referred to as softmax loss in
the rest of this article. The layer previous to the last linear
classifier will be referred to as the deep feature layer.
Training a DNN with the standard softmax loss does not
explicitly enforce an embedding of the learned deep features where samples of the same class are closer together
and further away from other classes. To improve the discrimination power of deep neural networks, previous approaches have tried to enforce such an embedding via auxiliary supervisory loss functions [19] acting on the Euclidean
distances between the deep features [1, 8, 13, 31, 33, 38].
Such metric learning techniques are particularly popular in
the face identification domain, with its two most representative examples being the pairwise loss [8] and the triplet
loss [31]. The drawback with these approaches is that they
require the careful selection of pairs or triplets of samples,
as well as extra data processing. More recently, methods
have been proposed to overcome this limitation by enforcing intra-class compactness of the representations inside
each random training minibatch, [20, 21, 38].
In this work we propose to improve the discriminability
of a neural network by a simple and elegant plug-and-play
loss term that, acting on the deep feature layer, encourages
the learned deep features of the same class to lie in a linear subspace (or union of them), and at the same time that
inter-class subspaces are orthogonal, see Figs. 1, 2. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first time a deep learning
framework is proposed that simultaneously reduces intraclass variance and increases inter-class margin, without requiring pair or triplet selection.
Our intuition is based on the following observations.
First, that the decision boundary for the softmax loss is de18109

