Two can play this Game: Visual Dialog with Discriminative Question Generation
and Answering
Unnat Jain
UIUC

Svetlana Lazebnik
UIUC

Alexander Schwing
UIUC

uj2@illinois.edu

slazebni@illinois.edu

aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract
Human conversation is a complex mechanism with subtle
nuances. It is hence an ambitious goal to develop artificial
intelligence agents that can participate fluently in a conversation. While we are still far from achieving this goal, recent progress in visual question answering, image captioning, and visual question generation shows that dialog systems may be realizable in the not too distant future. To this
end, a novel dataset was introduced recently and encouraging results were demonstrated, particularly for question
answering. In this paper, we demonstrate a simple symmetric discriminative baseline, that can be applied to both
predicting an answer as well as predicting a question. We
show that this method performs on par with the state of the
art, even memory net based methods. In addition, for the
first time on the visual dialog dataset, we assess the performance of a system asking questions, and demonstrate how
visual dialog can be generated from discriminative question
generation and question answering.

1. Introduction
Human conversation is a complex mechanism with the
intent to exchange information between at least two people.
It is often very subtle and nuances are particularly important. It is hence an ambitious goal to develop artificial intelligence based agents for human-computer conversation
about visual observations, that goes far beyond development of a simple question-answer mechanism.
Nonetheless, to obtain a basic understanding about how
to construct artificial intelligence powered agents for conversation about visual observations, it is important to develop early prototypes using dialogues containing questions
and answers. In a recent effort to facilitate this task, Das et
al. [6] collected, curated and provided to the general public an impressive dataset which allows to design virtual assistants that can converse. Different from image captioning
datasets, such as MSCOCO [21], or visual question answering datasets, such as VQA [2], the visual dialog dataset [6]
contains short dialogues about a scene between two people. To direct the dialogue, the dataset was constructed by
showing a caption to the first person (‘questioner’) to inquire more about the hidden image. The second person
(‘answerer’) could see both the image and it’s caption to

Figure 1: Visual dialog as a combination of two complementary tasks: (1) predicting a contextual answer to a given
question (VisDial [6]); (2) predicting a contextual follow-up
question to a given question-answer pair (VisDial-Q).
provide answers to these questions.
Beyond providing the Visual Dialog dataset (VisDial), to
facilitate a fair comparison, Das et al. [6] suggest a concrete
task that can be evaluated precisely. It requires the AI system to predict the next answer given the image, the question,
and a history of question-answer pairs. A variety of discriminative and generative techniques were proposed, ranging
from those based on Long-Short-Term-Memory (LSTM)
units [12] to reasonably complex ones, which make use of
memory nets [4] and hierarchical LSTM architectures.
In this paper we develop a deep net architecture that predicts an answer given a question, a caption, an image, and

5754

