Deep Regression Forests for Age Estimation
Wei Shen1,2 , Yilu Guo1 , Yan Wang2 , Kai Zhao3 , Bo Wang4 , Alan Yuille2
1
Key Laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Optical Access Networks,
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science,
School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University
2
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
3
College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University 4 Hikvision Research
{shenwei1231,gyl.luan0,wyanny.9,zhaok1206,wangbo.yunze,alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Abstract

Age 36

Age 50

(a)

Age estimation from facial images is typically cast as
a nonlinear regression problem. The main challenge of
this problem is the facial feature space w.r.t. ages is inhomogeneous, due to the large variation in facial appearance across different persons of the same age and the nonstationary property of aging patterns. In this paper, we propose Deep Regression Forests (DRFs), an end-to-end model, for age estimation. DRFs connect the split nodes to a
fully connected layer of a convolutional neural network (CNN) and deal with inhomogeneous data by jointly learning
input-dependant data partitions at the split nodes and data
abstractions at the leaf nodes. This joint learning follows
an alternating strategy: First, by fixing the leaf nodes, the
split nodes as well as the CNN parameters are optimized
by Back-propagation; Then, by fixing the split nodes, the
leaf nodes are optimized by iterating a step-size free update
rule derived from Variational Bounding. We verify the proposed DRFs on three standard age estimation benchmarks
and achieve state-of-the-art results on all of them.

1. Introduction
There has been a growing interest in age estimation from
facial images, driven by the increasing demands for a variety of potential applications in forensic research [2], security control [24], human-computer interaction (HCI) [24]
and social media [46]. Although this problem has been extensively studied, the ability to automatically estimate ages
accurately and reliably from facial images is still far from
meeting human performance.
There are two kinds of age estimation tasks. One is real
age estimation, which is to estimate the precise biological
(chronological) age of a person from his or her facial image; the other is age group estimation [37], which is to predict whether a person’s age falls within some range rather

Age

3

6

8

12

17

18

19

25

28

32

40

43

48

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The large variation in facial appearance across different persons of the same age. (b) Facial images of a person from
childhood to adulthood. Note that, Facial aging effects appear as
changes in the shape of the face during childhood and changes in
skin texture during adulthood, respectively.

than predicting the real chronological age. In this paper, we
focus on the first task, i.e., precise age regression. To address this problem, the key is to learn a nonlinear mapping
function between facial image features and the real chronological age. However, to learn such a mapping is challenging. The main difficulty is the facial feature space w.r.t.
ages is inhomogeneous, due to two facts: 1) there is a large
variation in facial appearance across different persons of the
same age (Fig. 1(a)); 2) the human face matures in different
ways at different ages, e.g., bone growth in childhood and
skin wrinkles in adulthood [43] (Fig. 1(b)).
To model such inhomogeneous data, existing age estimation methods either find a kernel-based global nonlinear mapping [23, 20], or apply divide-and-conquer strategies to partition the data space and learn multiple local regressors [25]. However, each of them has drawbacks: Learning non-stationary kernels is inevitably biased by
the inhomogeneous data distribution and thus easily causes over-fitting [5]; Divide-and-conquer is a good strategy
to learn the non-stationary age changes in human faces,
but the existing methods make hard partitions according to
ages [26, 25]. Consequently, they may not find homogeneous subsets for learning local regressors [29].
To address the above-mentioned challenges, we propose
differentiable regression forests for age estimation. Random forests or randomized decision trees [3, 4, 12], are
a popular ensemble predictive model, in which each tree

2304

