Efficient parametrization of multi-domain deep neural networks
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi1

Hakan Bilen2

1

Andrea Vedaldi1
2

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
{srebuffi,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
hbilen@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
A practical limitation of deep neural networks is their
high degree of specialization to a single task and visual domain. Recently, inspired by the successes of transfer learning, several authors have proposed to learn instead universal feature extractors that, used as the first stage of any
deep network, work well for several tasks and domains simultaneously. Nevertheless, such universal features are still
somewhat inferior to specialized networks.
To overcome this limitation, in this paper we propose
to consider instead universal parametric families of neural
networks, which still contain specialized problem-specific
models, but differing only by a small number of parameters.
We study different designs for such parametrizations, including series and parallel residual adapters, joint adapter
compression, and parameter allocations, and empirically
identify the ones that yield the highest compression. We
show that, in order to maximize performance, it is necessary
to adapt both shallow and deep layers of a deep network,
but the required changes are very small. We also show that
these universal parametrization are very effective for transfer learning, where they outperform traditional fine-tuning
techniques.

1. Introduction
As deep neural networks continue to dramatically improve results in almost all traditional problems in computer
vision, the interest of the community has started to shift
towards more ambitious goals. One of them is to supersede the common paradigm of addressing different image
understanding problems independently, using ad-hoc solutions and learning different and largely incompatible models for each of them. Just like the human brain is capable
of addressing a very large number of different image analysis tasks, so it should be possible to develop models that
address well and efficiently a variety of different computer
vision problems, with better efficiency and generalization

|

{z

(a) universal parametric family

} |

{z

(b) universal feature extractor

}

Figure 1: Universal parametric network families. We develop compact parametric families of neural networks (a)
that can target very different visual domains, from ImageNet to stop signs and characters, while sharing the vast
majority of their parameters w. Domain-specific parameters αt are isolated in small modular adapters that can be attached to an existing network to steer it non-disruptively to
different domains and enable efficient model storage, transfer, and exchange, as well as transfer learning. Parametric
families are shown empirically to be much more powerful
than sharing a fixed universal feature extractor as in (b).
than individual networks.
There are at least three aspects to this challenge. The
first is to construct a multi-task model that can extract
multiple types of information from an image, performing
class/object detection and segmentation, boundary extraction, motion estimation, etc. [14]. The second is to develop
a multi-domain model that can work well for many different
visual domains, such as Internet images, scene text, medical images, satellite images, driving images, etc [3, 23]. The

8119

