SfSNet: Learning Shape, Reflectance and Illuminance of Faces ‘in the wild’
Soumyadip Sengupta1 , Angjoo Kanazawa2 , Carlos D. Castillo1 , and David W. Jacobs1
1

University of Maryland, College Park, 2 University of California, Berkeley.

Input

Abstract

1. Introduction
In this work, we propose a method to decompose unconstrained real world faces into shape, reflectance and illuminance assuming lambertian reflectance. This decomposition or inverse rendering is a classical and fundamental
problem in computer vision [32, 22, 21, 2]. It allows one to
edit an image, for example with re-lighting and light transfer [37]. Inverse rendering also has potential applications
in Augmented Reality, where it is important to understand
the illumination and reflectance of a human face. A major
obstacle in solving this decomposition or any of its individual components for real images is the limited availability
of ground-truth training data. Even though it is possible to
collect real world facial shapes, it is extremely difficult to
build a dataset of reflectance and illuminance of images in
the wild at a large scale. Previous works have attempted to
learn surface normal from synthetic data [35, 28], which often performs imperfectly in the presence of real world variations like illumination and expression. Supervised learning
can generalize poorly if real test data comes from a different
distribution than the synthetic training data.

Shading

Albedo

Reconstruction

SfSNet

Synthetic

Training Data

We present SfSNet, an end-to-end learning framework
for producing an accurate decomposition of an unconstrained human face image into shape, reflectance and illuminance. SfSNet is designed to reflect a physical lambertian
rendering model. SfSNet learns from a mixture of labeled
synthetic and unlabeled real world images. This allows
the network to capture low frequency variations from synthetic and high frequency details from real images through
the photometric reconstruction loss. SfSNet consists of a
new decomposition architecture with residual blocks that
learns a complete separation of albedo and normal. This
is used along with the original image to predict lighting. SfSNet produces significantly better quantitative and qualitative results than state-of-the-art methods for inverse rendering and independent normal and illumination estimation.

Normal

+
Real

Relit Images

Figure 1: Decomposing real world faces into shape, reflectance and illuminance. We present SfSNet that learns from
a combination of labeled synthetic and unlabeled real data to produce an accurate decomposition of an image into surface normals,
albedo and lighting. Relit images are shown to highlight the accuracy of the decomposition. (Best viewed in color)

We propose a solution to this challenge by jointly learning all intrinsic components of the decomposition from real
data. In the absence of ground-truth supervision for real
data, photometric reconstruction loss can be used to validate
the decomposition. This photometric consistency between
the original image and inferred normal, albedo and illuminance provide strong cues for inverse rendering. However
it is not possible to learn from real images only with reconstruction loss, as this may cause the individual components to collapse on each other and produce trivial solutions.
Thus, a natural step forward is to get the best of both worlds
by simultaneously using supervised data when available and
real world data with reconstruction loss in their absence. To
this end we propose a training paradigm ‘SfS-supervision’.
To achieve this goal we propose a novel deep architecture
called SfSNet, which attempts to mimic the physical model
of lambertian image generation while learning from a mixture of labeled synthetic and unlabeled real world images.
16296

