Motion-Appearance Co-Memory Networks for Video Question Answering
Jiyang Gao∗

Runzhou Ge∗ Kan Chen Ram Nevatia
University of Southern California

{jiyangga, rge, kanchen, nevatia}@usc.edu

Attention

Question: What does the woman do after look uncertain? Answer: smile

Time
App. Att.
Motion Att.

1st Pass

App. Att.
Motion Att.

2nd Pass

Figure 1. Answering questions in videos involves both motion and appearance analysis, and usually requires multiple cycles of reasoning,
especially for transitive questions, e.g. “ What does the woman do after look uncertain?”, we need to first localize when the woman looks
uncertain, which requires motion evidence for looking uncertain and appearance evidence for the woman; and then focus on what the
woman does (smile).

1. Introduction
Abstract
Video Question Answering (QA) is an important task in
understanding video temporal structure. We observe that
there are three unique attributes of video QA compared with
image QA: (1) it deals with long sequences of images containing richer information not only in quantity but also in
variety; (2) motion and appearance information are usually correlated with each other and able to provide useful
attention cues to the other; (3) different questions require
different number of frames to infer the answer. Based on
these observations, we propose a motion-appearance comemory network for video QA. Our networks are built on
concepts from Dynamic Memory Network (DMN) and introduces new mechanisms for video QA. Specifically, there
are three salient aspects: (1) a co-memory attention mechanism that utilizes cues from both motion and appearance
to generate attention; (2) a temporal conv-deconv network
to generate multi-level contextual facts; (3) a dynamic fact
ensemble method to construct temporal representation dynamically for different questions. We evaluate our method
on TGIF-QA dataset, and the results outperform state-ofthe-art significantly on all four tasks of TGIF-QA.

∗ indicates equal contributions.

Understanding video temporal structure is an important
topic in computer vision. To achieve this goal, various
tasks have been proposed, such as temporal action localization [29, 10], action anticipation [11] and video prediction
[32]. Besides these tasks, video Question Answering (QA)
[16, 30] is another challenging task, which not only requires
the understanding of video temporal structure, but also joint
reasoning of videos and texts. In this paper, we tackle the
problem of video QA.
Image and text question answering have achieved much
progress recently. The success comes in part from the application of attention mechanisms [37, 21] and memory mechanisms [20] in deep neural networks. Attention mechanisms
tell the neural network “where to look”, while the memory mechanism refines answers in multiple reasoning cycles. Video QA is different from image QA [23, 21] in two
aspects: (1) the questions are more about temporal reasoning of the videos, e.g. motion transition and action counting, than spatial attributes, such as colors, spatial locations,
which require effective temporal representation modeling;
(2) the input source is a sequence of images, rather than a
single image, which contains richer information not only in
quantity but also in variety (appearance, motion, transition)
to “remember”, and it makes the reasoning process more
complicated.
Dynamic Memory Networks (DMN) [20, 33] were orig16576

