Future Person Localization in First-Person Videos
Takuma Yagi
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

Karttikeya Mangalam
Indian Institute of Technology
Kanpur, India

Ryo Yonetani
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

tyagi@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

mangalam@iitk.ac.in

yonetani@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yoichi Sato
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
ysato@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We present a new task that predicts future locations of
people observed in first-person videos. Consider a firstperson video stream continuously recorded by a wearable
camera. Given a short clip of a person that is extracted
from the complete stream, we aim to predict that person’s
location in future frames. To facilitate this future person
localization ability, we make the following three key observations: a) First-person videos typically involve significant ego-motion which greatly affects the location of the
target person in future frames; b) Scales of the target person act as a salient cue to estimate a perspective effect
in first-person videos; c) First-person videos often capture
people up-close, making it easier to leverage target poses
(e.g., where they look) for predicting their future locations.
We incorporate these three observations into a prediction
framework with a multi-stream convolution-deconvolution
architecture. Experimental results reveal our method to be
effective on our new dataset as well as on a public social
interaction dataset.

1. Introduction
Assistive technologies are attracting increasing attention
as a promising application of first-person vision — computer vision using wearable cameras such as Google Glass
and GoPro HERO. Much like how we use our eyes, firstperson vision techniques can act as an artificial visual system that perceives the world around camera wearers and assist them to decide on what to do next. Recent work has
focused on a variety of assistive technologies such as blind
navigation [20, 39], object echo-location [38], and person-

Past
locations
Pose
Future
locations
Ego-motion

Figure 1. Future Person Localization. Given a first-person video
of a certain target person, our network predicts where the target
person will be located in the future frames based on the poses
and scales of the person as well as the ego-motions of the camera wearer.

alized object recognition [15].
In this work, we are particularly interested in helping
a user to navigate in crowded places with many people
present in the user’s vicinity. Consider a first-person video
stream that a user records with a wearable camera. By observing people in certain frames and predicting how they
move subsequently, we would be able to guide the user to
avoid collisions. As the first step to realizing such safe navigation technologies in a crowded place, this work proposes
a new task that predicts locations of people in future frames,
i.e., future person localization, in first-person videos as illustrated in Figure 11 .
In order to enable future person localization, this work
makes three key observations. First, ego-motion of a camera wearer is clearly observed in the form of global motion
of first-person videos. This ego-motion should be incorporated in the prediction framework as it greatly affects fu1 Parts of faces in the paper were blurred for preserving privacy.

7593

