Dynamic Scene Deblurring Using Spatially Variant Recurrent Neural Networks
Jiawei Zhang1,2∗ Jinshan Pan3† Jimmy Ren2 Yibing Song4
Linchao Bao4 Rynson W.H. Lau1 Ming-Hsuan Yang5
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
4
Tencent AI Lab 5 Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Merced
Abstract
Due to the spatially variant blur caused by camera shake
and object motions under different scene depths, deblurring
images captured from dynamic scenes is challenging. Although recent works based on deep neural networks have
shown great progress on this problem, their models are usually large and computationally expensive. In this paper, we
propose a novel spatially variant neural network to address
the problem. The proposed network is composed of three
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and a recurrent
neural network (RNN). RNN is used as a deconvolution operator performed on feature maps extracted from the input
image by one of the CNNs. Another CNN is used to learn the
weights for the RNN at every location. As a result, the RNN
is spatially variant and could implicitly model the deblurring process with spatially variant kernels. The third CNN
is used to reconstruct the final deblurred feature maps into
restored image. The whole network is end-to-end trainable.
Our analysis shows that the proposed network has a large
receptive field even with a small model size. Quantitative
and qualitative evaluations on public datasets demonstrate
that the proposed method performs favorably against stateof-the-art algorithms in terms of accuracy, speed, and model
size.

1. Introduction
Motion blur, which is caused by camera shake and object
motions, is one of the most common problems when taking
pictures. The community has made active research efforts on
this classical problem in the last decade. However, restoring
a clean image from blurry one is difficult since it is a highly
ill-posed problem. Most existing algorithms assume the blur
to be caused by camera motions, such as translation and
rotation. However, this assumption does not always hold for
dynamic scenes, which contain object motions and abrupt
depth variations (e.g., Figure 1).
Existing dynamic scene deblurring algorithms [9, 10, 23]
∗ email: zhjw1988@gmail.com
† Corresponding author

(a) Blurry image

(b) Nah et al. [21]

(c) Ours

(d) Clean image

Figure 1. A challenging dynamic scene blurry example where the
blur is caused by both camera shake and object motion. As the
blur is spatially variant, conventional CNN-based methods (which
usually adopt convolution and non-linear activation operations, e.g.,
Nah et al. [21] to approximate this problem) do not handle this
problem well. Our method is based on a spatially variant RNNs,
which is able to model the spatially variant property, capture a
larger receptive field, and thus generate a much clearer image.

usually need segmentation methods to help the deblurring
process. However, these methods heavily depend on an accurate segmentation. In addition, the deblurring process is
time-consuming as highly non-convex optimization problems should be solved.
Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have been applied to dynamic scene deblurring [33, 7, 21,
22]. Unlike conventional algorithms that involve a complex
blur kernel estimation process, these CNN-based methods
either predict pixel-wise blur kernels or directly restore clear
images from blurred inputs. However, existing CNN-based
methods have two major problems. The first one is that
weights of the CNN are spatially invariant. It is hard to use
a CNN with a small model size to approximate the dynamic
scene deblurring problem, which has the spatially variant
property (see Figure 1). The second one is that large image
regions should be used to increase the receptive field even
though the blur is small. This inevitably leads to a network
with a large model size and a high computation cost. Thus,
there is a need to develop an effective network with a small
model size and large receptive field to restore clear images
from blurred dynamic scenes.
In this paper, we propose a spatially variant recurrent

2521

