Differential Attention for Visual Question Answering
Badri Patro and Vinay P. Namboodiri
IIT Kanpur
{ badri,vinaypn }@iitk.ac.in

Abstract
In this paper we aim to answer questions based on images when provided with a dataset of question-answer pairs
for a number of images during training. A number of methods have focused on solving this problem by using image
based attention. This is done by focusing on a specific part
of the image while answering the question. Humans also
do so when solving this problem. However, the regions that
the previous systems focus on are not correlated with the
regions that humans focus on. The accuracy is limited due
to this drawback. In this paper, we propose to solve this
problem by using an exemplar based method. We obtain
one or more supporting and opposing exemplars to obtain
a differential attention region. This differential attention is
closer to human attention than other image based attention
methods. It also helps in obtaining improved accuracy when
answering questions. The method is evaluated on challenging benchmark datasets. We perform better than other image based attention methods and are competitive with other
state of the art methods that focus on both image and questions.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of improved attention obtained using Differential Context Network. Using the baseline reference we got
answer as: “Black and White” But, using our methods DAN or
DCN we get answer as “Brown and White”, that is actually the
color of the cow. We provide the attention map that indicates the
actual improvement in attention.

Answering questions regarding images requires us to obtain an understanding about the image. We can gain insights into a method by observing the region of an image
the method focuses on while answering a question. It has
been observed in a recent work that humans also attend to
specific regions of an image while answering questions [3].
We therefore expect strong correlation between focusing on
the “right regions while answering questions and obtaining
better semantic understanding to solve the problem. This
correlation exists as far as humans are concerned [3]. We
therefore aim in this paper to obtain image based attention
regions that correlate better with human attention. We do
that by obtaining a differential attention. The differential
attention relies on an exemplar model of cognition.
In cognition studies, the exemplar theory suggests that
humans are able to obtain generalisation for solving cogni-

tive tasks by relying on an exemplar model. In this model,
individuals compare new stimuli with the instances already
stored in memory [9][20] and obtain answers based on these
exemplars. We would like an exemplar model to provide attention. We want to focus on the specific parts in a nearest
exemplar that distinguishes it from a far example. We do
that by obtaining the differential attention region that distinguishes a supporting exemplar from an opposing exemplar. Our premise is that the difference between a nearest
semantic exemplar and a far semantic exemplar can guide
attention on a specific image region. We show that by using
this differential attention mechanism we are able to obtain
significant improvement in solving the visual question answering task. Further, we show that the obtained attention
17680

