Deep Mutual Learning
Ying Zhang1,2 , Tao Xiang2 , Timothy M. Hospedales3 , and Huchuan Lu1
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Queen Mary University of London, UK 3 University of Edinburgh, UK
zydl0907@mail.dlut.edu.cn, t.xiang@qmul.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Model distillation is an effective and widely used technique to transfer knowledge from a teacher to a student network. The typical application is to transfer from a powerful large network or ensemble to a small network, in order
to meet the low-memory or fast execution requirements. In
this paper, we present a deep mutual learning (DML) strategy. Different from the one-way transfer between a static
pre-defined teacher and a student in model distillation, with
DML, an ensemble of students learn collaboratively and
teach each other throughout the training process. Our experiments show that a variety of network architectures benefit from mutual learning and achieve compelling results
on both category and instance recognition tasks. Surprisingly, it is revealed that no prior powerful teacher network
is necessary – mutual learning of a collection of simple student networks works, and moreover outperforms distillation
from a more powerful yet static teacher.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks achieve state of the art performance on many problems, but are often very large in depth
and/or width, and contain large numbers of parameters
[7, 28]. This has the drawback that they may be slow to execute or large to store, limiting their use in applications or
platforms with low memory or fast execution requirements,
e.g., mobile phones. This has led to a rapid growth of research in developing smaller and faster models. Achieving
compact yet accurate models has been approached in a variety of ways including explicit frugal architecture design [9],
model compression [22], pruning [14], binarisation [18] and
most interestingly model distillation [8].
Distillation-based model compression relates to the observation [3, 1] that small networks often have the same
representation capacity as large networks; but compared
to large networks they are simply harder to train and find
the right parameters that realise the desired function. That
is, the limitation seems to lie in the difficulty of optimisa-

tion rather than in the network size [1]. To better learn a
small network, the distillation approach starts with a powerful (deep and/or wide) teacher network (or network ensemble), and then trains a smaller student network to mimic the
teacher [8, 1, 16, 3]. Mimicking the teacher’s class probabilities [8] and/or feature representation [1, 19] conveys
additional information beyond the conventional supervised
learning target. The optimisation problem of learning to
mimic the teacher turns out to be easier than learning the
target function directly, and the student can match or even
outperform [19] the much larger teacher.
In this paper we aim to solve the same problem of learning small but powerful deep neural networks. However,
we explore a different but related idea to model distillation – that of mutual learning. Distillation starts with a
powerful large and pre-trained teacher network and performs one-way knowledge transfer to a small untrained student. In contrast, in mutual learning we start with a pool
of untrained students who simultaneously learn to solve
the task together. Specifically, each student is trained with
two losses: a conventional supervised learning loss, and a
mimicry loss that aligns each student’s class posterior with
the class probabilities of other students. Trained in this
way, it turns out that each student in such a peer-teaching
based scenario learns significantly better than when learning alone in a conventional supervised learning scenario.
Moreover mutually learned student networks achieve better results than students trained by conventional distillation
from a larger pre-trained teacher. Furthermore, while the
conventional understanding of distillation requires a teacher
larger and more powerful than the intended student, it turns
out that in many cases mutual learning of several large networks also improves performance compared to independent
learning. This makes the deep mutual learning strategy generally applicable, e.g., it can also be used in application scenarios where there is no constraint on the model size and
the recognition accuracy is the only concern.
It is perhaps not obvious why the proposed learning strategy should work at all. Where does the additional knowledge come from, when the learning process starts out with

4320

