Optimal Structured Light à la Carte
Parsa Mirdehghan

Wenzheng Chen
Kiriakos N. Kutulakos
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto

{parsa,wenzheng,kyros}@cs.toronto.edu
projection pattern

Abstract
We consider the problem of automatically generating sequences of structured-light patterns for active stereo triangulation of a static scene. Unlike existing approaches that
use predetermined patterns and reconstruction algorithms
tied to them, we generate patterns on the fly in response
to generic specifications: number of patterns, projectorcamera arrangement, workspace constraints, spatial frequency content, etc. Our pattern sequences are specifically
optimized to minimize the expected rate of correspondence
errors under those specifications for an unknown scene, and
are coupled to a sequence-independent algorithm for perpixel disparity estimation. To achieve this, we derive an
objective function that is easy to optimize and follows from
first principles within a maximum-likelihood framework. By
minimizing it, we demonstrate automatic discovery of pattern sequences, in under three minutes on a laptop, that can
outperform state-of-the-art triangulation techniques.

1. Introduction
A key tenet in structured-light triangulation is that the
choice of projection patterns matters a lot. Over the years,
the field has seen significant boosts in performance—in robustness, 3D accuracy, speed and versatility—due to new
types of projection patterns, and new vision algorithms tailored to them [1, 2]. These advances continue to this day,
for improved robustness to indirect light [3–10]; computational efficiency [4, 11, 12]; high-speed imaging [13],
outdoor 3D scanning [14, 15]; and for 3D imaging with
specialized computational cameras [16], consumer-oriented
devices [17, 18] and time-of-flight cameras [19–22].
Underlying all this work is a fundamental question: what
are the optimal patterns to use and what algorithm should
process the images they create? This question was originally posed by Horn and Kiryati twenty years ago [23] but
the answer was deemed intractable and not pursued. Since
then, pattern design has largely been driven by practical
considerations [24–28] and by intuitive concepts borrowed
from many fields (e.g., communications [29], coding theory [2], number theory [25], numerical analysis [30], etc.)
In this paper we present the first computational approach to
optimal design of patterns for structured light. We focus on
the oldest, most accuracy-oriented version of this task: pro-

pairwise similarity
of columns

higher
max frequency

code matrix

Figure 1: Overview. Top: A projection pattern is a 1D image projected along a projector’s rows. A sequence of them defines a code matrix, whose columns encode pixel position. We
present a framework for computing stereo correspondences using optimal code matrices, which we generate on the fly. These
matrices minimize the expected number of stereo errors that occur when the individual matrix columns are not very distinctive
(red=similar, blue=dissimilar). Middle: A whole space of optimal
matrices exists, for different numbers of projection patterns, image
signal-to-noise ratio, spatial frequency content (sample patterns
shown above), etc. Bottom: We use two automatically-generated
four-pattern sequences to compute the depth map of the object
shown on left. Both are optimized for a one-pixel tolerance for
stereo errors, without (middle) and with (right) a bounding-box
constraint. Both depth maps are unprocessed (please zoom in).
jecting a sequence of patterns one by one onto a static scene
and using a camera to estimate per-pixel depth by triangulation. Starting from first principles, we formally derive an
objective function over the space of pattern sequences that
quantifies the expected number of incorrect stereo correspondences, and then minimize it using standard tools [31].
Our optimization takes as input the projector’s resolution
and the desired number of projection patterns. In addition
to these parameters, however, it can generate patterns that
are precisely optimized for 3D accuracy on the system at
hand (Figure 1): for the specific arrangement of projector

6248

