Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation using Class Peak Response
Yanzhao Zhou†1 , Yi Zhu1 , Qixiang Ye1 , Qiang Qiu2 and Jianbin Jiao†1
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Duke University

{zhouyanzhao215, zhuyi215}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {qxye, jiaojb}@ucas.ac.cn, qiang.qiu@duke.edu

Peaks

Abstract
Weakly supervised instance segmentation with imagelevel labels, instead of expensive pixel-level masks, remains
unexplored. In this paper, we tackle this challenging problem by exploiting class peak responses to enable a classification network for instance mask extraction. With image
labels supervision only, CNN classifiers in a fully convolutional manner can produce class response maps, which
specify classification confidence at each image location. We
observed that local maximums, i.e., peaks, in a class response map typically correspond to strong visual cues residing inside each instance. Motivated by this, we first design a process to stimulate peaks to emerge from a class response map. The emerged peaks are then back-propagated
and effectively mapped to highly informative regions of each
object instance, such as instance boundaries. We refer to
the above maps generated from class peak responses as
Peak Response Maps (PRMs). PRMs provide a fine-detailed
instance-level representation, which allows instance masks
to be extracted even with some off-the-shelf methods. To the
best of our knowledge, we for the first time report results for
the challenging image-level supervised instance segmentation task. Extensive experiments show that our method also
boosts weakly supervised pointwise localization as well as
semantic segmentation performance, and reports state-ofthe-art results on popular benchmarks, including PASCAL
VOC 2012 and MS COCO. 1

1. Introduction
Most contemporary methods of semantic segmentation
rely on large-scale dense annotations for training deep models; however, annotating pixel-level masks is expensive and
labor-intensive [18]. In contrast, image-level annotations,
i.e., presence or absence of object categories in an image,
are much cheaper and easier to define. This motivates the
† Corresponding Authors
1 Source code is publicly available at yzhou.work/PRM

Class-aware
visual cues
Class Response Map (sheep)

sheep
sheep
sheep

Query
Instance Predictions
Input

Instance-aware
visual cues

Peak Response Map

Object Proposal Retrieval

Figure 1: Class peak responses correspond to strong visual
cues residing inside each respective instance. Those peaks
can be back-propagated and effectively mapped to highly
informative regions of each object, which allow instance
masks to be extracted. Best viewed in color.
development of weakly supervised semantic segmentation
methods, which use image labels to learn convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) for class-aware segmentation.
Most existing weakly supervised semantic segmentation
methods consider convolutional filters in CNN as object
detectors and aggregate the deep feature maps to extract
class-aware visual evidence [47, 43]. Typically, pre-trained
classification networks are first converted to fully convolutional networks (FCNs) to produce class response maps
in a single forward pass. Such class response maps indicate essential image regions used by the network to identify
an image class; however, cannot distinguish different object instances from the same category. Therefore, existing
weakly supervised semantic segmentation methods cannot
be simply generalized to instance-level semantic segmentation [16, 12], which aims to detect all objects in an image
as well as predicting precise masks for each instance.
In this paper, we explore the challenging problem
of training CNNs with image-level weak supervision for
instance-level semantic segmentation (instance segmentation for short). Specifically, we propose to exploit peaks
in a class response map to enable a classification network,
13791

