A Unifying Contrast Maximization Framework for Event Cameras,
with Applications to Motion, Depth, and Optical Flow Estimation
Guillermo Gallego, Henri Rebecq, Davide Scaramuzza
Dept. of Informatics and Neuroinformatics, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich

Abstract
120

120
100

Y [pix]

We present a unifying framework to solve several computer vision problems with event cameras: motion, depth
and optical flow estimation. The main idea of our framework is to find the point trajectories on the image plane
that are best aligned with the event data by maximizing
an objective function: the contrast of an image of warped
events. Our method implicitly handles data association between the events, and therefore, does not rely on additional
appearance information about the scene. In addition to accurately recovering the motion parameters of the problem,
our framework produces motion-corrected edge-like images
with high dynamic range that can be used for further scene
analysis. The proposed method is not only simple, but more
importantly, it is, to the best of our knowledge, the first
method that can be successfully applied to such a diverse
set of important vision tasks with event cameras.

Y [pix]

100
80
60
14.52

80
60

14.54
14.56
100

time [s]

120

140

X [pix]

160

14.52

time [s]

14.57

(a)

100

120

140

160

X [pix]

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Events (dots) caused by a moving edge pattern and point trajectories in a space-time region of the image plane, colored according to event polarity (blue: positive event, i.e., brightness increase; red: negative event,
i.e., brightness decrease). (b) Visualization of the events
along the direction of the point trajectories highlighted in
(a); corresponding events line up, revealing the edge pattern that caused them. Our approach works by maximizing the contrast of an image of warped events similar to
(b). A video demonstrating our framework is available at:
https://youtu.be/KFMZFhi-9Aw

1. Introduction
Unlike traditional cameras, which produce intensity images at a fixed rate, event cameras, such as the Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) [1], have independent pixels that report
only intensity changes (called “events”) asynchronously, at
the time they occur. Each event consists of the spatiotemporal coordinates of the brightness change (with microsecond resolution) and its sign1 . Event cameras have
several advantages over traditional cameras: a latency in the
order of microseconds, a very high dynamic range (140 dB
compared to 60 dB of traditional cameras), and very low
power consumption (10 mW vs 1.5 W of traditional cameras). Moreover, since all pixels capture light independently, such sensors do not suffer from motion blur. In summary, event cameras represent a paradigm shift since visual
information is: (i) sampled based on the dynamics of the
scene, not based on an external clock2 , and (ii) encoded us1 An animation of the principle of operation of event cameras can be
found in the video of [2] https://youtu.be/LauQ6LWTkxM?t=25
2 If nothing moves in the scene, no events are generated. Conversely, the
number of events (samples) increases with the amount of scene motion.

ing an asynchronous and sparse stream of events, which is
fundamentally different from a sequence of images. Such a
paradigm shift calls for new methods to process visual information and unlock the capabilities of these novel sensors.
Algorithms for event cameras can be classified according to different criteria. Depending on the way in which
events are processed, two broad categories can be distinguished: 1) methods that operate on an event-by-event
basis, where the state of the system (the estimated unknowns) can change upon the arrival of a single event
[2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]; and 2) methods
that operate on groups of events. This category can be further subdivided into two: 2a) methods that discard temporal
information of the events and accumulate them into frames
to re-utilize traditional, image-based computer vision algorithms [16, 17, 18], and 2b) methods that exploit the temporal information of the events during the estimation process,
and therefore cannot re-utilize traditional computer vision
algorithms (sample applications of these methods include
variational optical flow estimation [19], event-based multi-

3867

