Deformation Aware Image Compression
Tamar Rott Shaham and Tomer Michaeli
Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
{stamarot@campus,tomer.m@ee}.technion.ac.il

(a) Input

Abstract

1. Introduction
The last decades have seen an exponential rise in the
popularity of mobile devices equipped with high-resolution
cameras. To accommodate the numerous amounts of pictures captured by those devices on a daily basis, there is a
crucial need for high quality compression algorithms. Indeed, while 20 megapixel images are becoming common
(requiring 60 megabytes to store uncompressed), transmission and storage is often limited to less than 1 megabyte per
image. At such high ratios, commonly used compression
methods tend to discard important information from the image and produce visually unpleasing results.
In this paper, we propose a generic approach for boosting
the visual quality of any image compression method, by introducing deformations to the input image (see Fig. 1). Our

compress

deform

Lossy compression algorithms aim to compactly encode
images in a way which enables to restore them with minimal
error. We show that a key limitation of existing algorithms
is that they rely on error measures that are extremely sensitive to geometric deformations (e.g. SSD, SSIM). These
force the encoder to invest many bits in describing the exact
geometry of every fine detail in the image, which is obviously wasteful, because the human visual system is indifferent to small local translations. Motivated by this observation, we propose a deformation-insensitive error measure
that can be easily incorporated into any existing compression scheme. As we show, optimal compression under our
criterion involves slightly deforming the input image such
that it becomes more “compressible”. Surprisingly, while
these small deformations are barely noticeable, they enable
the CODEC to preserve details that are otherwise completely lost. Our technique uses the CODEC as a “black
box”, thus allowing simple integration with arbitrary compression methods. Extensive experiments, including user
studies, confirm that our approach significantly improves
the visual quality of many CODECs. These include JPEG,
JPEG 2000, WebP, BPG, and a recent deep-net method.

(b) JPEG 2000

compress

(c) Optimally Deformed Input

(d) Our

Figure 1. Deformation aware image compression. Our algorithm seeks to minimize a deformation-insensitive error measure.
This boils down to determining how to best deform the input image (a) so as to make it more compressible (c). By doing so, we
trade a little geometric integrity with a significant gain in terms of
preservation of visual information (d) compared to regular compression (b). Note that images (b) and (d) were obtained by compressing images (a) and (c), respectively, with the same JPEG 2000
CODEC using the same compression ratio of 150:1.

algorithm uses the CODEC as a “black box” and is thus extremely simple to incorporate into arbitrary methods. Yet,
it has a pronounced effect: At the same bit rate, we are able
to achieve significantly better visual results.
Lossy compression schemes attempt to compactly encode images in a way which allows to restore them with
minimal error. Over the years, most efforts to improve compression methods focused on seeking better image models. Examples include sparsity of image blocks in the
DCT domain [35], recurrence of patches across different scales of the image [3], sparsity in the wavelet domain [28], and smoothness (as exploited e.g. by PDE based

2453

