Mix and match networks: encoder-decoder alignment for zero-pair image
translation
Yaxing Wang, Joost van de Weijer, Luis Herranz
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
{wang,joost,lherranz}@cvc.uab.es

(a)

Abstract
We address the problem of image translation between
domains or modalities for which no direct paired data is
available (i.e. zero-pair translation). We propose mix and
match networks, based on multiple encoders and decoders
aligned in such a way that other encoder-decoder pairs can
be composed at test time to perform unseen image translation tasks between domains or modalities for which explicit
paired samples were not seen during training. We study
the impact of autoencoders, side information and losses in
improving the alignment and transferability of trained pairwise translation models to unseen translations. We show
our approach is scalable and can perform colorization and
style transfer between unseen combinations of domains. We
evaluate our system in a challenging cross-modal setting
where semantic segmentation is estimated from depth images, without explicit access to any depth-semantic segmentation training pairs. Our model outperforms baselines
based on pix2pix and CycleGAN models.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translations (or simply image translations) are an integral part of many computer vision systems.
They include transformations between different modalities,
such as from RGB to depth [19], or domains, such as luminance to color images [32], horses to zebras [34], or editing
operations such as artistic style changes [9]. These mappings can also include 2D label representations such as semantic segmentations [21] or surface normals [5]. Deep
networks have shown excellent results in learning models to
perform image translations between different domains and
modalities [1, 10, 21]. These systems are typically trained
with pairs of matching images between domains, e.g. an
RGB image and its corresponding depth image.
Image translation methods, which transfer images from
one domain to another, are often based on encoder-decoder

Train

Test (zero-pair)

(b)
(c)

Figure 1: Zero-pair image translation: (a) given a set of
domains or modalities (circles) for which paired training
data is available, the objective is to evaluate zero-pair translations. Translations are implemented as aligned encoderdecoder networks. (b) Mix and match networks do not require retraining on unseen transformations, in contrast to
unpaired translation alternatives (e.g. CycleGAN [34]). (c)
Two cascaded paired translations (e.g. 2×pix2pix [10]) require explicit translation to an intermediate domain. Better
seen in color.

frameworks [1, 10, 21, 34]. In these approaches, an encoder
network maps the input image from domain A to a continuous vector in a latent space. From this latent representation
the decoder generates an image in domain B. The latent representation is typically much smaller than the original image size, thereby forcing the network to learn to efficiently
compress the information from domain A which is relevant for domain B into the latent representation. Encoderdecoder networks are trained end-to-end by providing the
network with matching pairs from both domains or modalities. An example could be learning a mapping from RGB
to depth [19]. Other applications include semantic segmentation [1] and image restoration [23].
In this paper we introduce zero-pair image translation:
a new setting for testing image translations which involves
evaluating on unseen translations, i.e. no matching image
15467

