Efficient Large-scale Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search on OpenCL FPGA
Jialiang Zhang
UW-Madison

Soroosh Khoram
UW-Madison

Jing Li
UW-Madison

jialiang.zhang@ece.wisc.edu

khoram@wisc.edu

jli@ece.wisc.edu

Abstract
We present a new method for Product Quantization (PQ)
based approximated nearest neighbor search (ANN) in high dimensional spaces. Specifically, we first propose a quantization
scheme for the codebook of coarse quantizer, product quantizer,
and rotation matrix, to reduce the cost of accessing these codebooks. Our approach also combines a highly parallel k-selection
method, which can be fused with the distance calculation to reduce the memory overhead. We implement the proposed method
on Intel HARPv2 platform using OpenCL-FPGA. The proposed
method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
CPU and GPU for high dimensional nearest neighbor queries
on billion-scale datasets in terms of query time and accuracy
regardless of the batch size. To our best knowledge, this is the
first work to demonstrate FPGA performance superior to CPU
and GPU on high-dimensional, large-scale ANN datasets.

1. Introduction
Approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search in highdimensional spaces is important to many computer vision tasks,
such as image retrieval [3], recognition[11] and classification
[5]. This algorithm searches a high-dimensional dataset for data
points that are close to a query point. Such searches, however,
are slow as a consequence of the curse of dimensionality. In the
past years, there has been increasing interest [4, 9] in compressing high-dimensional data into compact codes. Compact encoding can compress the size of index to only tens of bits per dataset
entry. It not only reduces the size of database, but also improves
the efficiency of nearest neighbor search on large-scale datasets.
To generate the compact encoding, a large body of existing
works rely on hashing [4], which approximates the similarity between two dataset entries using the Hamming distance between
the hashed codes. Product quantization (PQ) is an alternative approach for compact encoding, which has been proven to be more
effective on large-scale datasets than hashing-based approaches,
especially when combined with inverted files (IVF)[19].
PQ uses the Cartesian product of multiple small subcodebooks to achieve a large effective codebook size. Due to
its lower quantization distortions, PQ has been shown to be
more accurate than hashing-based methods. Moreover, PQ is
amenable to be implemented on modern parallel processors

(e.g., CPU, GPU), which makes it more promising for
large-scale ANN applications. Further, the distances between
codewords can be pre-computed and stored in look-up-tables
(LUTs). Thus, the query computation involves merely reading
the LUTs. To deal with large datasets, PQ is typically combined
with the IVF technique, which consists of a coarse, exhaustive
step to find a set of probing centroids near the query vector. The
number of probing centroids is typically much smaller than the
dataset size. Thus, it can significantly reduce the the number
of PQ-based distance calculations.
Quantizing dataset elements into a small codebook
introduces a quantization error to the ANN results. To reduce
the quantization error, existing works [6, 17] try to make
the quantization better fit to the underlying distribution of
database entries. Optimized product quantization (OPQ) and
its equivalent Ck-means[17] apply an optimal global rotation
to all product quantizers. Another method is locally optimized
product quantization (LOPQ) [14], which locally optimizes
product quantizer over rotation and space decomposition.
Although the PQ-based methods can effectively reduce
the database size, they cannot leverage the parallel processing
capability of modern processors (e.g. multi-core CPU, GPU,
and FPGA) well to reduce the query time. One of the reasons
is that codebooks are too large to fit into their small but fast
on-chip memories (cache, shared memory and block RAM) and
need to be moved to the larger but slower external memories.
Furthermore, for each query, these codebooks need to be
accessed multiple times, which amplifies the storage delay
problem creating a key performance bottlengeck. To make
matters worse, approaches like OPQ and LOPQ, introduce
one or more large rotation matrices, also too large to fit into
the on-chip memory, that need to be accessed multiple times
for every single query. As a result, the query speed in these
approaches are bounded by the external memory delay, preventing full utilization of the available computation capabilities.
Therefore, existing works on GPU-based ANN acceleration
focus on reducing the number of computations of PQ-based
method. The method in [22] introduces a Product-quantization
tree, which can reduce number of distance calculations, using
an additional codebook. Faiss [13] provides several detailed
GPU-specific optimizations of the IVFPQ method and reports
14924

