Face Aging with Identity-Preserved
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks
Zongwei Wang
Shanghaitech University

Xu Tang
Baidu

Weixin Luo, Shenghua Gao∗
Shanghaitech University

wangzw@shanghaitech.edu.cn

tangxu02@baidu.com

{luowx, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Face aging is of great importance for cross-age recognition and entertainment related applications. However,
the lack of labeled faces of the same person across a long
age range makes it challenging. Because of different aging
speed of different persons, our face aging approach aims
at synthesizing a face whose target age lies in some given
age group instead of synthesizing a face with a certain age.
By grouping faces with target age together, the objective of
face aging is equivalent to transferring aging patterns of
faces within the target age group to the face whose aged
face is to be synthesized. Meanwhile, the synthesized face
should have the same identity with the input face. Thus we
propose an Identity-Preserved Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (IPCGANs) framework, in which a Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks module functions
as generating a face that looks realistic and is with the target age, an identity-preserved module preserves the identity
information and an age classifier forces the generated face
with the target age. Both qualitative and quantitative experiments show that our method can generate more realistic faces in terms of image quality, person identity and age
consistency with human observations.

1. Introduction
Face aging, also known as aging synthesis of the human
face, is a task of synthesizing faces of a certain person under
a given age. It is attracting more and more researchers’ attention because of its various applications in cross-age face
recognition and entertainment. For example, it could be applied to help find lost children or to predict what someone
will look like in the future. Extensive studies have been
made on face aging [28] [11] [5]. However, the lack of
training samples for a given person over a long range of
years [15][20] [3] [21] makes face aging still an extremely
challenging task in computer vision.
∗ Corresponding author.

Traditional face aging methods can roughly be categorized into prototype-based approaches [11] and physical
model-based approaches [25]. Prototype-based approaches
usually compute an average face within a face age group
first, and the difference between different average faces
from different groups would be treated as aging pattern
which would be used for synthesizing an aged face [11].
Consequently, person-specific information of each person
would be lost, which results in the synthesized faces look
unrealistic. By contrast, physical model-based approaches
model the shape and texture changes with age in terms of
hair colors, muscles, and wrinkles, etc. with a parametric
model, which usually requires lots of training samples and
is computationally expensive.
Recently, Generative Adversarial Networks(GANs)
based approaches have been demonstrated their successes
in generating high quality images [7] [14] [18]. Of which,
as a special GANs, Conditional GANs (cGANs) [7] [14] [9]
take prior information in image generation and make generated images be with certain desired property. Inspired by
the success of CGANs, we propose an Identity-Preserved
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (IPCGANs)
for face aging. Specifically, our IPCGANs consists of three
modules: a CGANs module, an identity-preserved module
and an age classifier. The generator of CGANs takes an input image and a target age code as its input and generates a
face with the target age. The generated face is expected
to be indistinguishable from real faces in that target age
group by the discriminator. To keep identity information,
we introduce a perceptual loss [4] in the objective of IPCGANs. Finally, to guarantee the synthesized faces fall into
the target age group, we send the generated aged faces to a
pre-trained age classifier and add an age classification loss
to the objective. Since all components of our IPCAGANs
are differentiable with respect to the model parameters, the
whole network can be trained in an end-to-end fashion.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
1. We propose to impose an identity-preserved term and
an age classification term into the objective of our IPC4321
7939

