CSRNet: Dilated Convolutional Neural Networks for Understanding the Highly
Congested Scenes
Yuhong Li1,2 , Xiaofan Zhang1 , Deming Chen1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{leeyh,xiaofan3,dchen}@illinois.edu
Abstract
We propose a network for Congested Scene Recognition
called CSRNet to provide a data-driven and deep learning
method that can understand highly congested scenes and
perform accurate count estimation as well as present highquality density maps. The proposed CSRNet is composed
of two major components: a convolutional neural network
(CNN) as the front-end for 2D feature extraction and a dilated CNN for the back-end, which uses dilated kernels to
deliver larger reception fields and to replace pooling operations. CSRNet is an easy-trained model because of its pure
convolutional structure. We demonstrate CSRNet on four
datasets (ShanghaiTech dataset, the UCF CC 50 dataset,
the WorldEXPO’10 dataset, and the UCSD dataset) and
we deliver the state-of-the-art performance. In the ShanghaiTech Part B dataset, CSRNet achieves 47.3% lower
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) than the previous state-of-theart method. We extend the targeted applications for counting other objects, such as the vehicle in TRANCOS dataset.
Results show that CSRNet significantly improves the output
quality with 15.4% lower MAE than the previous state-ofthe-art approach.

1. Introduction
Growing number of network models have been developed [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] to deliver promising solutions for crowd
flows monitoring, assembly controlling, and other security
services. Current methods for congested scenes analysis are
developed from simple crowd counting (which outputs the
number of people in the targeted image) to density map presenting (which displays characteristics of crowd distribution) [6]. This development follows the demand of reallife applications since the same number of people could
have completely different crowd distributions (as shown in
Fig. 1), so that just counting the number of crowds is not
enough. The distribution map helps us for getting more accurate and comprehensive information, which could be critical for making correct decisions in high-risk environments,
such as stampede and riot. However, it is challenging to
generate accurate distribution patterns. One major difficulty

Figure 1. Pictures in first row show three images all containing 95
people in ShanghaiTech Part B dataset [18], while having totally
different spatial distributions. Pictures in second row show their
density maps.

comes from the prediction manner: since the generated density values follow the pixel-by-pixel prediction, output density maps must include spatial coherence so that they can
present the smooth transition between nearest pixels. Also,
the diversified scenes, e.g., irregular crowd clusters and different camera perspectives, would make the task difficult,
especially for using traditional methods without deep neural networks (DNNs). The recent development of congested
scene analysis relays on DNN-based methods because of
the high accuracy they have achieved in semantic segmentation tasks [7, 8, 9, 10, 11] and the significant progress they
have made in visual saliency [12]. The additional bonus of
using DNNs comes from the enthusiastic hardware community where DNNs are rapidly investigated and implemented on GPUs [13], FPGAs [14, 15, 16], and ASICs [17].
Among them, the low-power, small-size schemes are especially suitable for deploying congested scene analysis in
surveillance devices.
Previous works for congested scene analysis are mostly
based on multi-scale architectures [4, 5, 18, 19, 20]. They
have achieved high performance in this field but the designs they used also introduce two significant disadvantages
when networks go deeper: large amount of training time
and non-effective branch structure (e.g., multi-column CNN
(MCNN) in [18]). We design an experiment to demonstrate that the MCNN does not perform better compared to a

1091

