Domain Adaptive Faster R-CNN for Object Detection in the Wild
Yuhua Chen1
1

Wen Li1

Christos Sakaridis1
2

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich

Dengxin Dai1

Luc Van Gool1,2

VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven

{yuhua.chen,liwen,csakarid,dai,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Object detection typically assumes that training and test
data are drawn from an identical distribution, which, however, does not always hold in practice. Such a distribution
mismatch will lead to a significant performance drop. In
this work, we aim to improve the cross-domain robustness of
object detection. We tackle the domain shift on two levels:
1) the image-level shift, such as image style, illumination,
etc., and 2) the instance-level shift, such as object appearance, size, etc. We build our approach based on the recent
state-of-the-art Faster R-CNN model, and design two domain adaptation components, on image level and instance
level, to reduce the domain discrepancy. The two domain
adaptation components are based on H-divergence theory,
and are implemented by learning a domain classifier in adversarial training manner. The domain classifiers on different levels are further reinforced with a consistency regularization to learn a domain-invariant region proposal network (RPN) in the Faster R-CNN model. We evaluate our
newly proposed approach using multiple datasets including
Cityscapes, KITTI, SIM10K, etc. The results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed approach for robust object detection in various domain shift scenarios.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental problem in computer
vision. It aims at identifying and localizing all object instances of certain categories in an image. Driven by the
surge of deep convolutional networks (CNN) [32], many
CNN-based object detection approaches have been proposed, drastically improving performance [21, 51, 20, 8, 19,
39].
While excellent performance has been achieved on the
benchmark datasets [12, 37], object detection in the real
world still faces challenges from the large variance in viewpoints, object appearance, backgrounds, illumination, image quality, etc., which may cause a considerable domain
shift between the training and test data. Taking autonomous

Figure 1. Illustration of different datasets for autonomous driving: From top to bottom-right, example images are taken from:
KITTI[17], Cityscapes[5], Foggy Cityscapes[49], SIM10K[30].
Though all datasets cover urban scenes, images in those dataset
vary in style, resolution, illumination, object size, etc. The visual
difference between those datasets presents a challenge for applying an object detection model learned from one domain to another
domain.

driving as an example, the camera type and setup used in a
particular car might differ from those used to collect training data, and the car might be in a different city where
the appearance of objects is different. Moreover, the autonomous driving system is expected to work reliably under
different weather conditions (e.g. in rain and fog), while the
training data is usually collected in dry weather with better
visibility. The recent trend of using synthetic data for training deep CNN models presents a similar challenge due to
the visual mismatch with reality. Several datasets focusing
on autonomous driving are illustrated in Figure 1, where we
can observe a considerable domain shift.
Such domain shifts have been observed to cause significant performance drop [23]. Although collecting more
training data could possibly alleviate the impact of domain
shift, it is non-trivial because annotating bounding boxes is
an expensive and time-consuming process. Therefore, it is
highly desirable to develop algorithms to adapt object detection models to a new domain that is visually different
from the training domain.
In this paper, we address this cross-domain object detection problem. We consider the unsupervised domain adaptation scenario: full supervision is given in the source domain while no supervision is available in the target domain.
13339

