Towards a Mathematical Understanding of the Difficulty in Learning with
Feedforward Neural Networks
Hao Shen
fortiss - The Research Institute of the Free State of Bavaria, Germany
Guerickestr. 25, 80805 Munich, Germany
hao.shen@fortiss.org

Abstract
Training deep neural networks for solving machine
learning problems is one great challenge in the field, mainly
due to its associated optimisation problem being highly
non-convex. Recent developments have suggested that
many training algorithms do not suffer from undesired local minima under certain scenario, and consequently led
to great efforts in pursuing mathematical explanations for
such observations. This work provides an alternative mathematical understanding of the challenge from a smooth optimisation perspective. By assuming exact learning of finite
samples, sufficient conditions are identified via a critical
point analysis to ensure any local minimum to be globally
minimal as well. Furthermore, a state of the art algorithm,
known as the Generalised Gauss-Newton (GGN) algorithm,
is rigorously revisited as an approximate Newton’s algorithm, which shares the property of being locally quadratically convergent to a global minimum under the condition
of exact learning.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been successfully
applied to solve challenging problems in pattern recognition, computer vision, and speech recognition [3, 21, 43].
Despite this success, training DNNs is still one of the greatest challenges in the field [9]. In this work, we focus on
training the classic feedforward Multi-Layer Perceptrons
(MLPs). It is known that performance of MLPs is highly
dependent on various factors in a very complicated way. For
example, studies in [15, 37] identify the topology of MLPs
as a determinative factor. Works in [25, 9] demonstrate the
impact of different activation functions to performance of
MLPs. Moreover, a choice of error/loss functions is also
shown to be influential as in [8].
Even with a well designed MLP architecture, training
a specific MLP both effectively and efficiently can be as
challenging as constructing the network. The most popular

method used in training MLPs is the well-known backpropagation (BP) algorithm [42]. Although the classic BP algorithm shares a great convenience of being very simple,
they can suffer from two major problems, namely, (i) convergence to undesired local minima, if global optimality is
assumed; and (ii) slow convergence speed. Early works
as [38, 30] argue that such problems with BP algorithms
are essentially due to their nature of being gradient descent
algorithms, while an associated optimisation problem for
MLP training is often highly non-convex and of large scale.
One major approach to address the problem of undesired
local minima in MLP training is via an error/loss surface
analysis [14, 35, 6]. Even for simple tasks, such as the
classic XOR problem, the error surface analysis is surprisingly complicated and its results can be hard to conclude
[22, 35, 36]. Early efforts in [11, 44, 45] try to identify general conditions on the topology of MLPs to eliminate undesired local minima, i.e., suboptimal local minima. Unfortunately, these attempts fail to provide complete solutions
to general problems. On the other hand, although BP algorithms are often thought to be sensitive to initialisations
[19], recent results reported in [10] suggest that modern
MLP training algorithms can overcome the problem of suboptimal local minima conveniently. Such observations have
triggered several very recent efforts to characterise global
optimality of DNN training [17, 28, 13].
The work in [17] shows that both deep linear networks
and deep nonlinear networks with only the Rectified Linear
Unit (ReLU) function in the hidden layers are free of suboptimal local minima. The attempted technique is not applicable for analysing deep nonlinear networks with other
activation functions, e.g. the Sigmoid and the SoftSign. Recent work in [28] proves that all local minima are globally
minimal for exact learning with wide MLPs, if the number of units in a hidden layer of the network is larger than
the number of training samples and the network structure
from that layer on is pyramidal. Unfortunately, the deployed
techniques can neither exclude the possibility of suboptimal
local minima of low rank, nor be applied to narrow MLPs.

811

