Arbitrary Style Transfer with Deep Feature Reshuffle
Shuyang Gu1∗
1

Congliang Chen2∗
2

University of Science and Technology of China
gsy777@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Jing Liao3

Lu Yuan3

Peking University

3

chcoliang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel method by reshuffling deep
features (i.e., permuting the spacial locations of a feature
map) of the style image for arbitrary style transfer. We theoretically prove that our new style loss based on reshuffle
connects both global and local style losses respectively used
by most parametric and non-parametric neural style transfer methods. This simple idea can effectively address the
challenging issues in existing style transfer methods. On
one hand, it can avoid distortions in local style patterns,
and allow semantic-level transfer, compared with neural
parametric methods. On the other hand, it can preserve
globally similar appearance to the style image, and avoid
wash-out artifacts, compared with neural non-parametric
methods. Based on the proposed loss, we also present a progressive feature-domain optimization approach. The experiments show that our method is widely applicable to various
styles, and produces better quality than existing methods.

1. Introduction
This process of rendering a content image in the style of
another image is referred to as Style Transfer. The problem of style transfer has its origin from non-photo-realistic
rendering [24], and is closely related to texture synthesis
and transfer [9, 10, 11]. These methods typically rely on
low-level statistics and often fail to capture semantic structures. Recently, the work of Gatys et al. [14] opened up a
new field called Neural Style Transfer, which uses Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [23] to change the style of
an image while preserving its content. It is flexible enough
to combine content and style of arbitrary images.
Style transfer is receiving increasing attention from computer vision researchers because it involves two interesting topics: image representation and image synthesis.
∗ Equal contribution. This work is done when Shuyang Gu and Congliang Chen are interns at Microsoft Research Asia.

Microsoft Research

{jliao,luyuan}@microsoft.com

Some early representations, like multi-resolution [7], pyramid [16], wavelet [33], used in traditional texture synthesis
and transfer, are mainly for statistics matching. The recent
work [14] showed that the representations of image content
and style were separable by variant CNN convolutional layers. Moreover, the representation provides the possibility
for image decoupling and recombining.
Image synthesis methods, whether traditional or neural, can be broadly categorized as parametric and nonparametric. Specifically, for neural methods, the parametric methods match the global statistics of deep features,
like Gram matrix [14, 21] and its approximates [28, 31],
mean and variance [18, 8], histogram [39]; while the nonparametric methods [26, 27, 6, 30] directly find neural
patches similar to the given example. However, to the best
of our knowledge, there are no work connecting these neural methods to form a complementary solution.
The neural parametric models (e.g., [14]) yields results,
preserving the content of image and the overall looking of
the artwork. However, the models will distort local style
patterns (shown in the first row of Fig. 1) or cannot obtain locally semantic-level transfer (e.g., eye-to-eye in the
second row of Fig. 1). The neural non-parametric models
(e.g., [26]) can address these issues well, but their example
matching uses a greedy optimization, causing the decreasing in the richness of the style patterns (shown in the first
row of Fig. 2), and introducing wash-out artifacts [19] (see
the second row of Fig. 2). It suggests that such neural nonparametric models should consider global constraint, borrowing from neural parametric models.
In this paper, we propose a novel neural style transfer
algorithm which owns the advantages of both neural parametric and non-parametric methods. This is achieved by
deep feature reshuffle, which refers to spatially rearranging
the position of neural activations. We reshuffle the features
of the style image according to the content image for style
transfer. On one hand, the feature reshuffle enforces the
distribution of style patterns, between the transferring result and the style image, to be globally consistent. It can be
18222

