WILDTRACK: A Multi-camera HD Dataset for
Dense Unscripted Pedestrian Detection
Tatjana Chavdarova1 , Pierre Baqué2 , Stéphane Bouquet2 ,
Andrii Maksai2 , Cijo Jose1 , Timur Bagautdinov2 , Louis Lettry3 ,
Pascal Fua2 , Luc Van Gool3 , and François Fleuret1
1

Machine Learning group, Idiap Research Institute & École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
2
CVLab, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
3
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich
{firstname.lastname}@{idiap1 ,epfl2 ,vision.ee.ethz3 }.ch

Abstract
People detection methods are highly sensitive to occlusions between pedestrians, which are extremely frequent
in many situations where cameras have to be mounted
at a limited height. The reduction of camera prices allows for the generalization of static multi-camera set-ups.
Using joint visual information from multiple synchronized
cameras gives the opportunity to improve detection performance.
In this paper, we present a new large-scale and highresolution dataset. It has been captured with seven static
cameras in a public open area, and unscripted dense groups
of pedestrians standing and walking. Together with the
camera frames, we provide an accurate joint (extrinsic and
intrinsic) calibration, as well as 7 series of 400 annotated
frames for detection at a rate of 2 frames per second. This
results in over 40 000 bounding boxes delimiting every person present in the area of interest, for a total of more than
300 individuals.
We provide a series of benchmark results using baseline
algorithms published over the recent months for multi-view
detection with deep neural networks, and trajectory estimation using a non-Markovian model.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is an important computer vision
problem with numerous applications in security, surveillance, robotics, autonomous driving, and crowdsourcing.
The variation of pedestrians appearance greatly increases
the difficulty of this problem. With the availability of

large-scale monocular datasets of annotated pedestrians and
the advances in detection algorithms, the accuracy of the
pedestrian detectors has improved significantly in the past
few years. Moreover, modern detection algorithms using deep learning allow us to learn discriminative features
which are transferable across datasets. Impressively, recently developed deep learning based monocular detectors
are approaching human-level performance [49] on common
benchmark datasets [17].
However, many situations of practical interest require
detection in highly crowded and cluttered scenes. Severe
occlusions make monocular pedestrian detection insufficient in these scenarios. Luckily, in real-world applications, image feeds from multiple cameras with overlapping
fields of view are often available. Most commonly, the cameras are positioned slightly above the average human height.
Hence designing pedestrian detectors by exploiting multiple
views and the geometry of the scene will provide reliable
detection estimates in crowded scenes.
Surprisingly, to nowadays standards, there is no large
scale and good quality public dataset that replicate this
setup. The most frequently used one, PETS 2009 [21] is
only in the order of several hundreds of frames long. The
provided camera calibration is inaccurate which makes it
difficult to exploit geometrical constraints jointly. Moreover, it is recorded in a so-called actor set-up, meaning
that throughout the sequence, a very limited total number
of different individuals actually appear. All other standard
datasets are either much shorter and scarcely crowded [22,
48, 7], have a very constrained scenario [3] or use nonoverlapping cameras [40].
The lack of such a dataset seriously limits the development of multi-camera detection methods. Recent improve-

5030

