Divide and Grow: Capturing Huge Diversity in Crowd Images with
Incrementally Growing CNN
Deepak Babu Sam
Neeraj N Sajjan
R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India 560012

Mukundhan Srinivasan
NVIDIA
Bangalore, India 560045

Abstract
Automated counting of people in crowd images is a challenging task. The major difficulty stems from the large diversity in the way people appear in crowds. In fact, features available for crowd discrimination largely depend on
the crowd density to the extent that people are only seen as
blobs in a highly dense scene. We tackle this problem with
a growing CNN which can progressively increase its capacity to account for the wide variability seen in crowd scenes.
Our model starts from a base CNN density regressor, which
is trained in equivalence on all types of crowd images. In
order to adapt with the huge diversity, we create two child
regressors which are exact copies of the base CNN. A differential training procedure divides the dataset into two clusters and fine-tunes the child networks on their respective
specialties. Consequently, without any hand-crafted criteria for forming specialties, the child regressors become experts on certain types of crowds. The child networks are
again split recursively, creating two experts at every division. This hierarchical training leads to a CNN tree, where
the child regressors are more fine experts than any of their
parents. The leaf nodes are taken as the final experts and
a classifier network is then trained to predict the correct
specialty for a given test image patch. The proposed model
achieves higher count accuracy on major crowd datasets.
Further, we analyse the characteristics of specialties mined
automatically by our method.

1. Introduction
Crowds are common in public places; be it the daily city
traffic or some special gatherings, analysing crowds is becoming increasingly important both in terms of security as
well as planning. Counting people in crowds, especially
dense gatherings, is a difficult task even for humans. This
is primarily because of the large diversity in the way people
appear in crowded scenes. In highly dense crowds, people are only seen as blobs, while in less dense gatherings

INPUT IMAGE

GROUND TRUTH

SPARSE EXPERT

DENSE EXPERT

Figure 1. Predictions of a typical regressor fine-tuned for sparse or
dense crowds. Models perform better on their own specialties.

facial features may be visible. Hence, the visibility of features for crowd discrimination is related to the density of
the crowd. Severe occlusion, pose changes and view-point
variations further compound the problem. Head or body
detection based methods fails to adapt to such huge diversity. As a result, most modern approaches solve counting
by regression. With advent of deep learning, often Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are trained to predict crowd
density map. Density maps represent count per unit area
and provide spatial information. These models learn to map
crowd features (head or shoulder patterns as they appear in
crowds) to its density as opposed to detecting individuals
with facial or body features.
Typical CNN density regressors [2, 10, 26] are optimized
over an entire dataset containing images of all densities.
And in many datasets, the density of crowd is not uniform.
For example, in PartA of Shanghaitech dataset [26], the distribution is skewed with less number of dense crowd images
than sparse ones. Consequently, performance of models
varies widely across different categories of crowds. This
usually results in over-estimating count for sparse images
and under predicting for dense images as shown in [16].
One obvious solution to address this wide variability is
having multiple regressors, each specialized for a particular
type of crowd. This is illustrated in Figure 1 with predictions made by regressors fine-tuned for sparse and dense
crowds. The experts perform well in their own specialties
but worse in others. The major difficulty in such approaches

3618

