Bootstrapping the Performance of Webly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Tong Shen1 , Guosheng Lin2 , Chunhua Shen1 , Ian Reid1
1
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{tong.shen, chunhua.shen, ian.reid}@adelaide.edu.au
gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Fully supervised methods for semantic segmentation require pixel-level class masks to train, the creation of which
is expensive in terms of manual labour and time. In this
work, we focus on weak supervision, developing a method
for training a high-quality pixel-level classifier for semantic segmentation, using only image-level class labels as the
provided ground-truth. Our method is formulated as a twostage approach in which we first aim to create accurate
pixel-level masks for the training images via a bootstrapping process, and then use these now-accurately segmented
images as a proxy ground-truth in a more standard supervised setting. The key driver for our work is that in the target
dataset we typically have reliable ground-truth image-level
labels, while data crawled from the web may have unreliable labels, but can be filtered to comprise only easy images
to segment, therefore having reliable boundaries. These two
forms of information are complementary and we use this observation to build a novel bi-directional transfer learning
framework. This framework transfers knowledge between
two domains, target domain and web domain, bootstrapping the performance of weakly supervised semantic segmentation. Conducting experiments on the popular benchmark dataset PASCAL VOC 2012 based on both a VGG16
network and on ResNet50, we reach state-of-the-art performance with scores of 60.2% IoU and 63.9% IoU respectively1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation is a fundamental problem
in computer vision whose aim is to predict a category label
for each pixel of an image. Recent approaches [19, 18, 2,
17, 20, 33] based on Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(DCNN) have achieved remarkable success. However, unlike training classification networks [9, 28, 15, 32], which
1 Our code is available at https://github.com/ascust/BDWSS

7DUJHWGRPDLQ

Web domain

Filter
Model-T

Model-W
Enhance

Figure 1: Illustration of the bi-directional framework.
Model-T and Model-W are trained in the target domain and
the web domain respectively. Model-T uses the knowledge
in its domain to help Model-W to filter out image with incorrect tags, yielding a set of high quality easy images.
Model-W trained with high quality web images transfers
the knowledge back to the target domain, helping Model-T
enhance the results.
only requires image-level labels, training a network for semantic segmentation involves a large amount of pixel-level
labels.
As shown in [1], annotating pixel-level labels is very
time-consuming, taking an average of 239.7 seconds for a
single image. In contrast, obtaining image-level labels only
takes 20 seconds or less per image. This motivates exploring the possibility of using partially annotated or weakly
annotated data to achieve reasonable performance. To this
end, a number of semi- or weakly supervised methods have
been proposed [24, 1, 26, 16, 13, 30, 6, 23]. These methods
utilize different levels of supervision including bounding
boxes, scribbles, points, image-level labels, etc. Points indicate the location of the object; bounding boxes and scribbles
imply the extent of the object; image-level supervision only
indicates the presence of the object. Among various types
of supervision, image-level supervision is undoubtedly the
weakest one. In this paper, we focus explicitly on this task
of using the weakest supervision; i.e. semantic segmentation with only image-level labels.
We tackle the problem by focusing on generating the

1363

