Super SloMo: High Quality Estimation of Multiple Intermediate Frames
for Video Interpolation
Huaizu Jiang1
Deqing Sun2
Varun Jampani2
3,2
Ming-Hsuan Yang
Erik Learned-Miller1
Jan Kautz2
1
UMass Amherst 2 NVIDIA 3 UC Merced
{hzjiang,elm}@cs.umass.edu,{deqings,vjampani,jkautz}@nvidia.com, mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Given two consecutive frames, video interpolation aims
at generating intermediate frame(s) to form both spatially
and temporally coherent video sequences. While most
existing methods focus on single-frame interpolation, we
propose an end-to-end convolutional neural network for
variable-length multi-frame video interpolation, where the
motion interpretation and occlusion reasoning are jointly
modeled. We start by computing bi-directional optical
flow between the input images using a U-Net architecture.
These flows are then linearly combined at each time step to
approximate the intermediate bi-directional optical flows.
These approximate flows, however, only work well in locally
smooth regions and produce artifacts around motion boundaries. To address this shortcoming, we employ another UNet to refine the approximated flow and also predict soft visibility maps. Finally, the two input images are warped and
linearly fused to form each intermediate frame. By applying the visibility maps to the warped images before fusion,
we exclude the contribution of occluded pixels to the interpolated intermediate frame to avoid artifacts. Since none
of our learned network parameters are time-dependent, our
approach is able to produce as many intermediate frames as
needed. To train our network, we use 1,132 240-fps video
clips, containing 300K individual video frames. Experimental results on several datasets, predicting different numbers
of interpolated frames, demonstrate that our approach performs consistently better than existing methods.

1. Introduction
There are many memorable moments in your life that
you might want to record with a camera in slow-motion
because they are hard to see clearly with your eyes: the
first time a baby walks, a difficult skateboard trick, a dog
catching a ball, etc. While it is possible to take 240-fps
(frame-per-second) videos with a cell phone, professional

high-speed cameras are still required for higher frame rates.
In addition, many of the moments we would like to slow
down are unpredictable, and as a result, are recorded at
standard frame rates. Recording everything at high frame
rates is impractical–it requires large memories and is powerintensive for mobile devices.
Thus it is of great interest to generate high-quality slowmotion video from existing videos. In addition to transforming standard videos to higher frame rates, video interpolation can be used to generate smooth view transitions.
It also has intriguing new applications in self-supervised
learning, serving as a supervisory signal to learn optical
flow from unlabeled videos [15, 16].
It is challenging to generate multiple intermediate video
frames because the frames have to be coherent, both spatially and temporally. For instance, generating 240-fps
videos from standard sequences (30-fps) requires interpolating seven intermediate frames for every two consecutive
frames. A successful solution has to not only correctly interpret the motion between two input images (implicitly or
explicitly), but also understand occlusions. Otherwise, it
may result in severe artifacts in the interpolated frames, especially around motion boundaries.
Existing methods mainly focus on single-frame video interpolation and have achieved impressive performance for
this problem setup [15, 16, 19, 20]. However, these methods
cannot be directly used to generate arbitrary higher framerate videos. While it is an appealing idea to apply a singleframe video interpolation method recursively to generate
multiple intermediate frames, this approach has at least two
limitations. First, recursive single-frame interpolation cannot be fully parallelized, and is therefore slow, since some
frames cannot be computed until other frames are finished
(e.g., in seven-frame interpolation, frame 2 depends on 0
and 4, while frame 4 depends on 0 and 8). Errors also accumulates during recursive interpolation. Second, it can only
generate 2i − 1 intermediate frames (e.g., 3, 7). As a result, one cannot use this approach (efficiently) to generate
1008-fps video from 24-fps, which requires generating 41
19000

