Defense against Universal Adversarial Perturbations
Naveed Akhtar*

Jian Liu*

Ajmal Mian

*The authors contributed equally to this work.

Computer Science and Software Engineering
The University of Western Australia
naveed.akhtar@uwa.edu.au, jian.liu@research.uwa.edu.au, ajmal.mian@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
Recent advances in Deep Learning show the existence
of image-agnostic quasi-imperceptible perturbations that
when applied to ‘any’ image can fool a state-of-the-art network classifier to change its prediction about the image
label. These ‘Universal Adversarial Perturbations’ pose
a serious threat to the success of Deep Learning in practice. We present the first dedicated framework to effectively
defend the networks against such perturbations. Our approach learns a Perturbation Rectifying Network (PRN) as
‘pre-input’ layers to a targeted model, such that the targeted
model needs no modification. The PRN is learned from real
and synthetic image-agnostic perturbations, where an efficient method to compute the latter is also proposed. A
perturbation detector is separately trained on the Discrete
Cosine Transform of the input-output difference of the PRN.
A query image is first passed through the PRN and verified
by the detector. If a perturbation is detected, the output of
the PRN is used for label prediction instead of the actual image. A rigorous evaluation shows that our framework can
defend the network classifiers against unseen adversarial
perturbations in the real-world scenarios with up to 97.5%
success rate. The PRN also generalizes well in the sense
that training for one targeted network defends another network with a comparable success rate.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks are at the heart of the current advancements in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
providing state-of-the-art performance on many challenging
classification tasks [9], [12], [14], [16], [36], [37]. However,
Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [25] recently showed the possibility of fooling the deep networks to change their prediction
about ‘any’ image that is slightly perturbed with the Universal Adversarial Perturbations. For a given network model,
these image-agnostic (hence universal) perturbations can be
computed rather easily [25], [26]. The perturbations remain

Figure 1. Adding quasi-imperceptible universal adversarial perturbations [25] can fool neural networks. The proposed framework
rectifies the images to restore the network predictions. The patterns removed by rectification are separately analyzed to decide
on the presence of adversarial perturbations in images. The shown
‘perturbations’ and ‘removed patterns’ are normalized on different
scales for better visualization.

quasi-imperceptible (see Fig. 1), yet the adversarial examples generated by adding the perturbations to the images
fool the networks with alarmingly high probabilities [25].
Furthermore, the fooling is able to generalize well across
different network models.
Being image-agnostic, universal adversarial perturbations can be conveniently exploited to fool models on-thefly on unseen images by using pre-computed perturbations.
This even eradicates the need of on-board computational
capacity that is needed for generating image-specific perturbations [7], [21]. This fact, along the cross-model generalization of universal perturbations make them particularly
relevant to the practical cases where a model is deployed in
13389

