Recurrent Pixel Embedding for Instance Grouping
Shu Kong, Charless Fowlkes
Dept. of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine
{skong2, fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu
Abstract
We introduce a differentiable, end-to-end trainable
framework for solving pixel-level grouping problems such
as instance segmentation consisting of two novel components. First, we regress pixels into a hyper-spherical embedding space so that pixels from the same group have high
cosine similarity while those from different groups have similarity below a specified margin. We analyze the choice of
embedding dimension and margin, relating them to theoretical results on the problem of distributing points uniformly
on the sphere. Second, to group instances, we utilize a variant of mean-shift clustering, implemented as a recurrent
neural network parameterized by kernel bandwidth. This
recurrent grouping module is differentiable, enjoys convergent dynamics and probabilistic interpretability. Backpropagating the group-weighted loss through this module allows
learning to focus on correcting embedding errors that won’t
be resolved during subsequent clustering. Our framework,
while conceptually simple and theoretically abundant, is
also practically effective and computationally efficient. We
demonstrate substantial improvements over state-of-the-art
instance segmentation for object proposal generation, as
well as demonstrating the benefits of grouping loss for classification tasks such as boundary detection and semantic
segmentation.

1. Introduction
The successes of deep convolutional neural nets (CNNs)
at image classification has spawned a flurry of work in computer vision on adapting these models to pixel-level image
understanding tasks, such as boundary detection [1, 89, 63],
semantic segmentation [59, 10, 45], optical flow [86, 20],
and pose estimation [84, 7]. The key ideas that have enabled
this adaption thus far are: (1) deconvolution schemes that
allow for upsampling coarse pooled feature maps to make
detailed predictions at the spatial resolution of individual
pixels [89, 27], (2) skip connections and hyper-columns
which concatenate representations across multi-resolution
feature maps [31, 10], (3) atrous convolution which allows

Figure 1: Our framework embeds pixels into a hyper-sphere
where recurrent mean-shift dynamics groups pixels into a variable
number of object instances. Here we visualize random projections
of a 64-dim embeddings into 3-dimensions.

efficient computation with large receptive fields while maintaining spatial resolution [10, 45], and (4) fully convolutional operation which handles variable sized input images.
In contrast, there has been less innovation in the development of specialized loss functions for training. Pixel-level
labeling tasks fall into the category of structured output prediction [4], where the model outputs a structured object
(e.g., a whole image parse) rather than a scalar or categorical variable. However, most CNN pixel-labeling architectures are trained with loss functions that decompose into a
simple (weighted) sum of classification or regression losses
over individual pixel labels.
The need to address the output space structure is more
apparent when considering problems where the set of output labels isn’t fixed. Our motivating example is object instance segmentation, where the model generates a collection of segments corresponding to object instances. This
problem can’t be treated as k-way classification since the
number of objects isn’t known in advance. Further, the loss
should be invariant to permutations of the instance labels
within the same semantic category.
As a result, most recent successful methods for instance
segmentation have adopted more heuristic approaches that
first use an object detector to enumerate candidate instances and then perform pixel-level segmentation of each
instance [56, 17, 54, 55, 2]. Alternately one can generate
generic proposal segments and then label each one with a
semantic detector [30, 12, 31, 16, 81, 33]. In either case
the detection and segmentation steps can both be mapped
to standard binary classification losses. While effective,
4321
9018

