Iterative Visual Reasoning Beyond Convolutions
Xinlei Chen1
Li-Jia Li2
Li Fei-Fei2
Abhinav Gupta1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Google

spatial

Abstract
We present a novel framework for iterative visual reasoning. Our framework goes beyond current recognition systems that lack the capability to reason beyond stack of convolutions. The framework consists of two core modules: a
local module that uses spatial memory [4] to store previous
beliefs with parallel updates; and a global graph-reasoning
module. Our graph module has three components: a) a
knowledge graph where we represent classes as nodes and
build edges to encode different types of semantic relationships between them; b) a region graph of the current image
where regions in the image are nodes and spatial relationships between these regions are edges; c) an assignment
graph that assigns regions to classes. Both the local module and the global module roll-out iteratively and cross-feed
predictions to each other to refine estimates. The final predictions are made by combining the best of both modules
with an attention mechanism. We show strong performance
over plain ConvNets, e.g. achieving an 8.4% absolute improvement on ADE [55] measured by per-class average precision. Analysis also shows that the framework is resilient
to missing regions for reasoning.

spatial reasoning

person
window

window

car

In recent years, we have made significant advances in
standard recognition tasks such as image classification [16],
detection [37] or segmentation [3]. Most of these gains are
a result of using feed-forward end-to-end learned ConvNet
models. Unlike humans where visual reasoning about the
space and semantics is crucial [1], our current visual systems lack any context reasoning beyond convolutions with
large receptive fields. Therefore, a critical question is how
do we incorporate both spatial and semantic reasoning as
we build next-generation vision systems.
Our goal is to build a system that can not only extract
and utilize hierarchy of convolutional features, but also improve its estimates via spatial and semantic relationships.
But what are spatial and semantic relationships and how can
they be used to improve recognition? Take a look at Fig. 1.
An example of spatial reasoning (top-left) would be: if three
regions out of four in a line are “window”, then the fourth is
also likely to be “window”. An example of semantic reasoning (bottom-right) would be to recognize “school bus” even

bus

car

receptive fields

school bus
current systems

1. Introduction

spatial-semantic

origin

semantic reasoning

semantic

Figure 1. Current recognition systems lack the reasoning power
beyond convolutions with large receptive fields, whereas humans
can explore the rich space of spatial and semantic relationships for
reasoning: e.g. inferring the fourth “window” even with occlusion,
or the “person” who drives the “car”. To close this gap, we present
a generic framework that also uses relationships to iteratively reason and build up estimates.

if we have seen few or no examples of it – just given examples of “bus” and knowing their connections. Finally, an example of spatial-semantic reasoning could be: recognition
of a “car” on road should help in recognizing the “person”
inside “driving” the “car”.
A key recipe to reasoning with relationships is to iteratively build up estimates. Recently, there have been
efforts to incorporate such reasoning via top-down modules [38, 48] or using explicit memories [51, 32]. In the
case of top-down modules, high-level features which have
class-based information can be used in conjunction with
low-level features to improve recognition performance. An
17239

