Learning to Promote Saliency Detectors
Yu Zeng1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Lihe Zhang1 , Mengyang Feng1 , Ali Borji2
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
University of Central Florida, USA
zengyu@mail.dlut.edu.cn, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, zhanglihe@dlut.edu.cn,
mengyangfeng@gmail.com, aliborji@gmail.com

Salient

1. Introduction
Detecting salient objects or regions of an image, i.e.
saliency detection, is useful for many computer vision
tasks. As a preprocessing step, saliency detection is appealing for many practical applications, such as content-ware
video compression [37], image resizing [2], and image retrieval [10]. A plethora of saliency models have been proposed in the past two decades to locate conspicuous image
regions [4, 6, 5]. Although much effort has been devoted
and significant progress has been made, saliency detection
remains a challenging open problem.
Conventional saliency detection methods usually utilize
low-level features and heuristic priors which are not robust
enough to discover salient objects in complex scenes, neither are capable of capturing semantic objects. Deep neural

Persons

The categories and appearance of salient objects vary
from image to image, therefore, saliency detection is an
image-specific task. Due to lack of large-scale saliency
training data, using deep neural networks (DNNs) with pretraining is difficult to precisely capture the image-specific
saliency cues. To solve this issue, we formulate a zero-shot
learning problem to promote existing saliency detectors.
Concretely, a DNN is trained as an embedding function
to map pixels and the attributes of the salient/background
regions of an image into the same metric space, in which
an image-specific classifier is learned to classify the pixels. Since the image-specific task is performed by the classifier, the DNN embedding effectively plays the role of a
general feature extractor. Compared with transferring the
learning to a new recognition task using limited data, this
formulation makes the DNN learn more effectively from
small data. Extensive experiments on five data sets show
that our method significantly improves accuracy of existing methods and compares favorably against state-of-theart approaches.

Background

Signs

Abstract

Figure 1. Images and the corresponding feature maps from the last
convolution layer of VGG16 [25]. The small binary mask in each
image indicates the salient object of this image.

networks (DNNs) have been used to remedy the drawbacks
of conventional methods. They can learn high-level semantic features from training samples, thus are more effective
in locating semantically salient regions, yielding more accurate results in complex scenes.
DNNs usually need to be trained on a large dataset, while
training data for saliency detection is very limited. This issue is generally solved by pre-training on a large dataset for
other tasks, such as image classification, which easily leads
to several problems. First, saliency detection is an imagespecific task, and labels should be assigned to pixels depending on the image content. However, features produced
by pre-trained feature extractors are supposed to work for
all images. For example, signs and persons are salient objects in the first column of Figure 1 , while they belong to
the background in the second column. However, the regions
of signs and persons are indiscriminately highlighted in the
feature maps in the two columns. With this kind of feature
extractor, the prediction model might be enforced to learn
to map similar features into opposite labels, which is difficult for small training dataset. Second, categories and appearance of salient objects vary from image to image, while
small training data is not enough to capture the diversity.
For example, the six salient objects shown in Figure 1 come
from six different categories and differ wildly in their appearance. Consequently, it might be hard to learn a unified
detector to handle all varieties of salient objects.

1644

