Statistical Tomography of Microscopic Life
Aviad Levis, Yoav Y. Schechner, Ronen Talmon
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
aviad.levis@gmail.com ; yoav@ee.technion.ac.il ; ronen@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We achieve tomography of 3D volumetric natural objects, where each projected 2D image corresponds to a
different specimen. Each specimen has unknown random
3D orientation, location, and scale. This imaging scenario is relevant to microscopic and mesoscopic organisms, aerosols and hydrosols viewed naturally by a microscope. In-class scale variation inhibits prior single-particle
reconstruction methods. We thus generalize tomographic
recovery to account for all degrees of freedom of a similarity transformation. This enables geometric self-calibration
in imaging of transparent objects. We make the computational load manageable and reach good quality reconstruction in a short time. This enables extraction of statistics
that are important for a scientific study of specimen populations, specifically size distribution parameters. We apply
the method to study of plankton.

1. Introduction
The environment is teeming with microscopic and mesoscopic objects, whose study both structurally and as a population is central to science [39]. Examples include aerosols,
hydrosols, and small organisms which have wide varieties
of classes. It is possible to take samples to a lab and measure
their 3D statistics, while they are few and sit still. However,
such an approach has drawbacks. In a lab, organisms do
not behave as in nature. To minimize biasing nature, in-situ
microscopes are used, as illustrated in Fig. 1. There, and
also in many lab studies, specimens do not sit still. Hence
each image is of a different specimen at random orientation, scale, and location. Moreover, as there is a priority on
gathering large data, time may not be allocated to scan each
of the specimens in 3D using common microscopic methods. Due to the randomness of projection of volumetric objects, the data are not well amenable to 2D image analysis.
Thus, manual labor is used, greatly limiting the statistical
and structural understanding of nature. Consider plankton
(Fig. 2), mesoscopic organisms which are a fundamental
building block in the oceanic food chain. Their population
state is indicative of climate changes and the state of the
marine eco-system [17]. In-situ microscopes [39,40] give

Figure 1. A random set of moving organisms at different orientations and scales is imaged using a submerged microscope. Statistical tomographic reconstruction yields self-calibrated estimation of
the 3D density map, along with the unknown orientation and scale
of each sample. Estimation of the population’s size-distribution is
thus enabled, jointly with 3D recovery (3D-POP). Microscope 3D
model courtesy of Jaffe Lab.

high-temporal resolution in 2D [1,15], while 3D imaging of
fixated plankton is done in the laboratory [22,27].
To address these challenges, we seek in-situ volumetric
recovery and natural population statistics. In the case of biological specimens, this can provide high-quality estimates
of bio-mass [38] and size-distributions [6]. The idea is to
use an ensemble of 2D images, each of a different specimen, and recover all that is needed based on this random
data. Our aim is to recover a statistical 3D tomography of
microscopic life. Unlike common computational tomography [16,18,22] the images acquired are uncalibrated: the
rotation, scale, and locations of the specimens are random
and unknown.
We build on Single Particle Reconstruction (SPR) [12].
16411

