Image Blind Denoising With Generative Adversarial Network Based
Noise Modeling
Jingwen Chen, Jiawei Chen, Hongyang Chao∗, Ming Yang
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, P. R. China
CVTE Research, Guangzhou, P. R. China
The Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University),
Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, P. R. China
{chenjw87, chenjw85}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, isschhy@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yangming@cvte.com

Abstract
In this paper, we consider a typical image blind denoising problem, which is to remove unknown noise from noisy
images. As we all know, discriminative learning based
methods, such as DnCNN, can achieve state-of-the-art denoising results, but they are not applicable to this problem
due to the lack of paired training data. To tackle the barrier,
we propose a novel two-step framework. First, a Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) is trained to estimate the noise
distribution over the input noisy images and to generate
noise samples. Second, the noise patches sampled from the
first step are utilized to construct a paired training dataset,
which is used, in turn, to train a deep Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) for denoising. Extensive experiments have
been done to demonstrate the superiority of our approach
in image blind denoising.

(a) Original

(b) CBM3D (σ = 25)

(c) CDnCNN-B

(d) Our method

Figure 1. An Example of blind denoising. (a) The original noisy
image. (b) Result of CBM3D at default setting σ = 25 (σ is the
standard deviation). (c) Result of CDnCNN-B (a blind Gaussian
denoising model). (d) Result of our method.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is a classic topic in low level vision
as well as an important pre-processing step in many vision
tasks. Following the degradation model y = x + v, image
denoising targets at recovering a noise-free image x from
its noisy observation y by reducing the noise v. In many
cases, the noise information in the image is unavailable due
to many factors such as the environment (e.g. low light) or
the uncertainties of sensors. For example, photos taken by
mobile phones on a specific occasion (e.g. night) are usually subject to unknown noise just as mentioned above. It
is meaningful to remove these noises to improve the visual
experience of users. In this paper, we focus on how to solve
this blind denoising problem.
As popular solutions to denoising problems, various image prior based methods [8, 6, 21, 2], such as BM3D [4],
can be extended to remove unknown noises with noise
∗ Corresponding author: Hongyang Chao.

level estimated by algorithms like [19, 37, 17]. These approaches model image priors over the input image directly
and achieve remarkable results. However, there are still
several main drawbacks of this kind of methods. First, the
image priors adopted by these methods are defined mostly
based on human knowledge, so the full features of the images could be hardly captured. Therefore, the performance
may be limited (see an example in Fig. 1(b)). Second, most
of these approaches only use the internal information of the
input image with no use of any external information. This
way, though these methods can be exploited for blind denoising with some adaption, there is still room for improvement.
Besides the methods aforementioned, there are a few approaches [35, 18, 25], such as Multiscale [15], proposed to
address the image blind denoising problems. These methods generally are the integration of noise model estimation
and an adaptive denoising algorithm. Modeling the noise

3155

