Toward Driving Scene Understanding:
A Dataset for Learning Driver Behavior and Causal Reasoning
Vasili Ramanishka1

Yi-Ting Chen2

Teruhisa Misu2

Kate Saenko1

vram@bu.edu

ychen@honda-ri.com

tmisu@honda-ri.com

saenko@bu.edu

1

Boston University, 2 Honda Research Institute, USA

Abstract
Driving Scene understanding is a key ingredient for intelligent transportation systems. To achieve systems that
can operate in a complex physical and social environment,
they need to understand and learn how humans drive and
interact with traffic scenes. We present the Honda Research
Institute Driving Dataset (HDD), a challenging dataset to
enable research on learning driver behavior in real-life environments. The dataset includes 104 hours of real human
driving in the San Francisco Bay Area collected using an instrumented vehicle equipped with different sensors. We provide a detailed analysis of HDD with a comparison to other
driving datasets. A novel annotation methodology is introduced to enable research on driver behavior understanding
from untrimmed data sequences. As the first step, baseline
algorithms for driver behavior detection are trained and
tested to demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed task.

1. Introduction
Driving involves different levels of scene understanding
and decision making, ranging from detection and tracking
of traffic participants, localization, scene recognition, risk
assessment based on prediction and causal reasoning, to
interaction. The performance of visual scene recognition
tasks has been significantly boosted by recent advances of
deep learning algorithms [27, 9, 35, 8], and an increasing
number of benchmark datasets [6, 21]. However, to achieve
an intelligent transportation system, we need a higher level
understanding.
Different vision-based datasets for autonomous driving [7, 12, 22, 28, 4, 34, 23] have been introduced and push
forward the development of core algorithmic components.
In core computer vision tasks, we have witnessed significant advances in object detection and semantic segmentation because of large scale annotated datasets [6, 7, 4]. Additionally, the Oxford RobotCar Dataset [22] addresses the
challenges of robust localization and mapping under signif-

Figure 1: An example illustrating different driver behaviors in
traffic scenes. The yellow trajectory indicates GPS positions of
our instrumented vehicle. The driver performs actions and reasons
about the scenes. To understand driver behavior, we define a 4layer annotation scheme: Goal-oriented action, Stimulus-driven
action, Cause and Attention. In Cause and Attention, we use
bounding boxes to indicate when the traffic participant causes a
stop or is attended by the driver. Best viewed in color.

icantly different weather and lighting conditions. However,
these datasets do not address many of the challenges in the
higher level driving scene understanding. We believe detecting traffic participants and parsing scenes into the corresponding semantic categories is only the first step. Toward
a complete driving scene understanding, we need to understand the interactions between human driver behaviors and
the corresponding traffic scene situations [29].
To achieve the goal, we design and collect HDD1 with
the explicit goal of learning how humans perform actions
and interact with traffic participants. We collected 104
hours of real human driving in the San Francisco Bay Area
1 The dataset will be made available at
https://usa.honda-ri.com/HDD

7699

