A PID Controller Approach for Stochastic Optimization of Deep Networks
Wangpeng An1,2 , Haoqian Wang1,3 , Qingyun Sun4 , Jun Xu2 , Qionghai Dai1,3 , and Lei Zhang ∗2
1 Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2 Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China.
3 Shenzhen Institute of Future Media Technology, Shenzhen, China
4 Stanford University, CA, USA
1 anwangpeng@gmail.com, 1 wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn, 2 cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep neural networks have demonstrated their power in
many computer vision applications. State-of-the-art deep
architectures such as VGG, ResNet, and DenseNet are
mostly optimized by the SGD-Momentum algorithm, which
updates the weights by considering their past and current gradients. Nonetheless, SGD-Momentum suffers from
the overshoot problem, which hinders the convergence of
network training. Inspired by the prominent success of
proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller in automatic control, we propose a PID approach for accelerating deep network optimization. We first reveal the intrinsic
connections between SGD-Momentum and PID based controller, then present the optimization algorithm which exploits the past, current, and change of gradients to update
the network parameters. The proposed PID method reduces
much the overshoot phenomena of SGD-Momentum, and it
achieves up to 50% acceleration on popular deep network
architectures with competitive accuracy, as verified by our
experiments on the benchmark datasets including CIFAR10,
CIFAR100, and Tiny-ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Benefitting from the availability of large-scale visual
datasets such as ImageNet [1], deep neural networks
(DNN), especially deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), have significantly improved the system accuracy
in many computer vision problems, such as image classi∗ Corresponding author. This work is supported by HK RGC GRF grant
(PolyU 152135/16E), the NSFC fund (61571259, 61531014), Shenzhen
Science and Technology Project under Grant (GGFW2017040714161462,
JCYJ20170307153051701) and the National High-tech R&D Program of
China (863Program, 2015AA015901).

fication [2], object detection [3], and face recognition [4],
etc. Despite the great successes of deep learning, the training of deep networks on large-scale datasets is usually computationally expensive, costing several days or even weeks
using GPU equipped high-end PCs. It is substantially important to investigate how to accelerate the training speed
of deep models without sacrificing the accuracy, which can
save the time and memory cost, particularly for resource
limited applications.
The key component of DNN training is the optimizer,
which defines how the millions or even billions of parameters of a deep model are updated. The learning rate is one of
the most important hyper-parameters to train a DNN [5].
Based on how the learning rate is set, deep learning optimizers can be categorized into two groups, hand-tuned
learning rate optimizers such as stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) [6], SGD Momentum [7] and Nesterov′ s Momentum [7], and auto learning rate optimizers such as AdaGrad [8], RMSProp [9] and Adam [10], etc. Auto learning
rate optimizers adaptively tune an individual learning rate
for each parameter. Such a goal of fine adaptation is attractive and it is expected to yield better deep model learning
results. However, the recent findings by Wilson et al. [11]
show that hand-tuned SGD-Momentum achieves better result at the same speed or even faster speed. The hypothesis put forth here is that adaptive methods may converge
to different local minima [12]. It is also noted that most of
the best-performance deep models such as ResNet [13] and
DenseNet [14] are usually trained by SGD-Momentum.
The strategy of SGD-Momentum is to consider both the
past and present gradients to update the network parameters. However, SGD-Momentum suffers from the overshoot
problem [15], which refers to the phenomena that a weight′ s
value exceeds much its target value and does not change its
update direction. Such an overshoot problem hinders the

8522

