Video Based Reconstruction of 3D People Models
Thiemo Alldieck1

Marcus Magnor1

Weipeng Xu2

Christian Theobalt2

Gerard Pons-Moll2

1

2

Computer Graphics Lab, TU Braunschweig, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany

{alldieck,magnor}@cg.cs.tu-bs.de {wxu,theobalt,gpons}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Figure 1: Our technique allows to extract for the first time accurate 3D human body models, including hair and clothing,
from a single video sequence of the person moving in front of the camera such that the person is seen from all sides.

Abstract
This paper describes a method to obtain accurate 3D
body models and texture of arbitrary people from a single,
monocular video in which a person is moving. Based on
a parametric body model, we present a robust processing
pipeline to infer 3D model shapes including clothed people with 4.5mm reconstruction accuracy. At the core of our
approach is the transformation of dynamic body pose into
a canonical frame of reference. Our main contribution is
a method to transform the silhouette cones corresponding
to dynamic human silhouettes to obtain a visual hull in a
common reference frame. This enables efficient estimation
of a consensus 3D shape, texture and implanted animation
skeleton based on a large number of frames. Results on 4
different datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach to produce accurate 3D models. Requiring only an
RGB camera, our method enables everyone to create their
own fully animatable digital double, e.g., for social VR applications or virtual try-on for online fashion shopping.

1. Introduction
A personalized realistic and animatable 3D model of
a human is required for many applications, including virtual and augmented reality, human tracking for surveillance,
gaming, or biometrics. This model should comprise the
person-specific static geometry of the body, hair and clothing, alongside a coherent surface texture.

One way to capture such models is to use expensive active scanners. But size and cost of such scanners prevent
their use in consumer applications. Alternatively, multiview passive reconstruction from a dense set of static body
pose images can be used [22, 46]. However, it is hard for
people to stand still for a long time, and so this process is
time-consuming and error-prone. Also, consumer RGB-D
cameras can be used to scan 3D body models [39], but these
specialized sensors are not as widely available as video.
Further, all these methods merely reconstruct surface shape
and texture, but no rigged animation skeleton inside. All
aforementioned applications would benefit from the ability
to automatically reconstruct a personalized movable avatar
from monocular RGB video.
Despite remarkable progress in reconstructing 3D body
models [6, 71, 81] or free-form surface [86, 44, 47, 21]
from depth data, 3D reconstruction of humans in clothing
from monocular video (without a pre-recorded scan of the
person) has not been addressed before. In this work, we estimate the shape of people in clothing from a single video
in which the person moves. Some methods infer shape
parameters of a parametric body model from a single image [7, 20, 5, 27, 83, 34], but the reconstruction is limited to
the parametric space and can not capture personalized shape
detail and clothing geometry.
To estimate geometry from a video sequence, we could
jointly optimize a single free-form shape constrained by a

8387

