Relation Networks for Object Detection
Han Hu1∗ Jiayuan Gu2∗†

Zheng Zhang1∗

Jifeng Dai1

Yichen Wei1

1

2

Microsoft Research Asia
Department of Machine Intelligence, School of EECS, Peking University
{hanhu,v-jiaygu,zhez,jifdai,yichenw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Although it is well believed for years that modeling relations between objects would help object recognition, there
has not been evidence that the idea is working in the deep
learning era. All state-of-the-art object detection systems
still rely on recognizing object instances individually, without exploiting their relations during learning.
This work proposes an object relation module. It processes a set of objects simultaneously through interaction
between their appearance feature and geometry, thus allowing modeling of their relations. It is lightweight and
in-place. It does not require additional supervision and is
easy to embed in existing networks. It is shown effective on
improving object recognition and duplicate removal steps
in the modern object detection pipeline. It verifies the efficacy of modeling object relations in CNN based detection.
It gives rise to the first fully end-to-end object detector.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in object detection using deep convolutional neutral networks
(CNNs) [27]. The state-of-the-art object detection methods [24, 18, 38, 9, 32, 10, 23] mostly follow the region
based paradigm since it is established in the seminal work
R-CNN [19]. Given a sparse set of region proposals, object
classification and bounding box regression are performed
on each proposal individually. A heuristic and hand crafted
post-processing step, non-maximum suppression (NMS), is
then applied to remove duplicate detections.
It has been well recognized in the vision community for
years that contextual information, or relation between objects, helps object recognition [12, 17, 46, 47, 39, 36, 17,
16, 6]. Most such works are before the prevalence of deep
learning. During the deep learning era, there is no significant progress about exploiting object relation for detection
learning. Most methods still focus on recognizing objects
∗ Equal contribution. †This work is done when Jiayuan Gu is an intern
at Microsoft Research Asia.

separately.
One reason is that object-object relation is hard to model.
The objects are at arbitrary image locations, of different
scales, within different categories, and their number may
vary across different images. The modern CNN based methods mostly have a simple regular network structure [25, 23].
It is unclear how to accommodate above irregularities in existing methods.
Our approach is motivated by the success of attention
modules in natural language processing field [5, 49]. An
attention module can effect an individual element (e.g., a
word in the target sentence in machine translation) by aggregating information (or features) from a set of elements
(e.g., all words in the source sentence). The aggregation
weights are automatically learnt, driven by the task goal.
An attention module can model dependency between the
elements, without making excessive assumptions on their
locations and feature distributions. Recently, attention modules have been successfully applied in vision problems such
as image captioning [50].
In this work, for the first time we propose an adapted attention module for object detection. It is built upon a basic
attention module. An apparent distinction is that the primitive elements are objects instead of words. The objects have
2D spatial arrangement and variations in scale/aspect ratio.
Their locations, or geometric features in a general sense,
play a more complex and important role than the word location in an 1D sentence. Accordingly, the proposed module
extends the original attention weight into two components:
the original weight and a new geometric weight. The latter
models the spatial relationships between objects and only
considers the relative geometry between them, making the
module translation invariant, a desirable property for object
recognition. The new geometric weight proves important in
our experiments.
The module is called object relation module. It shares
the same advantages of an attention module. It takes variable number of inputs, runs in parallel (as opposed to sequential relation modeling [29, 44, 6]), is fully differen13588

