Partial Transfer Learning with Selective Adversarial Networks
Zhangjie Cao† , Mingsheng Long†∗, Jianmin Wang† , Michael I. Jordan♯
†
KLiss, MOE; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
†
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Software
♯
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
caozhangjie14@gmail.com, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn, jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Adversarial learning has been successfully embedded into
deep networks to learn transferable features, which reduce
distribution discrepancy between the source and target domains. Existing domain adversarial networks assume fully
shared label space across domains. In the presence of big
data, there is strong motivation of transferring both classification and representation models from existing large-scale
domains to unknown small-scale domains. This paper introduces partial transfer learning, which relaxes the shared
label space assumption to that the target label space is only
a subspace of the source label space. Previous methods typically match the whole source domain to the target domain,
which are prone to negative transfer for the partial transfer
problem. We present Selective Adversarial Network (SAN),
which simultaneously circumvents negative transfer by selecting out the outlier source classes and promotes positive
transfer by maximally matching the data distributions in
the shared label space. Experiments demonstrate that our
models exceed state-of-the-art results for partial transfer
learning tasks on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep networks have significantly improved the state of
the art for a wide variety of machine learning problems and
applications. At the moment, these impressive gains in performance come only when massive amounts of labeled data
are available. Since manual labeling of sufficient training
data for diverse application domains on-the-fly is often prohibitive, for problems short of labeled data, there is strong
motivation to establishing effective algorithms to reduce the
labeling consumption, typically by leveraging off-the-shelf
labeled data from a different but related source domain. This
promising transfer learning paradigm, however, suffers from
the shift in data distributions across different domains, which
∗ Corresponding author: M. Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn).

poses a major obstacle in adapting classification models to
target tasks [23].
Existing transfer learning methods assume shared label
space and different feature distributions across the source
and target domains. These methods bridge different domains
by learning domain-invariant feature representations without
using target labels, and the classifier learned from source
domain can be directly applied to target domain. Recent
studies have revealed that deep networks can learn more
transferable features for transfer learning [5, 33], by disentangling explanatory factors of variations behind domains.
The latest advances have been achieved by embedding transfer learning in the pipeline of deep feature learning to extract
domain-invariant deep representations [30, 16, 7, 31, 18].
In the presence of big data, we can readily access largescale labeled datasets such as ImageNet-1K. Thus, a natural
ambition is to directly transfer both the representation and
classification models from large-scale dataset to our target
dataset, such as Caltech-256, which are usually small-scale
and with unknown categories at training and testing time.
From big data viewpoint, we can assume that the large-scale
dataset is diverse enough to subsume all categories of the
small-scale dataset. Thus, we introduce a novel partial transfer learning problem, assuming that the target label space is
a subspace of the source label space. It is a prerequisite of
open set domain adaptation [3]. As shown in Figure 1, partial
transfer learning problem is more general and challenging
than standard transfer learning, since outlier source classes
(“sofa”) will result in negative transfer when discriminating
the target classes (“soccer-ball” and “binoculars”). Negative
transfer is the phenomenon that a transfer learner performs
even worse than a supervised classifier trained solely on
the source domain, which is the key challenge of transfer
learning [23]. Thus, matching the whole source and target
domains as previous methods is not an effective solution to
this new partial transfer learning scenario.
This paper presents Selective Adversarial Networks
(SAN), which largely extends the ability of deep adversarial
adaptation [7] to address partial transfer learning from large-

2724

