View Extrapolation of Human Body from a Single Image
Hao Zhu1,2 Hao Su3 Peng Wang4,5 Xun Cao1 Ruigang Yang2,4,5
1
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA
3
University of California, San Diego, CA, USA 4 Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
5
National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning and Technology and Application, China
zhuhao nju@163.com

haosu@eng.ucsd.edu

{wangpeng54, yangruigang}@baidu.com

caoxun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We study how to synthesize novel views of human body
from a single image. Though recent deep learning based
methods work well for rigid objects, they often fail on
objects with large articulation, like human bodies. The core
step of existing methods is to fit a map from the observable
views to novel views by CNNs; however, the rich articulation modes of human body make it rather challenging
for CNNs to memorize and interpolate the data well. To
address the problem, we propose a novel deep learning
based pipeline that explicitly estimates and leverages the
geometry of the underlying human body. Our new pipeline
is a composition of a shape estimation network and an image generation network, and at the interface a perspective
transformation is applied to generate a forward flow for
pixel value transportation. Our design is able to factor out
the space of data variation and makes learning at each step
much easier. Empirically, we show that the performance for
pose-varying objects can be improved dramatically. Our
method can also be applied on real data captured by 3D
sensors, and the flow generated by our methods can be used
for generating high quality results in higher resolution.

1. Introduction
In recent years, a number of papers have been published
on inferring 3D structures from single images using learning based approaches [9, 38, 11, 40, 28, 17, 35, 19, 7, 34,
3, 24, 21, 8]. One important task in this topic is novel-view
synthesis - predicting what a given object would look like
after a known 3D rotation is applied. In psychology, this
task is known as “mental rotation” and experiments tell us
that people excel at this task [27]. Practically, addressing
this problem would also have far-reaching impacts in image
editing, augmented reality, virtual reality, and many other
applications.
In principle, inferring 3D geometry from a single image
is an ill-defined problem. Recently, [35, 6, 40, 28, 17, 38]

transform

source view

backward flow

ground truth

target view

prior art
our work

source view

depth map

forward flow

projection

backward flow

target view

transform

Figure 1. When dealing with pose-varying human body, previous
methods like VSAP[40] fail to predict accurate flow. In contrast to VSAP that directly predicts 2D flow, our method firstly
predicts the depth map, then the forward flow based framework
dramatically improve the accuracy of the flow prediction. This
architecture reflects our appearance - shape - flow strategy.

have shown that it is quite promising to learn a cross-view
synthesizer from many source/target view pairs.
While decent results have been obtained for rigid objects
like vehicles, existing approaches perform quite poorly on
human bodies, which are both articulated and deformable.
As can be seen in Figure 1, the prediction from previous
methods is often blurry or distorted. To understand why,
let’s take a closer look into these approaches. Typically,
they either directly predict each pixel in the target view
[36, 28, 38, 15, 39], or predict a flow map that represents
where pixels should be copied from in the source view
(backward flow prediction)[40, 17, 11, 16, 14]. Compared
with rigid objects, the articulation of moving parts of humans, like limbs and heads, may differ greatly from case
to case. Coupled with the orientation of human body,
part deformation and source/target view, this kind of pose
variation forms an even larger joint space for all possible
source/target sample pairs. Therefore, it becomes extremely
difficult for the network to remember and interpolate such
highly varied data from limited training samples.
Our approach, based upon the flow prediction idea, is

4450

