PoseFlow: A Deep Motion Representation
for Understanding Human Behaviors in Videos

1

Dingwen Zhang1,2† , Guangyu Guo1† , Dong Huang2† , Junwei Han1∗
Northwestern Polytechincal University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University
zdw2006yyy@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, gyguo95@gmail.com
dghuang@andrew.cmu.edu, junweihan2010@gmail.com

Abstract
Motion of the human body is the critical cue for understanding and characterizing human behavior in videos.
Most existing approaches explore the motion cue using optical flows. However, optical flow usually contains motion on
both the interested human bodies and the undesired background. This “noisy” motion representation makes it very
challenging for pose estimation and action recognition in
real scenarios. To address this issue, this paper presents a
novel deep motion representation, called PoseFlow, which
reveals human motion in videos while suppressing background and motion blur, and being robust to occlusion. For
learning PoseFlow with mild computational cost, we propose a functionally structured spatial-temporal deep network, PoseFlow Net (PFN), to jointly solve the skeleton localization and matching problems of PoseFlow. Comprehensive experiments show that PFN outperforms the stateof-the-art deep flow estimation models in generating PoseFlow. Moreover, PoseFlow demonstrates its potential on
improving two challenging tasks in human video analysis:
pose estimation and action recognition.

1. Introduction
Understanding and characterizing human behavior in
video have attracted tremendous research interests due to its
potential to revolutionize daily life, health care and public
security. In particular, applications such as video surveillance, Telerehabilitation, social robotics and autonomous
driving, require automatically detecting and recognizing human body motion from cluttered background. To meet
these demands, researchers have made great efforts in
the last few years on pose estimation [3], tracking [6],
human parsing [23], action recognition [18], person reidentification [22, 4]. In all these tasks, learning effective
representation of the body motion plays a critical role for
∗ Corresponding author. † The first three authors contribute equally.

Figure 1. Optical flow and PoseFlow (our) computed on video
frames. Pixels in the Optical flow and PoseFlow images are visualized as color-coded vector fields (Best viewed in color). PoseFlow reveals only human body motion in videos from the background motion (the 1st row), body motion blur (the 2nd row) and
occlusion (the 3rd row).

improving detection and recognition of human behavior in
videos.
One of the most widely used motion representations in
video is optical flow [2]. Optical flow consists of the displacement vectors of correspondent pixels between video
frames. Most video analysis tasks require precomputed optical flows. Without using the pose and action labels that
correspond to human body motion, the displacement vectors of optical flow are produced not only on the interested
human bodies but also on the undesired background (See
the middle column in Fig. 1). Given cluttered background,
body motion blur and occlusion in both video frames and
optical flows, it is very challenging for latter algorithms to
estimate body poses and recognize actions. Moreover, traditional methods to compute optical flow would become inaccurate especially when dealing with multi-scales and large
displacement.
The flourishing advance of deep neural networks [24,

6762

