In-Place Activated BatchNorm for Memory-Optimized Training of DNNs
Samuel Rota Bulò, Lorenzo Porzi, Peter Kontschieder
Mapillary Research
research@mapillary.com

Abstract
store buffer

In this work we present In-Place Activated Batch Normalization (I N P LACE -ABN) – a novel approach to drastically reduce the training memory footprint of modern deep
neural networks in a computationally efficient way. Our
solution substitutes the conventionally used succession of
BatchNorm + Activation layers with a single plugin layer,
hence avoiding invasive framework surgery while providing straightforward applicability for existing deep learning
frameworks. We obtain memory savings of up to 50% by
dropping intermediate results and by recovering required
information during the backward pass through the inversion of stored forward results, with only minor increase
(0.8-2%) in computation time. Also, we demonstrate how
frequently used checkpointing approaches can be made
computationally as efficient as I N P LACE -ABN. In our experiments on image classification, we demonstrate on-par
results on ImageNet-1k with state-of-the-art approaches.
On the memory-demanding task of semantic segmentation,
we report competitive results for COCO-Stuff and set new
state-of-the-art results for Cityscapes and Mapillary Vistas. Code can be found at https://github.com/
mapillary/inplace_abn.

store buffer

store buffer

store buffer

store buffer

store buffer

store buffer

store buffer

+

store buffer

+

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Example of residual block with identity mapping [10].
Left: Implementation with standard BN and in-place activation
layers, which requires storing 6 buffers for the backward pass.
Right: Implementation with our proposed I N P LACE -ABN layer,
which requires storing only 3 buffers. Our solution avoids storing
the buffers that are typically kept for the backward pass through
BN and exhibits a lower computational overhead compared to
state-of-the-art memory-reduction methods.

High-performance computer vision recognition models
typically take advantage of deep network backbones, generating rich feature representations for target applications to
operate on. For example, top-ranked architectures used in
the 2017 LSUN or MS COCO segmentation/detection challenges are predominantly based on ResNet/ResNeXt [9, 30]
models comprising >100 layers.
Obviously, depth/width of networks strongly correlate
with GPU memory requirements and at given hardware
memory limitations, trade-offs have to be made to balance
feature extractor performance vs. application-specific parameters like network output resolution or training data size.
A particularly memory-demanding task is semantic segmentation, where one has to compromise significantly on

the number of training crops per minibatch and their spatial resolution. In fact, many recent works based on modern backbone networks have to set the training batch size to
no more than a single crop per GPU [2, 28], which is partially also due to suboptimal memory management in some
deep learning frameworks. In this work, we focus on increasing the memory efficiency of the training process of
modern network architectures in order to further leverage
performance of deep neural networks in tasks like image
classification and semantic segmentation.
We introduce a novel and unified layer that replaces the
commonly used succession of batch normalization (BN)
and nonlinear activation layers (ACT), which are integral
with modern deep learning architectures like ResNet [9],
15639

