Detect-and-Track: Efficient Pose Estimation in Videos
∗

∗

Rohit Girdhar1 Georgia Gkioxari2 Lorenzo Torresani2,3 Manohar Paluri2 Du Tran2
1
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Facebook 3 Dartmouth College
https://rohitgirdhar.github.io/DetectAndTrack

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of estimating and tracking human body keypoints in complex, multi-person video.
We propose an extremely lightweight yet highly effective approach that builds upon the latest advancements in human
detection [17] and video understanding [5]. Our method operates in two-stages: keypoint estimation in frames or short
clips, followed by lightweight tracking to generate keypoint
predictions linked over the entire video. For frame-level
pose estimation we experiment with Mask R-CNN, as well as
our own proposed 3D extension of this model, which leverages temporal information over small clips to generate more
robust frame predictions. We conduct extensive ablative experiments on the newly released multi-person video pose
estimation benchmark, PoseTrack, to validate various design
choices of our model. Our approach achieves an accuracy
of 55.2% on the validation and 51.8% on the test set using
the Multi-Object Tracking Accuracy (MOTA) metric, and
achieves state of the art performance on the ICCV 2017
PoseTrack keypoint tracking challenge [1].

1. Introduction
In recent years, visual understanding, such as object and
scene recognition [17, 40, 44, 55], has witnessed a significant
bloom thanks to deep visual representations [18, 31, 47, 50].
Modeling and understanding human behaviour in images has
been in the epicenter of a variety of visual tasks due to its importance for numerous downstream practical applications. In
particular, person detection and pose estimation from a single image have emerged as prominent and challenging visual
recognition problems [36]. While single-image understanding has advanced steadily through the introduction of tasks
of increasing complexity, video understanding has made
slower progress compared to the image domain. Here, the
preeminent task involves labeling whole videos with a single
activity type [5, 7, 10, 14, 29, 30, 32, 46, 49, 51, 52]. While still
relevant and challenging, this task shifts the focus away from
∗ Work done as a part of RG’s internship at Facebook

Stage #1

(3D) Mask R-CNN:
Detect person tubes +
keypoints in clip
Stage #2

Bipartite Matching:
Link the predictions
over time
Figure 1. We propose a two-stage approach to keypoint estimation
and tracking in videos. For the first stage, we propose a novel
video pose estimation formulation, 3D Mask R-CNN, that takes
a short video clip as input and produces a tubelet per person and
keypoints within those. In the second stage, we perform lightweight optimization to link the detections over time.

one of the more interesting aspects of video understanding,
namely modeling the changes in appearance and semantics
of scenes, objects and humans over time [6, 13, 15, 37].
In this work, we focus on the problem of human pose
tracking in complex videos, which entails tracking and estimating the pose of each human instance over time. The
challenges here are plenty, including pose changes, occlusions and the presence of multiple overlapping instances.
The ideal tracker needs to accurately predict the pose of all
human instances at each time step by reasoning about the
appearance and pose transitions over time. Hence, the effort
to materialize a pose tracker should closely follow the state
of the art in pose prediction but also enhance it with the tools
necessary to successfully integrate time information at an
instance-specific level.
Most recent video pose estimation methods use handdesigned graphical models or integer program optimizations
on top of frame-based keypoint predictions to compute the final predictions over time [21,26,48]. While such approaches
have shown good performance, they require hand-coding of
optimization constraints and may not be scalable beyond
short video clips due to their computational complexity.
Most importantly, the tracking optimization is only responsible for linking frame-level predictions, and the system has
no mechanism to improve the estimation of keypoints by
1350

