Deep Progressive Reinforcement Learning for Skeleton-based Action Recognition
Yansong Tang1,2,3,∗
Yi Tian1,∗
Jiwen Lu1,2,3
Peiyang Li1
Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, Tsinghua University, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{tys15,tianyi15,lipy15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{lujiwen,jzhou}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a deep progressive reinforcement learning (DPRL) method for action recognition in
skeleton-based videos, which aims to distil the most informative frames and discard ambiguous frames in sequences
for recognizing actions. Since the choices of selecting representative frames are multitudinous for each video, we
model the frame selection as a progressive process through
deep reinforcement learning, during which we progressively adjust the chosen frames by taking two important factors
into account: (1) the quality of the selected frames and (2)
the relationship between the selected frames to the whole
video. Moreover, considering the topology of human body
inherently lies in a graph-based structure, where the vertices and edges represent the hinged joints and rigid bones
respectively, we employ the graph-based convolutional neural network to capture the dependency between the joints for
action recognition. Our approach achieves very competitive
performance on three widely used benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is an important research direction in
computer vision, which has worldwide applications, such
as video surveillance, human-robot interaction and so on.
Compared with the conventional RGB videos, the skeletonbased sequences contain compact 3D positions of the major
body joints, which are robust to variations of viewpoints,
body scales and motion speeds [1]. Thus, skeleton-based
action recognition has attracted more and more attention in
recent years [2–8].
With the development of the cost-effective depth sensors (e.g. Kinect) and pose estimation algorithms [9], the
amount of skeleton-based data is growing rapidly [10, 11].
Therefore data-driven methods have been increasingly proposed for skeleton-based action recognition, by training
∗ indicates equal contribution, the corresponding author is Jiwen Lu.

Figure 1. The pipeline of our proposed method for skeleton-based
action recognition in the testing period. Given a video of human
body joints, we first select key frames with a frame distillation network (FDNet), which is trained by the proposed deep progressive
reinforcement learning method. Then, we employ a graph-based
convolutional neural network (GCNN), which retains the dependency between human joints, to deal with the selected key frames
for action recognition. (Best viewed in color)

deep models like recurrent neural networks (RNN) [12–14]
and convolutional neural networks (CNN) [15, 16]. The
RNN-based model has the capability to model the temporal
dependency, but it is difficult to train the stacked RNN in
practice [15, 17]. On the other hand, the CNN-based model, which captures the relationship of neighboring frames
at lower layers and long-term dependency at higher layers [18], is more effective and obtains promising performance
recently [15, 16]. However, most CNN-based methods for
skeleton-based action recognition consider all of the frames
in a sequence as equally important, which fails to focus
on the most representative frames. Take a video of action
15323

