Anticipating Traffic Accidents with Adaptive Loss and Large-scale Incident DB
Tomoyuki Suzuki1,2∗
Hirokatsu Kataoka1∗
Yoshimitsu Aoki2
1
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)

Yutaka Satoh1
2
Keio University

{suzuki-tomo, hirokatsu.kataoka, yu.satou}@aist.go.jp
tosuzuki@aoki-medialab.jp,

aoki@elec.keio.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for traffic
accident anticipation through (i) Adaptive Loss for Early
Anticipation (AdaLEA) and (ii) a large-scale self-annotated
incident database for anticipation. The proposed AdaLEA
allows a model to gradually learn an earlier anticipation
as training progresses. The loss function adaptively assigns
penalty weights depending on how early the model can anticipate a traffic accident at each epoch. Additionally, we
construct a Near-miss Incident DataBase for anticipation.
This database contains an enormous number of traffic nearmiss incident videos and annotations for detail evaluation
of two tasks, risk anticipation and risk-factor anticipation.
In our experimental results, we found our proposal achieved
the highest scores for risk anticipation (+6.6% better on
mean average precision (mAP) and 2.36 sec earlier than
previous work on the average time-to-collision (ATTC)) and
risk-factor anticipation (+4.3% better on mAP and 0.70 sec
earlier than previous work on ATTC).

1. Introduction
Recently, progress in advanced driver assistance systems
(ADASs), including self-driving cars, has been on the rise
due to contributions from such fields as computer science,
robotics, and traffic science. Among these advanced techniques, advanced computer vision algorithms are especially
important for implementation in ADASs. In self-driving
cars, the primary objective must be to produce “a car that
carries humans to their destination safely”, and one vital
technology field for achieving this target, three-dimensional
(3D) environment sensing, has seen significant improvements recently. For example, laser sensors such as light
detection and ranging (LiDAR) and visual simultaneous localization and mapping (vSLAM) are among the most active topics in the race for practical self-driving cars capable
of transporting human passengers. Also, two-dimensional
∗ indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. Our proposed Adaptive Loss for Early Anticipation
(AdaLEA), EL (conventional work), and LEA (also ours). Our
AdaLEA allows a model to anticipate incidents/accidents earlier
as training progresses by referring to the ability of its anticipation.
We achieved a traffic risk-factor anticipation with 3.65 seconds
average time-to-collision (ATTC), versus 2.99 seconds for a conventional EL on NIDB.

(2D) image processing is one of the key to achieve safe
driving and has addressed traffic tasks, including pedestrian
(object) detection, semantic segmentation and situational
awareness.
For a trail of safe driving, Geiger et al. have collected the KITTI benchmark to evaluate several self-driving
car tasks [9], problems related to semantic segmentation,
and two- and three-dimensional (2D/3D) object detection.
However, conventional databases represented by this lack
traffic accident or near-miss incident (accident/incident)
cases, even though the target of a traffic safety system is

3521

