Zero-Shot Kernel Learning
Hongguang Zhang∗,2,1
Piotr Koniusz∗,1,2
1
Data61/CSIRO, 2 Australian National University
firstname.lastname@{data61.csiro.au1 , anu.edu.au2 }
Abstract
In this paper, we address an open problem of zero-shot
learning. Its principle is based on learning a mapping
that associates feature vectors extracted from i.e. images
and attribute vectors that describe objects and/or scenes
of interest. In turns, this allows classifying unseen object
classes and/or scenes by matching feature vectors via mapping to a newly defined attribute vector describing a new
class. Due to importance of such a learning task, there exist many methods that learn semantic, probabilistic, linear
or piece-wise linear mappings. In contrast, we apply wellestablished kernel methods to learn a non-linear mapping
between the feature and attribute spaces. We propose an
easy learning objective inspired by the Linear Discriminant
Analysis, Kernel-Target Alignment and Kernel Polarization
methods [12, 8, 4] that promotes incoherence. We evaluate the performance of our algorithm on the Polynomial as
well as shift-invariant Gaussian and Cauchy kernels. Despite simplicity of our approach, we obtain state-of-the-art
results on several zero-shot learning datasets and benchmarks including a recent AWA2 dataset [45].

1. Introduction
The goal of zero-shot approaches is to learn a mapping
that matches any given data point, say an image descriptor,
to a predefined set of attributes which describe contents of
that data point/image, etc. The hope is that such a mapping
will generalize well to previously unseen combinations of
attributes, therefore facilitating recognition of new classes
of objects without the need for retraining the mapping itself
on these new objects. The quality of zero-shot learning may
depend on many factors i.e., (i) the mapping has to match
visual traits captured by descriptors and attributes well, (ii)
some visual traits and attributes describing them have to be
shared between the classes of objects used for training and
testing, otherwise transfer of knowledge is impossible, (iii)
the mapping itself should not overfit to the training set.
∗ Both authors contributed equally.

The task of zero-shot learning can be considered as a
form of transfer learning [6, 27]. Given a new (target)
task to learn, the arising question is how to identify the socalled commonality [39, 21] between this task and previous
(source) tasks, and transfer the knowledge from source tasks
to the target task. Thus, one has to address three questions:
what to transfer, how, and when [39]. For zero-shot learning, the visual traits and attributes describing them, which
are shared between the training and testing sets, form this
commonality. However, the objects in training and testing
sets are described by disjoint classes. The role of mapping
is to facilitate the identification of presence/absence of such
attributes, therefore enabling the knowledge transfer. From
that point of view, zero-shot learning assumes that the commonality is pre-defined (attributes typically are) and can be
identified in both training and testing data. Alternatively,
one can try to capture the commonality from the training
and/or testing data (manually or automatically) beforehand
e.g., by discovering so-called word2vec embeddings [28, 1].
Going back to the zero-shot learning terminology, we
focus in this paper on the design of mapping a.k.a. the
so-called compatibility function. Various works addressing
zero-shot learning and the design of mapping functions have
been proposed [26, 11, 33, 30, 38, 29, 13, 2], to name but a
few of approaches evaluated in [44]. We note the use of two
kinds of compatibility functions: linear and non-linear.
In this paper, we recognize the gap in the trends and employ kernel methods [37] combined with an objective inspired by the Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) [12, 9],
a related convex-concave relaxation KISSME [23], KernelTarget Alignment [8] and Kernel Polarization [4] methods. Specifically, we are interested in training a mapping
function via a non-linear kernel which ‘elevates’ datapoints
from the Euclidean space together with attribute vectors
into a non-linear high-dimensional Hilbert space in which
the classifier can more easily separate datapoints that come
from different classes. Our objective seeks a mapping for
which all datapoints sharing the same label with attribute
vectors are brought closer in the Hibert space to these attribute vectors while datapoints from different classes are
pushed far apart from each other. The mapping function
17670

