Learning Time/Memory-Efficient Deep Architectures with Budgeted Super
Networks
Tom Véniat* and Ludovic Denoyer*,†
*

Sorbonne Université, LIP6, F-75005, Paris, France
†
Criteo Research
{tom.veniat, ludovic.denoyer}@lip6.fr

Abstract
We propose to focus on the problem of discovering neural network architectures efficient in terms of both prediction quality and cost. For instance, our approach is able
to solve the following tasks: learn a neural network able to
predict well in less than 100 milliseconds or learn an efficient model that fits in a 50 Mb memory. Our contribution
is a novel family of models called Budgeted Super Networks
(BSN). They are learned using gradient descent techniques
applied on a budgeted learning objective function which integrates a maximum authorized cost, while making no assumption on the nature of this cost. We present a set of
experiments on computer vision problems and analyze the
ability of our technique to deal with three different costs:
the computation cost, the memory consumption cost and a
distributed computation cost. We particularly show that our
model can discover neural network architectures that have
a better accuracy than the ResNet and Convolutional Neural Fabrics architectures on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, at
a lower cost.

1. Introduction
In the Deep Learning community, finding the best Neural
Network architecture for a given task is a key problem that
is mainly addressed by hand or using validation techniques.
For instance, in computer vision, this has lead to particularly well-known models like GoogleNet [28] or ResNet
[11]. More recently, there is a surge of interest in developing techniques able to automatically discover efficient neural network architectures. Different algorithms have been
proposed including evolutionary methods [27, 20, 23] or
reinforcement learning-based approaches [32]. But in all
cases, this selection is usually based solely on a final predictive performance of the model such as the accuracy.

When facing real-world problems, this predictive performance is not the only measure that matters. Indeed, learning a very good predictive model with the help of a cluster of GPUs might lead to a neural network that can be
incompatible with low-resource mobile devices. Another
example concerns distributed models in which one part of
the computation is made in the cloud and the other part is
made on the device. In such situations, an efficient architecture would have to predict accurately while minimizing the
amount of exchanged messages between the cloud and the
device. One important research direction is thus to propose
models that can learn to take into account the inference cost
in addition to the quality of the prediction.
We formulate this issue as a problem of automatically
learning a neural network architecture under budget constraints. To tackle this problem, we propose a budgeted
learning approach that integrates a maximum cost directly
in the learning objective function. The main originality of
our approach with respect to state-of-the-art is the fact that
it can be used with any type of costs, existing methods being usually specific to particular constraints like inference
speed or memory consumption – see Section 5 for a review
of state-of-the-art. In our case, we investigate the ability of
our method to deal with three different costs: (i) the computation cost reflecting the inference speed of the resulting
model, (ii) the memory consumption cost that measures the
final size of the model, and the (iii) distributed computation
cost that measures the inference speed when computations
are distributed over multiple machines or processors.
Our model called Budgeted Super Network (BSN) is
based on the following principles: (i) the user provides a
(big) Super Network (see Section 2) defining a large set
of possible final network architectures as well as a maximum authorized cost. (ii) Since finding the best architecture that satisfies the cost constraint is an intractable combinatorial problem (Section 3.1), we relax this optimization

3492

