End-to-end learning of keypoint detector and descriptor
for pose invariant 3D matching
Georgios Georgakis1 , Srikrishna Karanam2 , Ziyan Wu2 , Jan Ernst2 , and Jana Košecká1
1
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax VA
2
Siemens Corporate Technology, Princeton NJ
ggeorgak@gmu.edu,{first.last}@siemens.com,kosecka@cs.gmu.edu

Abstract
CNN

Finding correspondences between images or 3D scans
is at the heart of many computer vision and image retrieval applications and is often enabled by matching local keypoint descriptors. Various learning approaches have
been applied in the past to different stages of the matching pipeline, considering detection, description, or metric
learning objectives. These objectives were typically addressed separately and most previous work has focused on
image data. This paper proposes an end-to-end learning
framework for keypoint detection and its representation (descriptor) for 3D depth maps or 3D scans, where the two can
be jointly optimized towards task-specific objectives without
a need for separate annotations. We employ a Siamese architecture augmented by a sampling layer and a novel score
loss function which in turn affects the selection of region
proposals. The positive and negative examples are obtained
automatically by sampling corresponding region proposals based on their consistency with known 3D pose labels.
Matching experiments with depth data on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed approach, showing significant improvements over state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Keypoint representations have been a central component of matching, retrieval, pose estimation, and registration pipelines. With the advent of approaches based on deep
neural networks, global representations became pervasive in
solving these type of problems as they can be trained in a
straightforward way in an end-to-end fashion. Their shortcomings are caused by occlusions, partial views or scenes
that contain large amount of clutter. In case of local feature
representations, deep learning has been also applied to the
different stages of the matching pipeline, considering detection, description, or metric learning objectives. Most of

...
Joint Learning

CNN

...
Depth Image Pair

Matching Objective

Figure 1. We propose a new method for jointly learning keypoint
detection and patch-based representations in depth images towards
the keypoint matching objective.

the frameworks considered the above objectives separately,
used image data, and required a large number of training
examples. In order to mitigate these issues, we propose to
use deep convolutional networks for learning keypoint representations and a keypoint detector for 3D matching jointly
without the need for separate annotations. The costly annotation stage can be avoided due to the availability of large
repositories of 3D models and the capability of obtaining
depth images from different viewpoints.
For the problem of jointly learning keypoint detectors
and descriptors, we define a Siamese network architecture
that receives as input a pair of depth images and their pose
annotations. Each branch of the architecture is a proposal
generation network used to generate patches in the two
depth images. The branches share weights and lead to a
sampling layer which selects pairs of patches. The pairs
are labeled as positive or negative depending on the proximity of their 3D re-projection calculated from the pose labels. In other words, the sampling layer is used to create
ground truth data on-the-fly by taking advantage of the initial pose annotations. For training the network, we use the
contrastive loss which attempts to minimize the distance in
the feature space between positive pairs, and maximize the
distance between negative pairs. Therefore, for patches that
are very close in the 3D space, but sampled from different

1965

