Harmonious Attention Network for Person Re-Identification
Wei Li1
Xiatian Zhu2
Queen Mary University of London1
{w.li, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk

Shaogang Gong1
Vision Semantics Ltd.2
eddy@visionsemantics.com

Abstract
Existing person re-identification (re-id) methods either
assume the availability of well-aligned person bounding
box images as model input or rely on constrained attention selection mechanisms to calibrate misaligned images.
They are therefore sub-optimal for re-id matching in arbitrarily aligned person images potentially with large human
pose variations and unconstrained auto-detection errors. In
this work, we show the advantages of jointly learning attention selection and feature representation in a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) by maximising the complementary
information of different levels of visual attention subject to
re-id discriminative learning constraints. Specifically, we
formulate a novel Harmonious Attention CNN (HA-CNN)
model for joint learning of soft pixel attention and hard
regional attention along with simultaneous optimisation of
feature representations, dedicated to optimise person re-id
in uncontrolled (misaligned) images. Extensive comparative evaluations validate the superiority of this new HACNN model for person re-id over a wide variety of state-ofthe-art methods on three large-scale benchmarks including
CUHK03, Market-1501, and DukeMTMC-ReID.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) aims to search people
across non-overlapping surveillance camera views deployed
at different locations by matching person images. In practical re-id scenarios, person images are typically automatically detected for scaling up to large visual data [49, 20, 27].
Auto-detected person bounding boxes are typically not optimised for re-id due to misalignment with background clutter, occlusion, missing body parts (Fig. 1). Additionally,
people (uncooperative) are often captured in various poses
across open space and time. These give rise to the notorious image matching misalignment challenge in cross-view
re-id [9]. There is consequently an inevitable need for attention selection within arbitrarily-aligned bounding boxes
as an integral part of model learning for re-id.
There are a few attempts in the literature for solving the

Figure 1. Examples of attention selection in auto-detected person
bounding boxes used for person re-id matching.

problem of re-id attention selection within person bounding boxes. One common strategy is local patch calibration and saliency weighting in pairwise image matching
[48, 28, 51, 39]. However, these methods rely on handcrafted features without deep learning jointly more expressive feature representations and matching metric holistically
(end-to-end). A small number of attention deep learning
models for re-id have been recently developed for reducing the negative effect from poor detection and human pose
change [19, 47, 30, 2]. Nevertheless, these deep methods
implicitly assume the availability of large labelled training
data by simply adopting existing deep architectures with
high complexity in model design. Additionally, they often consider only coarse region-level attention whilst ignoring the fine-grained pixel-level saliency. Hence, these
techniques are ineffective when only a small set of labelled
data is available for training whilst also facing noisy person
images of arbitrary misalignment and background clutter.
In this work, we consider the problem of jointly deep
learning attention selection and feature representation for
optimising person re-id in a more lightweight (with less parameters) network architecture. The contributions of this
work are: (I) We formulate a novel idea of jointly learning
multi-granularity attention selection and feature representation for optimising person re-id in deep learning. To our
knowledge, this is the first attempt of jointly deep learning
multiple complementary attention for solving the person reid problem. (II) We propose a Harmonious Attention Convolutional Neural Network (HA-CNN) to simultaneously

2285

