Learning Pose Specific Representations by Predicting Different Views
Georg Poier
David Schinagl
Horst Bischof
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision
Graz University of Technology
Austria

Abstract
The labeled data required to learn pose estimation for
articulated objects is difficult to provide in the desired quantity, realism, density, and accuracy. To address this issue,
we develop a method to learn representations, which are
very specific for articulated poses, without the need for labeled training data. We exploit the observation that the object pose of a known object is predictive for the appearance in any known view. That is, given only the pose and
shape parameters of a hand, the hand’s appearance from
any viewpoint can be approximated. To exploit this observation, we train a model that – given input from one view
– estimates a latent representation, which is trained to be
predictive for the appearance of the object when captured
from another viewpoint. Thus, the only necessary supervision is the second view. The training process of this model
reveals an implicit pose representation in the latent space.
Importantly, at test time the pose representation can be inferred using only a single view. In qualitative and quantitative experiments we show that the learned representations capture detailed pose information. Moreover, when
training the proposed method jointly with labeled and unlabeled data, it consistently surpasses the performance of its
fully supervised counterpart, while reducing the amount of
needed labeled samples by at least one order of magnitude.

1. Introduction
In this work we aim to estimate the pose of the hand
given a single depth image. For this task, the best performing methods have recently relied heavily on models learned
from data [12, 37, 46, 47]. Even methods which employ a
manually created hand model to search for a good fit with
the observation, often employ such a data-driven part as initialization or for error correction [21, 49, 52, 66]. Unfortunately, data-driven models require a large amount of labeled
data, covering a sufficient part of the pose space, to work
well.

prediction

(unknown)
pose & shape
representation
feedback

view 1

prediction

feedback

view 2

Figure 1: Sketch for learning a pose specific representation
from unlabeled data. We learn to predict a low-dimensional latent representation and, subsequently, a different view of the input,
solely from the latent representation. The error of the view prediction is used as feedback, enforcing the latent representation to
capture pose specific information without requiring labeled data.

However, for the task of estimating the pose of articulated objects, like the human hand, it is especially expensive to provide accurate annotations for a sufficient amount
of real world data. The articulated structure and specific
natural movements of the hand frequently cause strong selfocclusions. Together with the many 3D points to be annotated, this makes the annotation procedure a huge effort for
human annotators.
A largely unexplored direction to cope with this challenge is to exploit unlabeled data, which is easy to obtain
in large quantities. We make a step towards closing this
gap and propose a method that can exploit unlabeled data
by making use of a specific property of the pose estimation
task. We rely on the observation that pose parameters1 are
predictive for the object appearance of a known object from
any viewpoint. That is, given the pose parameters of a hand,
the hand’s appearance from any viewpoint can be estimated.
The observation might not seem helpful upfront, since it assumes the pose – which we want to estimate – to be given.
1 For the sake of clarity, here, pose parameters denote the parameters
defining the skeleton, including its size, as well as a rough shape

60

