Generative Image Inpainting with Contextual Attention
Jiahui Yu1

Zhe Lin2
1

Jimei Yang2

Xiaohui Shen2

Xin Lu2

Thomas S. Huang1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Adobe Research

Figure 1: Example inpainting results of our method on images of natural scene, face and texture. Missing regions are shown
in white. In each pair, the left is input image and right is the direct output of our trained generative neural networks without
any post-processing.

Abstract
Recent deep learning based approaches have shown
promising results for the challenging task of inpainting
large missing regions in an image. These methods can
generate visually plausible image structures and textures,
but often create distorted structures or blurry textures inconsistent with surrounding areas. This is mainly due to
ineffectiveness of convolutional neural networks in explicitly borrowing or copying information from distant spatial locations. On the other hand, traditional texture and
patch synthesis approaches are particularly suitable when
it needs to borrow textures from the surrounding regions.
Motivated by these observations, we propose a new deep
generative model-based approach which can not only synthesize novel image structures but also explicitly utilize
surrounding image features as references during network
training to make better predictions. The model is a feedforward, fully convolutional neural network which can process images with multiple holes at arbitrary locations and
with variable sizes during the test time. Experiments on
multiple datasets including faces (CelebA, CelebA-HQ),
textures (DTD) and natural images (ImageNet, Places2)
demonstrate that our proposed approach generates higherquality inpainting results than existing ones. Code, demo
and models are available at: https://github.com/
JiahuiYu/generative_inpainting.

1. Introduction
Filling missing pixels of an image, often referred as
image inpainting or completion, is an important task in
computer vision. It has many applications in photo editing, image-based rendering and computational photography [3, 23, 28, 29, 34, 39]. The core challenge of image
inpainting lies in synthesizing visually realistic and semantically plausible pixels for the missing regions that are coherent with existing ones.
Early works [3, 13] attempted to solve the problem using ideas similar to texture synthesis [9, 10], i.e. by matching and copying background patches into holes starting
from low-resolution to high-resolution or propagating from
hole boundaries. These approaches work well especially
in background inpainting tasks, and are widely deployed in
practical applications [3]. However, as they assume missing patches can be found somewhere in background regions,
they cannot hallucinate novel image contents for challenging cases where inpainting regions involve complex, nonrepetitive structures (e.g. faces, objects). Moreover, these
methods are not able to capture high-level semantics.
Rapid progress in deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN) and generative adversarial networks (GAN) [11]
inspired recent works [15, 25, 30, 39] to formulate inpainting as a conditional image generation problem where
high-level recognition and low-level pixel synthesis are
formulated into a convolutional encoder-decoder network,

5505

