Classifier Learning with Prior Probabilities
for Facial Action Unit Recognition
Yong Zhang1,2 , Weiming Dong1 , Bao-Gang Hu1 , and Qiang Ji3∗
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
zhangyong201303@gmail.com, weiming.dong@ia.ac.cn, hubg@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Facial action units (AUs) play an important role in human emotion understanding. One big challenge for datadriven AU recognition approaches is the lack of enough AU
annotations, since AU annotation requires strong domain
expertise. To alleviate this issue, we propose a knowledgedriven method for jointly learning multiple AU classifiers
without any AU annotation by leveraging prior probabilities
on AUs, including expression-independent and expressiondependent AU probabilities. These prior probabilities are
drawn from facial anatomy and emotion studies, and are
independent of datasets. We incorporate the prior probabilities on AUs as the constraints into the objective function of
multiple AU classifiers, and develop an efficient learning algorithm to solve the formulated problem. Experimental results on five benchmark expression databases demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method, especially its generalization ability, and the power of the prior probabilities.

1. Introduction
Automatic facial action unit (AU) recognition has
attracted increasing attention, and achieved impressive
progress in the past decades [2, 7, 33, 3]. Due to subtle
facial appearance changes, significant across-subject variations, uncertain and ambiguous facial motion measurements, and lack of ground-truth AU annotations, AU recognition is very challenging. Recently, several works turn
to leverage relationships among AUs or relationships between expression and AUs to facilitate AU classifier learning, since there exist significant dependencies among multiple AUs. They either use discriminative approaches or generative approaches. For discriminative approaches, the relationships are leveraged to introduce regularization on the
parameters of classifiers [32, 12]. They encourage the pa∗ Corresponding author.

rameters of AU classifiers or the estimated AU labels to be
close if the AUs are positively correlated. For generative approaches, the relationships are directly learned from training AU labels and then applied to predict AUs [20, 25].
Although the dependencies among AUs can improve the
performance of AU classifiers, almost all of these works
formulate AU recognition as a supervised learning or semisupervised learning, and thus require fully AU-annotated or
partly-annotated facial images for training. However, the
AU annotation needs strong domain expertise.
Can we learn AU classifiers without AU annotations? In
this paper, we propose a novel method to jointly learn classifiers for multiple AUs without any AU annotation. We
leverage prior probabilities on AUs, including expressiondependent AU probabilities and expression-independent
AU probabilities, which are obtained from facial anatomy
and emotion studies, and are independent of datasets. Unlike existing works which use AU labels for AU classifier
learning, we adopt the probabilities on AUs to train AU
classifiers. The generic knowledge from facial anatomy and
long-term expert observations and studies is almost universally applicable to different people in real applications. The
knowledge is imposed as soft probabilistic constraints to
train the AU classifiers.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows. Firstly, we propose a knowledge-driven method to
jointly learn multiple AU classifiers by leveraging probabilities on AUs instead of AU annotations. We systematically summarize different types of generic knowledge from
facial anatomy and emotion studies, including a variety of
single and joint AU probabilities, and formulate AU recognition as a joint classifier and label learning problem. Secondly, we propose an algorithm to optimize the formulated
problem by iteratively updating classifiers and AU labels.
Thirdly, we evaluate the proposed method on five benchmark databases and compare it to the state-of-the-art methods.
15108

