CosFace: Large Margin Cosine Loss for Deep Face Recognition

Hao Wang, Yitong Wang, Zheng Zhou, Xing Ji, Dihong Gong, Jingchao Zhou,
Zhifeng Li∗, and Wei Liu∗
Tencent AI Lab
{hawelwang,yitongwang,encorezhou,denisji,sagazhou,michaelzfli}@tencent.com
gongdihong@gmail.com wliu@ee.columbia.edu

Abstract
Face recognition has made extraordinary progress owing to the advancement of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The central task of face recognition, including face verification and identification, involves face
feature discrimination. However, the traditional softmax
loss of deep CNNs usually lacks the power of discrimination. To address this problem, recently several loss functions such as center loss, large margin softmax loss, and
angular softmax loss have been proposed. All these improved losses share the same idea: maximizing inter-class
variance and minimizing intra-class variance. In this paper, we propose a novel loss function, namely large margin cosine loss (LMCL), to realize this idea from a different
perspective. More specifically, we reformulate the softmax
loss as a cosine loss by L2 normalizing both features and
weight vectors to remove radial variations, based on which
a cosine margin term is introduced to further maximize the
decision margin in the angular space. As a result, minimum
intra-class variance and maximum inter-class variance are
achieved by virtue of normalization and cosine decision
margin maximization. We refer to our model trained with
LMCL as CosFace. Extensive experimental evaluations are
conducted on the most popular public-domain face recognition datasets such as MegaFace Challenge, Youtube Faces
(YTF) and Labeled Face in the Wild (LFW). We achieve the
state-of-the-art performance on these benchmarks, which
confirms the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Recently progress on the development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [15, 18, 12, 9, 44] has
significantly advanced the state-of-the-art performance on
∗ Corresponding authors

Training
Faces

Loss Layers

Labels

ConvNet

Verification

Testing
Faces

…

Identification
Cosine Similarity

Cropped Faces

Learned by Softmax

Learned by LMCL

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed CosFace framework. In the
training phase, the discriminative face features are learned with a
large margin between different classes. In the testing phase, the
testing data is fed into CosFace to extract face features which are
later used to compute the cosine similarity score to perform face
verification and identification.

a wide variety of computer vision tasks, which makes deep
CNN a dominant machine learning approach for computer
vision. Face recognition, as one of the most common computer vision tasks, has been extensively studied for decades
[37, 45, 22, 19, 20, 40, 2]. Early studies build shallow models with low-level face features, while modern face recognition techniques are greatly advanced driven by deep CNNs.
Face recognition usually includes two sub-tasks: face verification and face identification. Both of these two tasks
involve three stages: face detection, feature extraction, and
classification. A deep CNN is able to extract clean highlevel features, making itself possible to achieve superior
performance with a relatively simple classification architecture: usually, a multilayer perceptron networks followed by

5265

