Dynamic Graph Generation Network: Generating Relational Knowledge from
Diagrams
Daesik Kim1,2
1

YoungJoon Yoo3

Seoul National University

2

Jeesoo Kim1
3

V.DO Inc.

Sangkuk Lee1,2

Nojun Kwak1

Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp.

{daesik.kim|kimjiss0305|sangkuklee|nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

youngjoon.yoo@navercorp.com

1. Introduction
Within a decade, performances on classical vision problems such as image classiﬁcation [7], object detection
[5, 16], and segmentation [17] have been largely improved
by the use of deep learning frameworks. Based on the great
successes of deep learning for such low-level vision problems, a next step could be deriving semantics from images
such as relations between objects. For example, to understand a given soccer scene more deeply, it would be very
important not only to detect the objects in the image, such
as players and a ball but also to ﬁgure out the relationships
between the objects.
This work was supported by NRF of Korea (2017M3C4A7077582).

Diagram
Graph
Relational
Knowledge

In this work, we introduce a new algorithm for analyzing a diagram, which contains visual and textual information in an abstract and integrated way. Whereas diagrams contain richer information compared with individual image-based or language-based data, proper solutions
for automatically understanding them have not been proposed due to their innate characteristics of multi-modality
and arbitrariness of layouts. To tackle this problem, we
propose a unified diagram-parsing network for generating
knowledge from diagrams based on an object detector and
a recurrent neural network designed for a graphical structure. Specifically, we propose a dynamic graph-generation
network that is based on dynamic memory and graph theory. We explore the dynamics of information in a diagram
with activation of gates in gated recurrent unit (GRU) cells.
On publicly available diagram datasets, our model demonstrates a state-of-the-art result that outperforms other baselines. Moreover, further experiments on question answering
shows potentials of the proposed method for various applications.

Diagram

Abstract

Lion links to wild
cat

Adult ~95 days links
to pupa ~20days

Wedge Tailed Eagle
links to Goanna

Figure 1. Examples of how relational knowledge can be generated
from a diagram. In the ﬁrst row, inputs are only diagrams which
have various types of topics, illustrations, texts and layouts. Our
model can infer a graphical structure in a diagram as in the second
row. In the end, we can extract relational knowledge in the form
of sentence from the generated graphs.

In this work, among various vision problems, we aim
to understand diagram images, which have played a major
role in classical knowledge representation and education.
Previously, most machine learning algorithms have focused
on extracting knowledge from the information described by
natural languages or structured databases (e.g. Freebase [3],
Wordnet [20]). In contrast to language-based knowledge, a
diagram contains rich illustrations including text, visual information and their relationships, which can depict human’s
perception of objects more succinctly. As shown in Figure
1, some complicated concepts such as “food web in a jungle” and “life cycle of a moth” can be easily described as
a diagram. On the other hand, a single natural image or
a single sentence may not be sufﬁcient to deliver the same
amount of information to the readers.
Whereas the diagram has good characteristics of knowledge abstraction, it requires composite solutions to properly
14167

