Weakly Supervised Phrase Localization with Multi-Scale Anchored
Transformer Network
Fang Zhao

Jianshu Li
Jian Zhao
Jiashi Feng
National University of Singapore

elezhf@nus.edu.sg {jianshu,zhaojian90}@u.nus.edu elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel weakly supervised
model, Multi-scale Anchored Transformer Network (MATN), to accurately localize free-form textual phrases with only image-level supervision. The proposed MATN takes region proposals as localization anchors, and learns a multiscale correspondence network to continuously search for
phrase regions referring to the anchors. In this way, MATN
can exploit useful cues from these anchors to reliably reason about locations of the regions described by the phrases
given only image-level supervision. Through differentiable
sampling on image spatial feature maps, MATN introduces
a novel training objective to simultaneously minimize a contrastive reconstruction loss between different phrases from
a single image and a set of triplet losses among multiple
images with similar phrases. Superior to existing region
proposal based methods, MATN searches for the optimal
bounding box over the entire feature map instead of selecting a sub-optimal one from discrete region proposals. We
evaluate MATN on the Flickr30K Entities and ReferItGame
datasets. The experimental results show that MATN significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Textual phrase localization in images is a very challenging problem and has attracted extensive attention in recent
years [21, 27, 11, 28, 22, 16, 4]. It plays an important role in
text based image retrieval, human-robot interaction and visual question answering. Unlike object detection over several semantic classes, phrase localization aims to find the
image region corresponding to a specified free-form textual
phrase about the image content.
Most of existing phrase localization methods solve this
problem through selecting regions from finite pre-computed
region proposals (e.g., Selective Search [26] and Edge Boxes [38]). The performance of those methods thus heavily depends on the quality of the region proposals. How-

Region proposals

Discrete search

Local optimum

“a small black dog”
Spatial feature map

Multi-scale Anchored
Transformer Network
(MATN)
Continuous search

Better result

Figure 1. Main idea of the proposed Multi-scale Anchored Transformer Network (MATN). Using only image-level supervision,
MATN performs continuous search over the entire spatial feature
map by taking region proposals as anchors to offer more accurate phrase localization. This is different from existing weakly
supervised methods that only perform selection over these finite
discrete region proposals and also different from region proposal
network (RPN) based methods that need bounding box annotations
of phrases as supervised information.

ever, the region proposals generated heuristically are usually not accurate, which severely limits the performance.
As shown in Fig. 1, none of the candidate bounding boxes
from region proposals corresponds to the ground truth and
thus existing methods cannot accurately localize the phrase.
Although some methods rely on region proposal network
(RPN) to produce more accurate proposal bounding boxes, such as [16, 4], they are fully supervised and require
bounding box annotations of phrases to learn RPN. Most of
image-sentence datasets, such as MSCOCO [17] and Flickr30K [35], also have no such location information about
phrases mentioned in the sentence. Manually annotating
location of each phrase is very time-consuming and labor
intensive, which hampers those fully-supervised methods
from being scalable to larger datasets.
To address these critical problems in phrase localization, we propose a novel weakly supervised model, namely Multi-scale Anchored Transformer Network (MATN)

5696

