Cross-Dataset Adaptation for Visual Question Answering
Wei-Lun Chao∗
U. of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

Hexiang Hu∗
U. of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

Fei Sha
U. of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

weilunchao760414@gmail.com

hexiang.frank.hu@gmail.com

feisha@usc.edu

Abstract
We investigate the problem of cross-dataset adaptation
for visual question answering (Visual QA). Our goal is to
train a Visual QA model on a source dataset but apply it
to another target one. Analogous to domain adaptation for
visual recognition, this setting is appealing when the target
dataset does not have a sufficient amount of labeled data
to learn an “in-domain” model. The key challenge is that
the two datasets are constructed differently, resulting in the
cross-dataset mismatch on images, questions, or answers.
We overcome this difficulty by proposing a novel domain
adaptation algorithm. Our method reduces the difference
in statistical distributions by transforming the feature representation of the data in the target dataset. Moreover, it
maximizes the likelihood of answering questions (in the target dataset) correctly using the Visual QA model trained
on the source dataset. We empirically studied the effectiveness of the proposed approach on adapting among several
popular Visual QA datasets. We show that the proposed
method improves over baselines where there is no adaptation and several other adaptation methods. We both quantitatively and qualitatively analyze when the adaptation can
be mostly effective.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (Visual QA) has emerged as
a very useful task to pry into how well learning machines
can comprehend and reason with both visual and textual information, which is an important functionality for general
artificial intelligence. In this task, the machine is presented
with an image and a relevant question. The machine can
generate a free-form answer or select from a pool of candidates. In the last few years, more than a dozen datasets for
the task have been developed [17, 23, 43]. Despite a steady
and significant improvement in modeling, the gap in performance between humans and machines on those datasets is
∗

Equal contributions

Question:
Who leads
the parade?

Question:
What type of
bike is this?

Candidates:
The mayor.
The governor.
The clowns.
Motorcycle cop.

Candidates:
No.
Bike for two.
Kingfish.
Motorcycle.

Figure 1. An illustration of the dataset bias in visual question answering. Given the same image, Visual QA datasets like VQA [4]
(right) and Visual7W [50] (left) provide different styles of questions, correct answers (red), and candidate answer sets, each can
contributes to the bias to prevent cross-dataset generalization.

still substantial. For instance, on the VQA dataset [4] where
human attains accuracy of 88.5%, the state-of-the-art model
on the Visual QA multiple-choice task achieves 71.4% [48].
In this paper, we study another form of performance gap.
Specifically, can the machine learn knowledge well enough
on one dataset so as to answer adeptly questions from another dataset? Such study will highlight the similarity and
difference among different datasets and guides the development of future ones. It also sheds lights on how well learning machines can understand visual and textual information
in their generality, instead of learning and reasoning with
dataset-specific knowledge.
Studying the performance gap across datasets is reminiscent of the seminal work by Torralba and Efros [39]. There,
the authors study the bias in image datasets for object recognition. They have showed that the idiosyncrasies in the data
collection process cause domain mismatch such that classifiers learnt on one dataset degrade significantly on another
dataset [13, 11, 12, 25, 30, 38, 19, 37].
The language data in the Visual QA datasets introduces
an addition layer of difficulty to bias in the visual data (see
Fig. 1). For instance, [8] analyzes several datasets and illustrates their difference in syntactic complexity as well as
within- and cross-dataset perplexity. As such, data in Visual QA datasets are likely more taletelling the origins from
which datasets they come.
To validate this hypothesis, we had designed a Name
15716

