DA-GAN: Instance-level Image Translation by Deep Attention Generative
Adversarial Networks
Shuang Ma⋆ , Jianlong Fu† , Chang Wen Chen⋆♯ and Tao Mei †
Computer Science and Engineering, SUNY at Buffalo † Microsoft Research
♯
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

⋆

{shuangma,chencw}@buffalo.edu jianf@microsoft.com tmei@live.com

Abstract
Unsupervised image translation, which aims in translating two independent sets of images, is challenging in discovering the correct correspondences without paired data. Existing works build upon Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) such that the distribution of the translated images are indistinguishable from the distribution of the target set. However, such set-level constraints cannot learn
the instance-level correspondences (e.g. aligned semantic
parts in object transfiguration task). This limitation often
results in false positives (e.g. geometric or semantic artifacts), and further leads to mode collapse problem. To
address the above issues, we propose a novel framework
for instance-level image translation by Deep Attention GAN
(DA-GAN). Such a design enables DA-GAN to decompose
the task of translating samples from two sets into translating instances in a highly-structured latent space. Specifically, we jointly learn a deep attention encoder, and the
instance-level correspondences could be consequently discovered through attending on the learned instances. Therefore, the constraints could be exploited on both set-level and
instance-level. Comparisons against several state-of-thearts demonstrate the superiority of our approach, and the
broad application capability, e.g, pose morphing, data augmentation, etc., pushes the margin of domain translation
problem. 1

1. Introduction
Can machines possess human ability to relate different
image domains and translate them? This question can be
formulated as image translation problem. In other words,
learning a mapping function, by finding some underlying
correspondences (e.g. similar semantics), from one image
domain to the other. Years of research have produced powerful translation systems in supervised setting, where ex1 This work was done while Shuang’s internship in Microsoft Research

Figure 1: (a) text-to-image generation. (b) object configuration. We can observe that the absence of instance-level
correspondences results in both semantic artifacts (labeled
by red boxes) exist in StackGAN and geometry artifacts exist in CycleGAN. Our approach successfully produces the
correct correspondences (labeled by yellow boxes) because
of the proposed instance-level translating. Details can be
found in Sec. 1

ample pairs are available, e.g. [14]. However, obtaining
paired training data is difficult and expensive. Therefore, researchers turned to develop unsupervised learning approach
which only relies on unpaired data.
Following the principle of translation, i.e. remaining the
expected identity from source domain (e.g., semantics in
text-to-image, human-ID in face-to-animation), while generating samples that match the distribution of target domain,
existing works typically build upon Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). However, they are trained only on a
holistic characterization of the data distribution, while lacks
an inference mechanism to reason about data at abstract
level. The implicit training process and weak controllability
prevents them from finding meaningful instance-level correspondences, and the identity is thus hard to be governed.
By ’instance-level correspondences’, we refer to high-level
content involving identifiable objects that shared by a set
of samples. These identifiable objects could be adaptively
15657

