Graph-Cut RANSAC
Daniel Barath12 and Jiri Matas2
1
Machine Perception Research Laboratory, MTA SZTAKI, Budapest, Hungary
2
Centre for Machine Perception, Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic

Abstract
A novel method for robust estimation, called Graph-Cut
RANSAC1 , GC-RANSAC in short, is introduced. To separate inliers and outliers, it runs the graph-cut algorithm in
the local optimization (LO) step which is applied when a sofar-the-best model is found. The proposed LO step is conceptually simple, easy to implement, globally optimal and
efficient. GC-RANSAC is shown experimentally, both on
synthesized tests and real image pairs, to be more geometrically accurate than state-of-the-art methods on a range of
problems, e.g. line fitting, homography, affine transformation, fundamental and essential matrix estimation. It runs
in real-time for many problems at a speed approximately
equal to that of the less accurate alternatives (in milliseconds on standard CPU).

1. Introduction
The RANSAC (RANdom SAmple Consensus) algorithm proposed by Fischler and Bolles [7] in 1981 has become the most widely used robust estimator in computer
vision. RANSAC and similar hypothesize-and-verify approaches have been successfully applied to many vision
tasks, e.g. to short baseline stereo [27, 29], wide baseline
stereo matching [22, 17, 18], motion segmentation [27], image mosaicing [9], detection of geometric primitives [25],
multi-model fitting [31], or for initialization of multi-model
fitting algorithms [12, 21]. In brief, the RANSAC approach
repeatedly selects random subsets of the input data and fits
a model, e.g. a line to two points or a fundamental matrix to
seven point correspondences. In the second step, the model
support, i.e. the number of inliers, is obtained. The model
with the highest support, polished e.g. by a least squares fit
on inliers, is returned.
In the last three decades, many modifications of
RANSAC have been proposed.
For instance, NAPSAC [20], PROSAC [4] or EVSAC [8] modify the sampling strategy to increase the probability of selecting an all-

inlier sample earlier. NAPSAC considers spatial coherence
in the sampling of input data points, PROSAC exploits the
ordering of the points by their predicted inlier probability,
EVSAC uses an estimate of the confidence in each point.
Modifications of the model support step has also been proposed. In MLESAC [28] and MSAC [10], the model quality
is estimated by a maximum likelihood process, albeit under
certain assumptions, with all its beneficial properties. In
practice, MLESAC results are often superior to the inlier
counting of plain RANSAC and less sensitive to the userdefined threshold. The termination of RANSAC is controlled by a manually set confidence value η and the sampling stops when the probability of finding a model with
higher support falls below η 2 .
Observing that RANSAC requires in practice more samples than theory predicts, Chum et al. [5] identified a problem that not all all-inlier samples are “good”, i.e. lead to a
model accurate enough to distinguish all inliers, e.g. due to
poor conditioning of the selected random all-inlier sample.
They address the problem by introducing the locally optimized RANSAC (LO-RANSAC) that augments the original approach with a local optimization step applied to the
so-far-the-best model. In the original paper [5], local optimization is implemented as an iterated least squares refitting with a shrinking inlier-outlier threshold inside an
inner RANSAC applied only to the inliers of the current
model. In the reported experiments, LO-RANSAC outperforms standard RANSAC in both accuracy and the required
number of iterations. The number of LO runs is close to
the logarithm of the number of verifications, and it does not
create a significant overhead in the processing time in most
of the cases tested. However, it was shown by Lebeda et
al. [15] that for models with high inlier counts the local optimization step becomes a computational bottleneck due to
the iterated least squares model fitting. This is addressed
by using a 7m-sized subset of the inliers in each LO step,
where m is the size of a minimum sample; the factor of
7 was set by exhaustive experimentation. The idea of local
optimization has been included in state-of-the-art RANSAC
approaches like USAC [23]. Nevertheless, the LO proce-

1 Available at https://github.com/danini/graph-cut-ransac

2 This interpretation of η holds for the standard cost function only.

6733

