Towards Pose Invariant Face Recognition in the Wild
Jian Zhao1,2∗† Yu Cheng3 Yan Xu4 Lin Xiong4 Jianshu Li1 Fang Zhao1
Karlekar Jayashree4 Sugiri Pranata4 Shengmei Shen4 Junliang Xing5 Shuicheng Yan1,6
1
4

National University of Singapore

Panasonic R&D Center Singapore

5

2

National University of Defense Technology

3

Jiashi Feng1

Nanyang Technological University

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
6

Qihoo 360 AI Institute

Abstract
Pose variation is one key challenge in face recognition.
As opposed to current techniques for pose invariant face
recognition, which either directly extract pose invariant features for recognition, or first normalize profile face images
to frontal pose before feature extraction, we argue that it
is more desirable to perform both tasks jointly to allow
them to benefit from each other. To this end, we propose
a Pose Invariant Model (PIM) for face recognition in the
wild, with three distinct novelties. First, PIM is a novel
and unified deep architecture, containing a Face Frontalization sub-Net (FFN) and a Discriminative Learning sub-Net
(DLN), which are jointly learned from end to end. Second,
FFN is a well-designed dual-path Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) which simultaneously perceives global
structures and local details, incorporated with an unsupervised cross-domain adversarial training and a “learning
to learn” strategy for high-fidelity and identity-preserving
frontal view synthesis. Third, DLN is a generic Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for face recognition with
our enforced cross-entropy optimization strategy for learning discriminative yet generalized feature representation.
Qualitative and quantitative experiments on both controlled
and in-the-wild benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed model over the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Face recognition has been a key problem in computer
vision for decades. Even though (near-) frontal1 face recognition seems to be solved under constrained conditions, the
more general problem of face recognition in the wild still
needs more studies, desiderated by many practical applica∗ Homepage: https://zhaoj9014.github.io/.
† Work done in part during an internship at Panasonic R&D Center Singapore.
1 “Near frontal” faces are almost equally visible for both sides and their
yaw angles are within 10◦ from frontal view.

Figure 1: Pose invariant face recognition in the wild. Col. 1 & 6:
distinct identities under different poses with other unconstrained
factors (different expressions and lighting conditions); Col. 2 & 5:
recovered frontal faces with our proposed PIM model; Col. 3 & 4:
learned facial representations with our proposed PIM model. PIM
can learn pose-invariant representations and recover photorealistic
frontal faces effectively. The representations are extracted from
the penultimate layer of PIM.
tions. For example, in surveillance scenarios, free-walking
people would not always keep their faces frontal to the cameras. Most face images captured in the wild are contaminated by unconstrained factors like extreme pose, bad illumination, large expression, etc. Among them, the one
that harms face recognition performance arguably the most
is pose variation. The performance of most face recognition models degrades by over 10% from frontal-frontal to
frontal-profile verification [24]. In contrast, human can recognize faces with large pose variance without significant accuracy drop. In this work, we aim to mitigate such a gap
between human performance and automatic models for recognizing unconstrained faces with large pose variations.
Recent studies [10, 19] discovered that human brain has
a face-processing neural system that consists of several connected regions. The neurons in some of these regions perform face normalization (i.e., profile to frontal) and others
12207

