PoTion: Pose MoTion Representation for Action Recognition
Vasileios Choutas1,2

Philippe Weinzaepfel2 Jérôme Revaud2
1
2
Inria∗
NAVER LABS Europe
pose
estimation

Abstract

joint
heatmaps
nose

Most state-of-the-art methods for action recognition rely
on a two-stream architecture that processes appearance and
motion independently. In this paper, we claim that considering them jointly offers rich information for action recognition. We introduce a novel representation that gracefully encodes the movement of some semantic keypoints. We use the
human joints as these keypoints and term our Pose moTion
representation PoTion. Specifically, we first run a stateof-the-art human pose estimator [4] and extract heatmaps
for the human joints in each frame. We obtain our PoTion
representation by temporally aggregating these probability
maps. This is achieved by ‘colorizing’ each of them depending on the relative time of the frames in the video clip
and summing them. This fixed-size representation for an entire video clip is suitable to classify actions using a shallow
convolutional neural network.
Our experimental evaluation shows that PoTion outperforms other state-of-the-art pose representations [6, 48].
Furthermore, it is complementary to standard appearance
and motion streams. When combining PoTion with the
recent two-stream I3D approach [5], we obtain state-ofthe-art performance on the JHMDB, HMDB and UCF101
datasets.

1. Introduction
Significant progress has been made in action recognition
over the past decade thanks to the emergence of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [5, 32, 39, 40] that have
gradually replaced hand-crafted features [22, 25, 42]. CNN
architectures are either based on spatio-temporal convolutions [39, 40], recurrent neural networks [8] or two-stream
architectures [32, 43]. Two-stream approaches train two independent CNNs, one operating on the appearance using
RGB data, the other one processing motion based on optical flow images. Recently, Carreira and Zisserman [5]
obtained state-of-the-art performance on trimmed action
classification by proposing a two-stream architecture with
∗ Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, INPG, LJK, Grenoble, France.

Cordelia Schmid1

color
coding

right hand

t=1

...

temporal
aggregation

...
frame 1

left elbow

right foot

nose

right hand

nose

...

...
...
frame t

left elbow

right hand

...

right foot

left elbow

right foot
stacking

nose

right hand

PoTion

...
...
frame T

left elbow

right foot

t=T

Figure 1. Illustration of our PoTion representation. Given a video,
we extract joint heatmaps for each frame and colorize them using
a color that depends on the relative time in the video clip. For each
joint, we aggregate them to obtain the clip-level PoTion representation with fixed dimension.

spatio-temporal convolutions (I3D) and by pretraining on
the large-scale Kinetics dataset [47].
Other modalities can easily be added to a multi-stream
architecture. Human pose is certainly an important cue for
action recognition [6, 19, 48] with complementary information to appearance and motion. A vast portion of the
literature on using human poses for action recognition is
dedicated to 3D skeleton input [10, 27, 31], but these approaches remain limited to the case where the 3D skeleton
data is available. 2D poses have been used by a few recent
approaches. Some of them assume that the pose of the actor is fully-visible and use either hand-crafted features [19]
or CNNs on patches around the human joints [3, 6]. However, this cannot be directly applied to videos in-the-wild
that contain multiple actors, occlusions and truncations.
Zolfaghari et al. [48] proposed a pose stream that operates
on semantic segmentation maps of human body parts. They
are obtained using a fully-convolutional network and are
then classified using a spatio-temporal CNN.
In this paper, we propose to focus on the movement of
a few relevant keypoints over an entire video clip. Modeling the motion of a few keypoints stands in contrast to the
17024

