VoxelNet: End-to-End Learning for Point Cloud Based 3D Object Detection
Yin Zhou
Apple Inc

Oncel Tuzel
Apple Inc

yzhou3@apple.com

otuzel@apple.com

Abstract
Accurate detection of objects in 3D point clouds is a
central problem in many applications, such as autonomous
navigation, housekeeping robots, and augmented/virtual reality. To interface a highly sparse LiDAR point cloud with a
region proposal network (RPN), most existing efforts have
focused on hand-crafted feature representations, for example, a bird’s eye view projection. In this work, we remove
the need of manual feature engineering for 3D point clouds
and propose VoxelNet, a generic 3D detection network that
unifies feature extraction and bounding box prediction into
a single stage, end-to-end trainable deep network. Specifically, VoxelNet divides a point cloud into equally spaced 3D
voxels and transforms a group of points within each voxel
into a unified feature representation through the newly introduced voxel feature encoding (VFE) layer. In this way,
the point cloud is encoded as a descriptive volumetric representation, which is then connected to a RPN to generate
detections. Experiments on the KITTI car detection benchmark show that VoxelNet outperforms the state-of-the-art
LiDAR based 3D detection methods by a large margin. Furthermore, our network learns an effective discriminative
representation of objects with various geometries, leading
to encouraging results in 3D detection of pedestrians and
cyclists, based on only LiDAR.

1. Introduction
Point cloud based 3D object detection is an important
component of a variety of real-world applications, such as
autonomous navigation [11, 14], housekeeping robots [28],
and augmented/virtual reality [29]. Compared to imagebased detection, LiDAR provides reliable depth information that can be used to accurately localize objects and
characterize their shapes [21, 5]. However, unlike images, LiDAR point clouds are sparse and have highly variable point density, due to factors such as non-uniform
sampling of the 3D space, effective range of the sensors,
occlusion, and the relative pose. To handle these challenges, many approaches manually crafted feature represen-

VoxelNet

Figure 1. VoxelNet directly operates on the raw point cloud (no
need for feature engineering) and produces the 3D detection results using a single end-to-end trainable network.

tations for point clouds that are tuned for 3D object detection. Several methods project point clouds into a perspective view and apply image-based feature extraction techniques [30, 15, 22]. Other approaches rasterize point clouds
into a 3D voxel grid and encode each voxel with handcrafted features [43, 9, 39, 40, 21, 5]. However, these manual design choices introduce an information bottleneck that
prevents these approaches from effectively exploiting 3D
shape information and the required invariances for the detection task. A major breakthrough in recognition [20] and
detection [13] tasks on images was due to moving from
hand-crafted features to machine-learned features.
Recently, Qi et al.[31] proposed PointNet, an end-toend deep neural network that learns point-wise features directly from point clouds. This approach demonstrated impressive results on 3D object recognition, 3D object part
segmentation, and point-wise semantic segmentation tasks.
In [32], an improved version of PointNet was introduced
which enabled the network to learn local structures at different scales. To achieve satisfactory results, these two approaches trained feature transformer networks on all input
points (∼1k points). Since typical point clouds obtained
using LiDARs contain ∼100k points, training the architec14490

