Interpret Neural Networks by Identifying Critical Data Routing Paths
Yulong Wang
Hang Su
Bo Zhang
Xiaolin Hu∗
Tsinghua National Lab for Information Science and Technology
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, BNRist Lab
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{wang-yl15@mails,suhangss@mail,dcszb@mail,xlhu@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn
Conv3

1. Introduction
With the availability of large-scale databases and recent
improvements in deep learning methodologies, deep neural network has become an indispensable tool or even exceeded the human level on an increasing number of complex tasks [12, 25, 31]. In general, most of these algorithms
lack the capability to make themselves understandable to
users. A machine learning model tends to create nonlinear, non-monotonic and non-polynomial functions that approximate the relationship between variables in a dataset,
which makes it highly non-transparent. The opaqueness of
their inner working mechanism is recognized as one major

routing paths encoding

cat
apple
…

Interpretability of a deep neural network aims to explain
the rationale behind its decisions and enable the users to
understand the intelligent agents, which has become an
important issue due to its importance in practical applications. To address this issue, we develop a Distillation
Guided Routing method, which is a flexible framework to
interpret a deep neural network by identifying critical data
routing paths and analyzing the functional processing behavior of the corresponding layers. Specifically, we propose
to discover the critical nodes on the data routing paths during network inferring prediction for individual input samples by learning associated control gates for each layer’s
output channel. The routing paths can, therefore, be represented based on the responses of concatenated control gates
from all the layers, which reflect the network’s semantic selectivity regarding to the input patterns and more detailed
functional process across different layer levels. Based on
the discoveries, we propose an adversarial sample detection
algorithm by learning a classifier to discriminate whether
the critical data routing paths are from real or adversarial samples. Experiments demonstrate that our algorithm
can effectively achieve high defense rate with minor training overhead.

…

Conv1 Conv2 Conv3
1001 0011 100
0101 1001 010
…

Abstract

…

Conv2

…

Conv1

…
…
…
…

…
critical node
negligible node

identifying critical routing paths

critical data
routing paths

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed method. Left: we
develop a Distillation Guided Routing method to identify
the critical data routing paths for each input sample. Each
layer’s output channel is associated with a scalar control
gate to decide whether the channel is critical for the decision. The activated channels are termed as critical nodes
on the routing paths. Right: the learned control gates from
all layers are sequentially concatenated to form an encoding
feature of routing paths, which can be used to analyze the
functional process and dissect the working mechanism of a
DNN.
drawback in the task-critical applications where the reliance
of the model must be guaranteed, such as medical diagnosis [32] or self-driving cars [16].
An interpretable machine learning algorithm has the capability to explain or to present in understandable terms to
a human [7]. It has attracted an increasing attention to develop methods for visualizing, explaining and interpreting
deep learning models [3, 14, 17]. However, there is generally an inherent tension between the performance and interpretability. It may sacrifice accuracy to pursue the interpretability, which is undesirable in settings with critical
consequences [10]. In this paper, we focus on the post-hoc
interpretability, i.e., given a trained model, our goal is to
understand what and how the model achieves this decision
by analyzing its working process, which does not damage
the performance of a model itself. Some other efforts are
also made to provide explanations for each individual pre∗ indicates corresponding author

8906

