PairedCycleGAN: Asymmetric Style Transfer
for Applying and Removing Makeup
Jingwan Lu
Adobe Research

Abstract
This paper introduces an automatic method for editing
a portrait photo so that the subject appears to be wearing makeup in the style of another person in a reference
photo. Our unsupervised learning approach relies on a
new framework of cycle-consistent generative adversarial
networks. Different from the image domain transfer problem, our style transfer problem involves two asymmetric
functions: a forward function encodes example-based style
transfer, whereas a backward function removes the style. We
construct two coupled networks to implement these functions – one that transfers makeup style and a second that
can remove makeup – such that the output of their successive application to an input photo will match the input. The
learned style network can then quickly apply an arbitrary
makeup style to an arbitrary photo. We demonstrate the effectiveness on a broad range of portraits and styles.

Fisher Yu
UC Berkeley

those approaches can produce good results for stylization
of imagery in general, they do not work well for adding
various makeup styles to faces. A second challenge, specific
to our makeup problem, is that people are highly sensitive
to visual artifacts in rendered faces. A potential solution
is to restrict the stylization range so as to define a specific
color transformation space (such as affine transformations),
or so as to preserve edges [18, 19, 16]. Unfortunately, this
approach limits the range of makeup, because many styles
include features that would violate the edge preservation
property such as elongated eyelashes or dark eye liner.
Inspired by recent successful photorealistic style transfer based on generative adversarial networks (GANs), we
take an unsupervised learning approach that builds on the
CycleGAN architecture of Zhu et al. [26]. CycleGAN can
transfer images between two domains by training on two
sets of images, one from each domain. For our applica-

1. Introduction
Digital photo manipulation now plays a central role
in portraiture. Professional tools allow photographers to
adjust lighting, remove blemishes, or move wisps of hair.
Whimsical applications let novices add cartoon elements
like a party hat or clown nose, or to turn photos into
drawings and paintings. Some tools like Taaz [2] and
PortraitPro [1] can digitally add makeup to a person in a
photo, but the styles are limited to a collection of preset
configurations and/or a set of parameters that adjust specific
features like lip color.
This paper introduces a way to digitally add makeup to a
photo of a person, where the style of the makeup is provided
in an example photo of a different person (Figure 1). One
challenge is that it is difficult to acquire a dataset of photo
triplets from which to learn: the source photo, the reference
makeup photo, and the ground truth output (which preserves
identity of the source and style of the reference). Previous
work on style transfer avoids the need for such a training
set by defining the style and content loss functions based on
deep features trained by neural networks [8, 16, 18]. While

Adam Finkelstein
Princeton University

Source

Huiwen Chang
Princeton University

Reference

Figure 1: Three source photos (top row) are each modified to
match makeup styles in three reference photos (left column) to
produce nine different outputs (3 × 3 lower right).

1 40

