Recurrent Scene Parsing with Perspective Understanding in the Loop
Shu Kong, Charless Fowlkes
Dept. of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine
{skong2, fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu
Abstract
Objects may appear at arbitrary scales in perspective
images of a scene, posing a challenge for recognition systems that process images at a fixed resolution. We propose a depth-aware gating module that adaptively selects
the pooling field size in a convolutional network architecture according to the object scale (inversely proportional to
the depth) so that small details are preserved for distant objects while larger receptive fields are used for those nearby.
The depth gating signal is provided by stereo disparity or
estimated directly from monocular input. We integrate this
depth-aware gating into a recurrent convolutional neural
network to perform semantic segmentation. Our recurrent
module iteratively refines the segmentation results, leveraging the depth and semantic predictions from the previous
iterations.
Through extensive experiments on four popular largescale datasets, we demonstrate this approach achieves competitive semantic segmentation performance with a model
which is substantially more compact. We carry out extensive
analysis of this architecture including variants that operate
on monocular RGB but use depth as side-information during training, unsupervised gating as a generic attentional
mechanism, and multi-resolution gating. We find that gated
pooling for joint semantic segmentation and depth yields
state-of-the-art results for quantitative monocular depth estimation.

1. Introduction
An intrinsic challenge of parsing rich scenes is understanding object layout relative to the camera. Roughly
speaking, the scales of the objects in the image frame are
inversely proportional to the distance to the camera. Humans easily recognize objects even when they range over
many octaves of spatial resolution. For example, the cars
near the camera in urban scene can appear a dozen times
larger than those at distance as shown by the lower panel
in Figure 1. However, the huge range and arbitrary scale
at which objects appear pose difficulties for machine image

Figure 1: Upper: depth-aware gating spatially modulates
the selected pooling scale using a depth map predicted from
monocular input. In this paper, we also evaluate related architectures where scene depth is provided directly at test
time as a gating signal, and where spatially adaptive attentional gating is learned without any depth supervision.
Lower: example ground-truth compared to predictions with
and without the depth gating module. Rectangles overlayed on the image indicate pooling field sizes which are
adapted based on the local depth estimate. We quantize the
depth map into five discrete scales in our experiments. Using depth-gated pooling yields more accurate segment label
predictions by avoiding pooling across small multiple distant objects while simultaneously allowing sufficiently large
pooling fields for nearby objects.
understanding. Although individual local features (e.g., in
a deep neural network) can exhibit some degree of scaleinvariance, it is not obvious this invariance covers the range
scale variation that exists in images.
In this paper, we investigate how cues to perspective geometry conveyed by image content (estimated from monoc1956

