Alive Caricature from 2D to 3D
Qianyi Wu1 , Juyong Zhang1∗, Yu-Kun Lai2 , Jianmin Zheng3 and Jianfei Cai3
1

University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Cardiff University, UK
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

wqy9619@mail.ustc.edu.cn, juyong@ustc.edu.cn, Yukun.Lai@cs.cardiff.ac.uk,
{ASJMZheng,ASJFCai}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Caricature is an art form that expresses subjects in abstract, simple and exaggerated views. While many caricatures are 2D images, this paper presents an algorithm
for creating expressive 3D caricatures from 2D caricature images with minimum user interaction. The key idea
of our approach is to introduce an intrinsic deformation
representation that has the capability of extrapolation, enabling us to create a deformation space from standard face
datasets, which maintains face constraints and meanwhile
is sufficiently large for producing exaggerated face models. Built upon the proposed deformation representation,
an optimization model is formulated to find the 3D caricature that captures the style of the 2D caricature image automatically. The experiments show that our approach has
better capability in expressing caricatures than those fitting
approaches directly using classical parametric face models
such as 3DMM and FaceWareHouse. Moreover, our approach is based on standard face datasets and avoids constructing complicated 3D caricature training sets, which
provides great flexibility in real applications.

1. Introduction
Caricature is a pictorial representation or description that
deliberately exaggerates a person’s distinctive features or
peculiarities to create an easily identifiable visual likeness
with a comic effect [33]. This vivid art form contains the
concepts of abstraction, simplification and exaggeration. It
has been shown that the effect of producing caricature can
increase face recognition rates [32, 35, 14]. Since Brennan presented the first interactive caricature generator in
1985 [6], many approaches and computer-assisted carica∗ Corresponding author: Juyong Zhang

Figure 1. An example of 3D caricature generation from a single
image. Given a single caricature image (left), our algorithm generates its 3D model and the model with texture (right, displayed in
two views).

ture generation systems have been developed [24, 27, 25,
40]. Most of these works focus on 2D caricature generation. Our goal is to develop techniques for creating 3D
caricatures from 2D caricature images. Such expressive 3D
models of caricatures are interesting and useful, for example, in cartoon and social media.
Creating 3D caricatures from 2D images is a problem
of image-based modeling. A closely-related and very interesting problem is face reconstruction which is widely studied in computer vision. Due to diverse geometric and texture variations and a large variety of identities and expressions, face reconstruction is a nontrivial task. Recently face
reconstruction has achieved great progress. Many excellent works have been proposed for reconstructing real faces
and their expressions as well. Among them, example-based
17336

