Image Collection Pop-up: 3D Reconstruction and Clustering
of Rigid and Non-Rigid Categories
Antonio Agudo
Melcior Pijoan
Francesc Moreno-Noguer
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, 08028, Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
This paper introduces an approach to simultaneously
estimate 3D shape, camera pose, and object and type of
deformation clustering, from partial 2D annotations in a
multi-instance collection of images. Furthermore, we can
indistinctly process rigid and non-rigid categories. This advances existing work, which only addresses the problem for
one single object or, if multiple objects are considered, they
are assumed to be clustered a priori. To handle this broader
version of the problem, we model object deformation using a formulation based on multiple unions of subspaces,
able to span from small rigid motion to complex deformations. The parameters of this model are learned via Augmented Lagrange Multipliers, in a completely unsupervised
manner that does not require any training data at all. Extensive validation is provided in a wide variety of synthetic
and real scenarios, including rigid and non-rigid categories
with small and large deformations. In all cases our approach outperforms state-of-the-art in terms of 3D reconstruction accuracy, while also providing clustering results
that allow segmenting the images into object instances and
their associated type of deformation (or action the object is
performing).

1. Introduction
Simultaneously estimating 3D object shape and camera
pose from a collection of RGB images either acquired from
different viewpoints or by a single moving camera is one of
the most active research areas in computer vision. Early
works addressed this problem under the assumption of a
rigid structure [1, 29, 33]. More recently, many efforts
have focused on the non-rigid case, to retrieve deforming
3D shape and camera motion from only 2D measurements
in a monocular video [2, 23, 26, 37, 39]. This problem
is known to be inherently ambiguous and demands introducing sophisticated priors. Probably, the most standard
priors include the use of different modalities of low-rank
subspaces to constrain the solution space [3, 7, 9, 26, 35].
Moreover, these algorithms exploit the fact that input im-

ages smoothly change viewpoints. This allows introducing
temporal smoothness on the shape deformations and obtain
more accurate solutions [5, 28].
All these previous approaches, however, solve the problem for one single object instance. There exist works addressing scenarios with multiple objects within a category.
For instance, if the observed category is rigid (e.g., cars or
aeroplanes) and all objects in it have the same geometry, the
problem can be addressed as a rigid Structure from Motion
(SfM) one [31, 38]. When object instances within the category have distinct geometry, even if they are rigid (e.g.,
different model cars), the global problem of retrieving their
shape can be formulated in a non-rigid manner [20]. This
can be extended to inherently non-rigid classes (e.g., faces,
animal poses), in which case, both inter- and intra-object
deformations shall be considered [4]. However, all these
works are only focused on the reconstruction problem, and
assume the object clustering to be known a priori.
In this paper we move a step forward and tackle the problem in which the object clusters are not known a priori. That
is, given an input collection of images of a specific category,
we aim at simultaneously clustering them into different object instances and recovering their 3D shape regardless of
whether the objects are rigid or non-rigid. Camera pose
is also estimated. For instance, as shown in Fig. 1-Left,
given a number of images of bicycles (5 models seen from
different viewpoints) our approach clusters them into each
of the models and reconstructs their 3D shape. Note that
some observations of the bicycle instances are very similar
and difficult to distinguish from only 2D annotations. Simultaneously reasoning about the clustering and 3D reconstruction helps improving both tasks. The proposed method
generalizes to non-rigid categories as well. As shown in
Fig. 1-Right, given a collection of face images of 5 humans
under different viewpoints and facial expressions, our algorithm jointly splits the images into each of the individuals
and their actions, and retrieves their 3D deformable shape.
In order to simultaneously tackle clustering and reconstruction from a collection of unordered images, we propose
a novel optimization framework that builds upon recent
Non-Rigid Structure from Motion approaches (NRSfM) [6,
12607

