Learning from Synthetic Data: Addressing Domain Shift for Semantic
Segmentation
Swami Sankaranarayanan1 ∗ Yogesh Balaji 1∗
1

Arpit Jain 2

Ser Nam Lim 2,3

Rama Chellappa 1

UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
2
GE Global Research, Niskayuna, NY
3
Avitas Systems, GE Venture, Boston MA.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) have
revolutionalized the field of computer vision, achieving the
best performance in a multitude of tasks such as image classification [12], semantic segmentation [20], visual question answering [23] etc. This strong performance can be
attributed to the availability of abundant labeled training
data. While annotating data is relatively easier for certain
tasks like image classification, they can be extremely laborious and time-consuming for others. Semantic segmentation is one such task that requires great human effort as it
involves obtaining dense pixel-level labels. The annotation
time for obtaining pixel-wise labels for a single image from
∗ First two authors contributed equally

Model Trained on
Synthetic Data (Fs)

Test on Synthetic Data

High Accuracy on Synthetic Data

Due to
Domain Shift

Model Trained on
Real Data (Fr)
Test on Real Data

Fr

Fs

Performance on Real Data
Model Trained on
Synthetic Data (Fs)

GAN

Proposed Approach

Visual Domain Adaptation is a problem of immense importance in computer vision. Previous approaches showcase the inability of even deep neural networks to learn informative representations across domain shift. This problem is more severe for tasks where acquiring hand labeled
data is extremely hard and tedious. In this work, we focus
on adapting the representations learned by segmentation
networks across synthetic and real domains. Contrary to
previous approaches that use a simple adversarial objective
or superpixel information to aid the process, we propose
an approach based on Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) that brings the embeddings closer in the learned
feature space. To showcase the generality and scalability of
our approach, we show that we can achieve state of the art
results on two challenging scenarios of synthetic to real domain adaptation. Additional exploratory experiments show
that our approach: (1) generalizes to unseen domains and
(2) results in improved alignment of source and target distributions.

Extreme Domain Shift

Abstract

,

,

Supervised Synthetic data and Unsupervised Real Data

Proposed GAN
based Training
Reduces
Domain Gap

Our trained model (Fours)

Test on Real Data

Fr

Fs

Fours

Performance on Real Data

Figure 1: Characterization of Domain Shift and effect of the
proposed approach in reducing the same

the CITYSCAPES dataset is about 1 hr., highlighting the
level of difficulty ([4], [26]). The other challenge lies in
collecting the data: While natural images are easier to obtain, there are certain domains like medical imaging where
collecting data and finding experts to precisely label them
can also be very expensive.
One promising approach that addresses the above issues
is the utility of synthetically generated data for training.
However, models trained on the synthetic data fail to perform well on real datasets owing to the presence of domain
gap between the datasets. Domain adaptation encompasses
the class of techniques that address this domain shift prob13752

