Empirical study of the topology and geometry of deep networks
Alhussein Fawzi∗†

Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli∗‡

Pascal Frossard‡

fawzi@cs.ucla.edu

seyed.moosavi@epfl.ch

pascal.frossard@epfl.ch

Stefano Soatto†
soatto@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to analyze the geometric properties of deep neural network image classifiers in the input
space. We specifically study the topology of classification
regions created by deep networks, as well as their associated
decision boundary. Through a systematic empirical study, we
show that state-of-the-art deep nets learn connected classification regions, and that the decision boundary in the vicinity
of datapoints is flat along most directions. We further draw
an essential connection between two seemingly unrelated
properties of deep networks: their sensitivity to additive perturbations of the inputs, and the curvature of their decision
boundary. The directions where the decision boundary is
curved in fact characterize the directions to which the classifier is the most vulnerable. We finally leverage a fundamental
asymmetry in the curvature of the decision boundary of deep
nets, and propose a method to discriminate between original images, and images perturbed with small adversarial
examples. We show the effectiveness of this purely geometric
approach for detecting small adversarial perturbations in
images, and for recovering the labels of perturbed images.

and their expressivity in [6, 7], the geometric properties of
the decision boundary and classification regions of deep networks have comparatively received little attention. The goal
of this paper is to analyze these properties, and leverage them
to improve the robustness of such classifiers to perturbations.
In this paper, we specifically view classification regions
as topological spaces and decision boundaries as hypersurfaces, and we examine their geometric properties. We first
study the classification regions induced by state-of-the-art
deep networks, and provide empirical evidence suggesting
that these classification regions are connected; that is, there
exists a continuous path that remains in the region between
any two points of the same label. Up to our knowledge,
this represents the first instance where the connectivity of
classification regions is empirically shown. Then, to study
the complexity of the functions learned by the deep network,
we analyze the curvature of their decision boundary. We
empirically show that
• The decision boundary in the vicinity of natural images
is flat in most directions, with only a very few directions
that are significantly curved.
• We reveal the existence of a fundamental asymmetry
in the decision boundary of deep networks, whereby
the decision boundary (near natural images x) is biased
towards negative curvatures.1

1. Introduction
While the geometry of classification regions and decision
functions induced by traditional classifiers (such as linear
and kernel SVM) is fairly well understood, these fundamental geometric properties are to a large extent unknown for
state-of-the-art deep neural networks. Yet, to understand
the recent success of deep neural networks and potentially
address their weaknesses (such as their instability to perturbations [1]), an understanding of these geometric properties
remains primordial. While many fundamental properties of
deep networks have recently been studied, such as their optimization landscape in [2, 3], their generalization in [4, 5],
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
† University of California, Los Angeles, US
‡ École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland

• Directions with significantly curved decision boundaries are shared between different datapoints.
• We demonstrate the existence of a relation between the
sensitivity of a classifier to perturbations of the inputs,
and these shared directions: a deep net is vulnerable to
perturbations along these directions, and is insensitive
to perturbations along the remaining directions.
We finally leverage the fundamental asymmetry of deep
networks revealed in our analysis, and propose an algorithm
1 Throughout the paper, the sign of the curvature is chosen according to
the normal vector, and the data point x, as illustrated in Fig. 8 (top).

3762

