Aperture Supervision for Monocular Depth Estimation
Pratul P. Srinivasan1 *

Rahul Garg2
Neal Wadhwa2
Ren Ng1
1
UC Berkeley, 2 Google Research

Jonathan T. Barron2

Abstract
We present a novel method to train machine learning algorithms to estimate scene depths from a single image, by
using the information provided by a camera’s aperture as
supervision. Prior works use a depth sensor’s outputs or
images of the same scene from alternate viewpoints as supervision, while our method instead uses images from the
same viewpoint taken with a varying camera aperture. To
enable learning algorithms to use aperture effects as supervision, we introduce two differentiable aperture rendering functions that use the input image and predicted depths
to simulate the depth-of-field effects caused by real camera apertures. We train a monocular depth estimation network end-to-end to predict the scene depths that best explain these finite aperture images as defocus-blurred renderings of the input all-in-focus image.

1. Introduction
The task of inferring a 3D scene from a single image is
a central problem in human and computer vision. In addition to being of academic interest, monocular depth estimation also enables many applications in fields such as
robotics and computational photography. Currently, there
are two dominant strategies for training machine learning
algorithms to perform monocular depth estimation: direct
supervision and multi-view supervision. Both approaches
require large datasets where varied scenes are imaged or
synthetically rendered. In the direct supervision strategy,
each scene in the dataset consists of a paired RGB image
and ground truth depth map (from a depth sensor or a rendering engine), and an algorithm is trained to regress from
each input image to its associated ground truth depth. In the
multi-view supervision strategy, each scene in the dataset
consists of a pair (or set) of RGB images of the same scene
from different viewpoints, and an algorithm is trained to
predict the depths for one view of a scene that best explain the other view(s) subject to some geometric transformation. Both strategies present significant challenges.
* Work done while interning at Google Research.

Figure 1. Given a single all-in-focus image, our algorithm estimates a depth map of the scene using a monocular depth estimation network. The only supervisory signal used to train this
network was images taken from a single camera with different
aperture sizes. This “aperture supervision” allows for diverse
monocular depth estimation datasets to be gathered more easily.
Depth-estimation models trained using aperture supervision estimate depths that work particularly well for generating images with
synthetic shallow depth-of-field effects.

The depth sensors required for direct supervision are expensive, power-hungry, low-resolution, have limited range, often produce noisy or incomplete depth maps, usually work
poorly outdoors, and are challenging to calibrate and align
with the “reference” RGB camera. Multi-view supervision
ameliorates some of these issues but requires at least two
cameras or camera motion, and has the same difficulties as
classic stereo algorithms on image regions without texture
or with repetitive textures.
In this work, we propose a novel strategy for training
machine learning algorithms to perform monocular depth
estimation: aperture supervision. We demonstrate that sets
of images taken by the same camera and from the same
viewpoint but with different aperture sizes can be used to
train a monocular depth estimation algorithm. Aperture supervision can be used for general-purpose monocular depth
estimation, but works particularly well for one compelling
computational photography application: synthetic defocus.

6393

