Detail-Preserving Pooling in Deep Networks
∗

∗

Faraz Saeedan1
Nicolas Weber1,2
Michael Goesele1,3
Stefan Roth1
1
2
3
TU Darmstadt
NEC Laboratories Europe
Oculus Research

Abstract
Most convolutional neural networks use some method for
gradually downscaling the size of the hidden layers. This
is commonly referred to as pooling, and is applied to reduce the number of parameters, improve invariance to certain distortions, and increase the receptive field size. Since
pooling by nature is a lossy process, it is crucial that each
such layer maintains the portion of the activations that is
most important for the network’s discriminability. Yet, simple maximization or averaging over blocks, max or average
pooling, or plain downsampling in the form of strided convolutions are the standard. In this paper, we aim to leverage recent results on image downscaling for the purposes
of deep learning. Inspired by the human visual system,
which focuses on local spatial changes, we propose detailpreserving pooling (DPP), an adaptive pooling method that
magnifies spatial changes and preserves important structural detail. Importantly, its parameters can be learned
jointly with the rest of the network. We analyze some of
its theoretical properties and show its empirical benefits on
several datasets and networks, where DPP consistently outperforms previous pooling approaches.

1. Introduction
Pooling in various forms has been a crucial component
of virtually all convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1].
It reduces the computational cost and the number of parameters, improves the invariance to minor distortions, and increases the receptive field of intermediate and output nodes.
In mid-sized networks, such as VGG [27] or GoogLeNet
[29], max or average pooling are most commonly used.
Deeper network architectures, such as ResNet [11], often
use strided convolutions. All of them have shortcomings:
Strided convolutions simply pick one node in a fixed position in each local neighborhood, regardless of the significance of its activation. From an image downscaling perspective, such downsampling can cause artifacts such as
aliasing. Average pooling results in a gradual, constant at∗ This work was carried out while at TU Darmstadt.

(a) Original Image

(b) DPID (λ = 1)

(c) Box filter (average pooling)

(d) Spatial maximum \ extremum

Figure 1. Visual comparison for downscaling by a factor of 16 for
several methods applied to the image depicted in (a): (b) detailpreserving image downscaling (DPID) [31] with λ = 1; (c) box
filter plus downsampling (average pooling); and (d) taking the
maximum \ extremum in each local neighborhood (max \ extremum pooling). The details are better preserved by DPID, e.g.,
observable in the dog’s eyes and whiskers. Best viewed on screen.

tenuation of the contribution of individual nodes in the forward and backward passes, also irrespective of the importance of the local structure. The resulting loss of detail becomes apparent when visualizing its effect in image downscaling (Fig. 1c). Since detail is important for the discriminability of the network [1], max pooling aims to preserve it.
Yet, it disrupts the flow of gradients in some of the branches
of the backward pass, since only one node is selected in every input neighborhood. Moreover, looking from an image
downscaling perspective, max pooling leads to implausible
looking results (Fig. 1d). We thus ask: Can we design pooling layers that address these limitations by taking inspiration from image downscaling, expecting improved results?
Another shortcoming of standard pooling layers is that
the question of which one performs best depends on the
specific combination of network and dataset. Determining
the best pooling strategy is thus often done using exhaustive
empirical testing. There have been a few attempts to introduce more generic pooling layers, e.g., based on learning
a linear combination of max and average pooling [19], or

9108

