Im2Pano3D:
Extrapolating 360 Structure and Semantics Beyond the Field of View
◦

Shuran Song1 Andy Zeng1 Angel X. Chang1 Manolis Savva1 Silvio Savarese2 Thomas Funkhouser1
1
2
Princeton University
Stanford University
http://im2pano3d.cs.princeton.edu
Input: RGB-D Observation

Abstract
We present Im2Pano3D, a convolutional neural network
that generates a dense prediction of 3D structure and a
probability distribution of semantic labels for a full 360◦
panoramic view of an indoor scene when given only a partial observation (≤ 50%) in the form of an RGB-D image.
To make this possible, Im2Pano3D leverages strong contextual priors learned from large-scale synthetic and realworld indoor scenes. To ease the prediction of 3D structure,
we propose to parameterize 3D surfaces with their plane
equations and train the model to predict these parameters
directly. To provide meaningful training supervision, we use
multiple loss functions that consider both pixel level accuracy and global context consistency. Experiments demonstrate that Im2Pano3D is able to predict the semantics and
3D structure of the unobserved scene with more than 56%
pixel accuracy and less than 0.52m average distance error,
which is significantly better than alternative approaches.

1. Introduction
People possess an incredible ability to infer contextual
information from a single image [16]. Whether it is by using prior experience or by leveraging visual cues [2, 24],
people are adept at reasoning about what may lie beyond the
field of view and make use of that information for building a
coherent perception of the world [15]. Similarly, in robotics
and computer vision, extrapolating useful information outside a camera’s field of view (FOV) plays an important role
for many applications, such as goal-driven navigation[41, 4]
or next-best-view approximation [18], where a global representation of the environment can improve preemptive planning for intelligent systems.
However, prior work in view extrapolation typically only
predicts the color pixels beyond the image boundaries [25,
40, 31]. While inspiring, these methods do not predict 3D
structure or semantics, and hence cannot be used directly
for high-level reasoning tasks in robotics applications.

Output: Semantic-Structure View Extrapolation
Im2Pano3D

ceiling

wall

floor

bed

window

object

door

cabinet

Figure 1. Semantic-structure view extrapolation. Given a partial observation of the room in the form of an RGB-D image, our
Im2Pano3D predicts both 3D structure and semantics for a full
panoramic view of the same scene.

In this paper, we explore the task of directly extrapolating 3D structure and semantics for a full panoramic view of
a scene when given a view covering 50% or less as input.
We refer to this task as semantic-structure view extrapolation. Our method, Im2Pano3D, takes in a partial view
of an indoor scene (e.g., a few RGB-D images) and uses a
convolutional neural network to generate dense predictions
for 3D structure and a probability distribution of semantic
labels for a full 360◦ panoramic view of that same scene.
This is a very challenging task. However, by learning the
statistics of many typical room layouts, we can train a datadriven model to leverage contextual cues to predict what is
beyond the field of view for typical indoor environments.
For example, as shown in Fig.1, given half of a bedroom
(180 ◦ horizontal field of view), the system can predict the
3D structure and semantics for the other half. This requires
it not only to extend the partially observed room structures
(walls, floor, ceiling, etc.), but also to predict the existence
and locations of objects that are not directly observed in the
13847

