A2-RL: Aesthetics Aware Reinforcement Learning for Image Cropping
Debang Li 1,2 , Huikai Wu 1,2 , Junge Zhang1,2 , Kaiqi Huang1,2,3
1
CRIPAC & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
{debang.li, huikai.wu,jgzhang, kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Image cropping aims at improving the aesthetic quality of images by adjusting their composition. Most weakly
supervised cropping methods (without bounding box supervision) rely on the sliding window mechanism. The sliding
window mechanism requires fixed aspect ratios and limits
the cropping region with arbitrary size. Moreover, the sliding window method usually produces tens of thousands of
windows on the input image which is very time-consuming.
Motivated by these challenges, we firstly formulate the aesthetic image cropping as a sequential decision-making process and propose a weakly supervised Aesthetics Aware Reinforcement Learning (A2-RL) framework to address this
problem. Particularly, the proposed method develops an
aesthetics aware reward function which especially benefits image cropping. Similar to human’s decision making,
we use a comprehensive state representation including both
the current observation and the historical experience. We
train the agent using the actor-critic architecture in an endto-end manner. The agent is evaluated on several popular unseen cropping datasets. Experiment results show that
our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance with
much fewer candidate windows and much less time compared with previous weakly supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Image cropping is a common task in image editing,
which aims to extract well-composed regions from illcomposed images. It can improve the visual quality of images, because the composition plays an important role in the
image quality. An excellent automatic image cropping algorithm can give editors professional advices and help them
save a lot of time [14].
In the past decades, many researchers have devoted their
efforts to proposing novel methods [34, 10, 12] for automatic image cropping. As the cropping box annotations
are expensive to obtain, several weakly supervised cropping

…
Input

Step 1

Step T-3

Step T-2

Step T-1

Step T: Termination & Output

Figure 1. Illustration of the sequential decision-making based automatic cropping process. The cropping agent starts from the whole image and takes actions to find the best cropping window in
the input image. At each step, it takes an action (yellow and red
arrow) and transforms the previous window (dashed-line yellow
rectangle) to a new state (red rectangle). The agent takes the termination action and stops the cropping process to output the cropped
image at step T.

methods (without bounding box supervision) [11, 5, 35] are
proposed. Most of these weakly supervised methods follow
a three-step pipeline: 1) Densely extract candidates with the
sliding window method on the input image, 2) Extract carefully designed features from each region and 3) Use a classifier or ranker to grade each window and find the best region. Although these works have achieved pretty good performance, they may not find the best results due to the limitations of the sliding window method, which requires fixed
aspect ratios and limits the cropping region with arbitrary
size. What’s more, these sliding window based methods
usually need tens of thousands of candidates on image level,
which is very time-consuming. Although we can set several different aspect ratios and densely extract candidates, it
inevitably costs lots of time and is still unable to cover all
conditions.
Based on above observations, in this paper, we firstly formulate the automatic image cropping problem as a sequential decision-making process, and propose an Aesthetics

8193

