Learning Structure and Strength of CNN Filters for Small Sample Size Training
Rohit Keshari, Mayank Vatsa, Richa Singh
IIIT-Delhi, India

Afzel Noore
Texas A&M University-Kingsville, USA

{rohitk, mayank, rsingh}@iiitd.ac.in

Afzel.Noore@tamuk.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a multilayer
representation learning architecture which has received immense success in multiple applications such as object classification, image segmentation, and natural language processing. From LeNet [25] to AlexNet [23], GoogleNet [39],
VGG-Net [38], ResNet [17], and now DenseNet [18], given
large training data, CNNs have shown state-of-the-art performance for several applications. However, large training data is also a limiting requirement for applications with
small sample size and many of these architectures easily
overfit on small training samples. For example, as shown
in Figure 1, a face recognition model trained on large training data of adult faces (e.g. CelebA or LFW databases) may
not provide good performance when tested for newborn face

Traditional Approach

Pre-trained Filters

Fine-tune
Updated CNN

LFW Face Database

Learned on Large
Database

Learn Structure from Large Database
and Strength on Small Database

Pre-trained Filters
Proposed SSF-CNN

Convolutional Neural Networks have provided state-ofthe-art results in several computer vision problems. However, due to a large number of parameters in CNNs, they
require a large number of training samples which is a limiting factor for small sample size problems. To address this
limitation, we propose SSF-CNN which focuses on learning
the “structure” and “strength” of filters. The structure of
the filter is initialized using a dictionary based filter learning algorithm and the strength of the filter is learned using
the small sample training data. The architecture provides
the flexibility of training with both small and large training databases, and yields good accuracies even with small
size training data. The effectiveness of the algorithm is first
demonstrated on MNIST, CIFAR10, and NORB databases,
with varying number of training samples. The results show
that SSF-CNN significantly reduces the number of parameters required for training while providing high accuracies
on the test databases. On small sample size problems such
as newborn face recognition and Omniglot, it yields stateof-the-art results. Specifically, on the IIITD Newborn Face
Database, the results demonstrate improvement in rank-1
identification accuracy by at least 10%.

Newborn Face Database

Strength
Learning
Updated SSF-CNN

Learned on Large
Database
Both Structure and Strength are Learned from Small Sample Database
Pre-computed Filters

Updated SSF-CNN

Structure using
Dictionary Filters

Strength Learning

Figure 1. Face recognition models trained on adult face images
may not provide good performance for newborn face recognition. SSF-CNN proposes to learn structure and strength of the
filters for improving the classification performance for small sample databases.

recognition [2, 3]. In newborn face recognition, the available training data may be small and therefore, even after
fine-tuning, standard deep learning based face recognition
models may not yield high performance.
To address the challenge of small sample size, researchers have proposed algorithms focusing on CNN initialization tricks and modifications to CNN architecture.
Erhan et al. [9] have investigated the importance of unsupervised pre-training of deep architecture and empirically shown that pre-trained weights of the network generalize better than randomly initialized weights. Similarly,
Mishkin and Matas [32] have proposed Layer-Sequential
19349

