Collaborative and Adversarial Network for Unsupervised domain adaptation
Weichen Zhang1
Wanli Ouyang1
Wen Li2
Dong Xu1
1
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich
{weichen.zhang,wanli.ouyang,dong.xu}@sydney.edu.au

liwen@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new unsupervised domain
adaptation approach called Collaborative and Adversarial
Network (CAN) through domain-collaborative and domainadversarial training of neural networks. We add several domain classifiers on multiple CNN feature extraction blocks1 ,
in which each domain classifier is connected to the hidden
representations from one block and one loss function is defined based on the hidden presentation and the domain labels (e.g., source and target). We design a new loss function
by integrating the losses from all blocks in order to learn domain informative representations from lower blocks through
collaborative learning and learn domain uninformative representations from higher blocks through adversarial learning. We further extend our CAN method as Incremental
CAN (iCAN), in which we iteratively select a set of pseudolabelled target samples based on the image classifier and
the last domain classifier from the previous training epoch
and re-train our CAN model by using the enlarged training set. Comprehensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets Office and ImageCLEF-DA clearly demonstrate
the effectiveness of our newly proposed approaches CAN
and iCAN for unsupervised domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
In many visual recognition tasks, the training data used
to learn a model and the testing data on which the model is
applied often have different distributions. In order to enhance the generalization capability of learned models on
the testing data, several domain adaptation technologies
[1, 9, 5, 22, 11] were proposed to explicitly reduce the data
distribution mismatch between the training samples in the
source domain and the testing samples in the target domain.
Since deep learning methods have achieved excellent
performance for many computer vision tasks including
object recognition, a few deep transfer learning methods
1 In this work, each block consists of several CNN layers.

Figure 1. Illustration of two contributions in this work. Firstly, it
is beneficial to learn domain informative features through collaborative learning at lower blocks and learn domain uninformative
features through adversarial learning at higher blocks. Informative
features such as corners and edges are useful for distignuishing not
only images from different domains but also images from different
classes, while uninformative features are useful for domain adaptation. Secondly, we iteratively select more pseudo-labelled target
samples that have high prediction confidence from the image classifier, and are also considered as domain uninformative based on
the last domain classifier from the previous training epoch.

[21, 30, 25] were recently proposed to learn domain invariant features for visual recognition. These deep transfer
learning methods can be roughly categorized as statistics
approaches [19, 20, 24, 27], which exploit regularizer based

13801

