Multispectral Image Intrinsic Decomposition via Subspace Constraint
Qian Huang1

Weixin Zhu1

Yang Zhao1

Linsen Chen1

cianhwang@gmail.com

njuzhwx@163.com

zhaoyang@smail.nju.edu.cn

njucls@163.com

Yao Wang2

Tao Yue1

Xun Cao1

yw523@nyu.edu

yuetao@nju.edu.cn

caoxun@nju.edu.cn

1

2

School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New York University

Abstract
Multispectral images contain many clues of surface
characteristics of the objects, thus can be used in many
computer vision tasks, e.g., recolorization and segmentation. However, due to the complex geometry structure of
natural scenes, the spectra curves of the same surface can
look very different under different illuminations and from
different angles. In this paper, a new Multispectral Image
Intrinsic Decomposition model (MIID) is presented to decompose the shading and reflectance from a single multispectral image. We extend the Retinex model, which is
proposed for RGB image intrinsic decomposition, for multispectral domain. Based on this, a subspace constraint
is introduced to both the shading and reflectance spectral
space to reduce the ill-posedness of the problem and make
the problem solvable. A dataset of 22 scenes is given with
the ground truth of shadings and reflectance to facilitate
objective evaluations. The experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
The observed spectrum of a single pixel is determined
by illumination, reﬂectance and geometry. Shading image
contains illumination condition and geometry information,
while reﬂectance image contains the material reﬂectance
property, which is invariant to light condition and shadow
effect. The decomposition problem has been a long standing problem in both computer graphics and computer vision applications. For instance, shape-from-shading algorithms could beneﬁt from an image with only shading effects, while image segmentation would be easier in a world
without cast shadows.
Obviously, intrinsic image decomposition is an ill-posed
problem, since there are more unknowns than observations.

In order to solve this problem, many works [30, 31, 12] focus on sparse representation spatially, but this does not hold
for images in general. This paper addressed the problem
of the recovery of reﬂectance and shading from a single
multispectral image, namely, the Intrinsic Image Decomposition problem of a whole multispectral image captured
under general spectral illumination, hereafter referred to as
the IID problem. This problem is worth exploring since geometry and reﬂectance information are useful under certain
circumstances, but one of them always interferes the detection of the other one. Unfortunately, growing dimensions of
data make this problem harder to cope with.
The subspace constraint that we propose is based on the
assumption that the reﬂectance and shading vectors both
live in a low dimensional subspace along the spectral domain. According to the inherent nature of the multispectral
image, we derive shading basis on the knowledge of illumination condition and derive the reﬂectance subspace basis
by means of principle component analysis (PCA). Assuming that the Retinex theory [23] would continue to take effect in multispectral domain, we propose a subspace-based
model so that deriving reﬂectance and shading from a multispectral image can be modelled as an convex optimization
problem. In a signiﬁcant departure from the conventional
approaches which operate in the logarithmic domain, we
directly operate on the image domain. The ﬂowchart of our
proposed MIID algorithm is shown in Fig. 1.
To overcome the lack of ground truth data of shading
and reﬂectance, we provide a ground-truth dataset for multispectral intrinsic images to enable quantitative evaluation of
various intrinsic decomposition methods. Quantitative and
qualitative experiments on our dataset have demonstrated
that the performance of the MIID method is better than prior
work for multispectral images. Our work can bring merits
to multiple applications, such as recolorization, relighting,
scene reconstruction and image segmentation.
Our major contribution can be summarized as follows:
16430

