Crafting a Toolchain for Image Restoration by Deep Reinforcement Learning
Ke Yu 1
1

Chao Dong2

Liang Lin2,3

Chen Change Loy1

CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2

SenseTime Research

{yk017, ccloy}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We investigate a novel approach for image restoration by
reinforcement learning. Unlike existing studies that mostly
train a single large network for a specialized task, we prepare a toolbox consisting of small-scale convolutional networks of different complexities and specialized in different
tasks. Our method, RL-Restore, then learns a policy to select appropriate tools from the toolbox to progressively restore the quality of a corrupted image. We formulate a stepwise reward function proportional to how well the image is
restored at each step to learn the action policy. We also
devise a joint learning scheme to train the agent and tools
for better performance in handling uncertainty. In comparison to conventional human-designed networks, RL-Restore
is capable of restoring images corrupted with complex and
unknown distortions in a more parameter-efficient manner
using the dynamically formed toolchain1 .

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural network (CNN) has achieved
immense success, not only in high-level vision tasks, but
also low-level vision tasks such as deblurring [31, 35, 42],
denoising [6, 24], JPEG artifacts reduction [7, 9, 41] and
super-resolution [8, 19, 17, 37, 39]. In particular, good performance and fast testing speed are demonstrated over conventional model-based optimization methods.
Owing to the discriminative nature of CNN, most of
these models are trained to handle a specialized low-level
vision task. In JPEG artifacts reduction [7], for instance,
different networks for different compression qualities have
been designed to achieve satisfactory restoration. In the
case of super-resolution [8], it is common to have different networks to handle different scaling factors. Some recent studies [10, 37] have shown the possibility of handling
multiple distortion types or coping with different levels of
degradation at once using CNN. Nevertheless, this usually
1 Codes and data are available at http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.edu.
hk/projects/RL-Restore/

3

Sun Yat-sen University

{dongchao, linliang}@sensetime.com

comes with the expenses of using much deeper networks.
In addition, such networks process all images with the same
structure, despite some of which are inherently less difficult
and can be restored in a cheaper way.
In this paper, we explore the possibility of having
some smaller-scale but specialized CNNs to solve a harder
restoration task collaboratively. Our idea departs from the
current philosophy that one would need a large-capacity
CNN to solve a complex restoration task. Instead, we
wish to have a set of tools (based on small CNNs) and
learn to use them adaptively for solving the task at hand.
The aforementioned idea could provide new insights how
CNN can be used for solving real-world restoration tasks,
of which images are potentially contaminated with a mix of
distortions, e.g., blurring, noise and blockiness after several
stages of processing. Moreover, the new approach may lead
to parameter-efficient restoration in comparison to existing
CNN-based models. In particular, tools of different complexities can be selected based on the severity of distortion.
Towards this goal, we present a framework that treats
image restoration as a decision making process by which
an agent would adaptively select a sequence of tools to progressively refine an image, and the agent may choose to stop
if the restored quality is deemed satisfactory. In our framework, we prepare a number of light-weight CNNs with different complexities. They are task-specific aiming to handle
different types of restoration assignments including deblurring, denoising, or JPEG artifacts reduction. Choosing the
order of tools is formulated in a reinforcement learning (RL)
framework. An agent learns to decide the next best tool to
select by analyzing the content of the restored image in the
current step and observing the last action chosen. Rewards
are accumulated when the agent improves the quality of the
input image.
We refer to the proposed framework as RL-Restore. We
summarize our contributions as follows:
1) We present a new attempt to address image restoration in
a reinforcement learning framework. Unlike existing methods that deploy a single and potentially large network structure, RL-Restore enjoys the flexibility of using tools of dif-

2443

