A Memory Network Approach for Story-based
Temporal Summarization of 360◦ Videos
Sangho Lee, Jinyoung Sung, Youngjae Yu, Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
sangho.lee@vision.snu.ac.kr, jysung710@gmail.com, yj.yu@vision.snu.ac.kr, gunhee@snu.ac.kr
http://vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/pfmn

Abstract

1. Introduction
360◦ videos are growing rapidly as recording devices
such as GoPro and GearVR spread widely and many social network platforms such as YouTube and Facebook eagerly support the sharing of this content. With the explosive
growth of 360◦ content, there is a strong need for automatic
summarization, despite that 360◦ video summarization has
been still under-addressed in the video summarization literature. In particular, only spatial summarization, which
controls where to look in the video frame of unlimited field
of view (FOV) and generates an optimal camera trajectory,
has been addressed in [42, 41, 21]. Recently, Yu et al. [52]
attempt to generate a spatio-temporal highlight for a long
360◦ video, although they simply apply the ranking model

Future Memory
(Candidate Subshots)
In Time Order

We address the problem of story-based temporal summarization of long 360◦ videos. We propose a novel memory network model named Past-Future Memory Network
(PFMN), in which we first compute the scores of 81 normal field of view (NFOV) region proposals cropped from
the input 360◦ video, and then recover a latent, collective
summary using the network with two external memories that
store the embeddings of previously selected subshots and future candidate subshots. Our major contributions are twofold. First, our work is the first to address story-based temporal summarization of 360◦ videos. Second, our model
is the first attempt to leverage memory networks for video
summarization tasks. For evaluation, we perform three sets
of experiments. First, we investigate the view selection capability of our model on the Pano2Vid dataset [42]. Second, we evaluate the temporal summarization with a newly
collected 360◦ video dataset. Finally, we experiment our
model’s performance in another domain, with image-based
storytelling VIST dataset [22]. We verify that our model
achieves state-of-the-art performance on all the tasks.

Past Memory
(Selected Subshots)

Select the Next
Summary Subshot
Correlating Between
Past & Future Memory

View Selection
Input : 360° Video

Figure 1. The intuition of the proposed PFMN model for temporal
summarization of 360◦ videos. With a view selection module for
finding key objects and a novel memory network leveraging two
past and future memories, our PFMN temporally summarizes a
360◦ video based on the underlying storyline.

for spatial summarization to the temporal domain without
deliberate consideration of temporal summarization.
In this paper, we focus on story-based temporal summarization of long 360◦ videos by selecting a subset of key
subshots. Specifically, we focus on tackling the following
two summarization problems that are caused by the characteristics of 360◦ videos. First, 360◦ videos contain all surroundings of a camera in all directions. As a result, unlike
normal videos, there is no specific subject that a videographer intends to shoot. Since identifying the subject is often crucial to grasp the plot of the entire video, its absence
can be a stumbling block to the temporal summarization.
Second, it is difficult to use supervised learning, which is
preferable for model performance. There are few available
pairs of long 360◦ videos and their corresponding edited
summaries. To make matters worse, unlimited FOVs make
it difficult to browse videos, thus it takes a lot of time and
effort for humans to annotate the data.

1410

