An Analysis of Scale Invariance in Object Detection – SNIP
Bharat Singh
Larry S. Davis
University of Maryland, College Park
{bharat,lsd}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
An analysis of different techniques for recognizing and
detecting objects under extreme scale variation is presented. Scale specific and scale invariant design of detectors are compared by training them with different configurations of input data. By evaluating the performance
of different network architectures for classifying small objects on ImageNet, we show that CNNs are not robust to
changes in scale. Based on this analysis, we propose to
train and test detectors on the same scales of an imagepyramid. Since small and large objects are difficult to recognize at smaller and larger scales respectively, we present
a novel training scheme called Scale Normalization for Image Pyramids (SNIP) which selectively back-propagates the
gradients of object instances of different sizes as a function
of the image scale. On the COCO dataset, our single model
performance is 45.7% and an ensemble of 3 networks obtains an mAP of 48.3%. We use off-the-shelf ImageNet-1000
pre-trained models and only train with bounding box supervision. Our submission won the Best Student Entry in
the COCO 2017 challenge. Code will be made available at
http://bit.ly/2yXVg4c.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has fundamentally changed how computers perform image classification and object detection. In
less than five years, since AlexNet [20] was proposed, the
top-5 error on ImageNet classification [9] has dropped from
15% to 2% [16]. This is super-human level performance for
image classification with 1000 classes. On the other hand,
the mAP of the best performing detector [18] (which is only
trained to detect 80 classes) on COCO [25] is only 62%
– even at 50% overlap. Why is object detection so much
harder than image classification?
Large scale variation across object instances, and especially, the challenge of detecting very small objects stands
out as one of the factors behind the difference in performance. Interestingly, the median scale of object instances
relative to the image in ImageNet (classification) vs COCO

Figure 1. Fraction of RoIs in the dataset vs scale of RoIs relative
to the image.

(detection) are 0.554 and 0.106 respectively. Therefore,
most object instances in COCO are smaller than 1% of image area! To make matters worse, the scale of the smallest and largest 10% of object instances in COCO is 0.024
and 0.472 respectively (resulting in scale variations of almost 20 times!); see Fig. 1. This variation in scale which
a detector needs to handle is enormous and presents an extreme challenge to the scale invariance properties of convolutional neural networks. Moreover, differences in the
scale of object instances between classification and detection datasets also results in a large domain-shift while finetuning from a pre-trained classification network. In this paper, we first provide evidence of these problems and then
propose a training scheme called Scale Normalization for
Image Pyramids which leads to a state-of-the-art object detector on COCO.
To alleviate the problems arising from scale variation
and small object instances, multiple solutions have been
proposed. For example, features from the layers near
to the input, referred to as shallow(er) layers, are combined with deeper layers for detecting small object instances [23, 34, 1, 13, 27], dilated/deformable convolution
is used to increase receptive fields for detecting large objects
[32, 7, 37, 8], independent predictions at layers of different
resolutions are used to capture object instances of different
scales [36, 3, 22], context is employed for disambiguation
[38, 39, 10], training is performed over a range of scales
[7, 8, 15] or, inference is performed on multiple scales of
13578

