Bilateral Ordinal Relevance Multi-instance Regression
for Facial Action Unit Intensity Estimation
Yong Zhang1,2 , Rui Zhao3 , Weiming Dong1 , Bao-Gang Hu1 , and Qiang Ji3∗
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
zhangyong201303@gmail.com, zhaor@rpi.edu, weiming.dong@ia.ac.cn,
hubg@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Automatic intensity estimation of facial action units
(AUs) is challenging in two aspects. First, capturing subtle changes of facial appearance is quite difficult. Second,
the annotation of AU intensity is scarce and expensive. Intensity annotation requires strong domain knowledge thus
only experts are qualified. The majority of methods directly
apply supervised learning techniques to AU intensity estimation while few methods exploit unlabeled samples to improve the performance. In this paper, we propose a novel
weakly supervised regression model-Bilateral Ordinal Relevance Multi-instance Regression (BORMIR), which learns
a frame-level intensity estimator with weakly labeled sequences. From a new perspective, we introduce relevance to
model sequential data and consider two bag labels for each
bag. The AU intensity estimation is formulated as a joint regressor and relevance learning problem. Temporal dynamics of both relevance and AU intensity are leveraged to build
connections among labeled and unlabeled image frames to
provide weak supervision. We also develop an efficient algorithm for optimization based on the alternating minimization framework. Evaluations on three expression databases
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Human facial expressions are efficient means of human
communication, conveying rich information for expressing
our intention and emotion. They can be described by a
specific combination of facial muscle movements. Facial
Action Coding System (FACS) was developed by Ekman
and Friesen [8] to describe such movements. FACS defines
each observable component of facial movement as an AU.
It quantifies AU intensity into 6 discrete levels and provides
∗ Corresponding author.

 Ordinal relevance
 Smooth relevance
 Smooth intensity

Knowledge
Joint learning

 Peak and valley labels
Weak annotation

Relevance learning
Regressor learning

Unannotated
Database

Figure 1. The pipeline of the proposed method. BORMIR combines the weakly annotated sequences and the domain knowledge
to jointly learn the frame-level relevance and intensity regressor.

rules for annotation. However, automatic AU intensity estimation is a challenging task. First of all, AUs depict the subtle local facial appearance changes which vary by subjects,
head poses, and illuminations. Second, AU intensity annotation requires domain expertise and it is time-consuming.
Only databases annotated by certificated AU coders are reliable. Thus it is expensive to annotate a large database.
Although techniques like deep learning has increased modeling capacity for appearance variations, they also require a
large set of labeled samples, which may not be available.
The majority of existing methods directly apply supervised learning techniques for AU intensity estimation, such
as relevance vector regression [12] and convolutional neural networks [9]. These approaches do not consider the case
when intensity annotations are limited. Few works focus on
exploiting unlabeled instances to improve the performance
except for [30] and [50]. They exploit unlabeled instances
by considering the temporal relationships among AU intensity labels of frames in sequences.
As illustrated in Figure 2, AU intensity changes
smoothly as facial appearance evolves smoothly. Instead of
annotating the AU intensity for every frame in sequences,
identifying the locations of the peak and valley frames (key
frames) is relatively easier to perform for a large database
since annotating the trend requires less effort than annotating the exact intensity. One valuable property is that the AU
17034

