clcNet: Improving the Efficiency of Convolutional Neural Network using
Channel Local Convolutions
Dong-Qing Zhang
ImaginationAI LLC
dongqing@gmail.com

Abstract
Depthwise convolution and grouped convolution has
been successfully applied to improve the efficiency of convolutional neural network (CNN). We suggest that these models can be considered as special cases of a generalized convolution operation, named channel local convolution(CLC),
where an output channel is computed using a subset of the
input channels. This definition entails computation dependency relations between input and output channels, which
can be represented by a channel dependency graph(CDG).
By modifying the CDG of grouped convolution, a new CLC
kernel named interlaced grouped convolution (IGC) is created. Stacking IGC and GC kernels results in a convolution
block (named CLC Block) for approximating regular convolution. By resorting to the CDG as an analysis tool, we
derive the rule for setting the meta-parameters of IGC and
GC and the framework for minimizing the computational
cost. A new CNN model named clcNet is then constructed
using CLC blocks, which shows significantly higher computational efficiency and fewer parameters compared to stateof-the-art networks, when being tested using the ImageNet1K dataset.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Network has achieved tremendous success for many computer vision problems, such
as image classification[15], object detection[7], and image
segmentation[17]. More recently, due to the pervasive use
of mobile and wearable devices, and the rise of emerging
applications such as self-driving car, CNN models have
been implemented in resource constrained environments,
such as mobile and embedded platforms. The computational and memory efficiency of CNN is crucial for its successful deployment on these platforms, since they generally
have very strict resource requirements. Therefore, how to
improve the computational and memory efficiency of CNN
has become an important research topic in the field of deep

Figure 1. Receptive field (gray-colored cube) in the input tensor of
(a) fully connected layer (b) regular convolution (c) channel local
convolution

learning, and also is the focus of this paper.
Convolution layer is the fundamental building block in
a convolutional neural network, and was inspired by the
model proposed by Hubel and Wiessel [11], which shows
that visual neurons respond to a local small region of the
visual field. This leads to one of the central tenets of the
convolution operation in CNN: spatial locality, namely, the
computation at a cell only involves a local spatial area in
the input. On the other hand, regular convolution always
assume that all channels (i.e. the feature planes) of the input are involved in the computation at a cell. Namely, the
computation is always global for the channel dimension. It
was only unitl recently that researchers started to use depthwise convolution [3] and grouped convolution [15] , where
computation only involves subsets of the input channels.
This paper attempts to provide a generalized view about
depthwise convolution and grouped convolution through a
concept named channel local convolution, where the computation of an output channel only depends on a subset of
its input channels. Distinct from the regular convolution,
the receptive field of channel local convolution is local both
along the spatial and channel dimension, which is conceptually illustrated in Figure 1.
A channel local convolution (CLC) kernel is characterized by its channel dependency graph (CDG), which is an
acyclic graph where the nodes represent channels and edges
represent dependencies. CDG describes the computation
dependency of the channels, and can be used to analyze a
convolution block composed of multiple CLC kernels for
approximating regular convolution.

7912

