Left-Right Comparative Recurrent Model for Stereo Matching
Zequn Jie∗

Pengfei Wang†

Yonggen Ling∗

Bo Zhao§

Yunchao Wei≀

Jiashi Feng†

Wei Liu∗

∗

Tencent AI Lab † National University of Singapore
§
University of British Columbia ≀ University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{zequn.nus, wpfhtl, lingyg2008, zhaobo.cs, wychao1987, jshfeng}@gmail.com

wliu@ee.columbia.edu

Abstract
Leveraging the disparity information from both left and
right views is crucial for stereo disparity estimation. Leftright consistency check is an effective way to enhance the
disparity estimation by referring to the information from the
opposite view. However, the conventional left-right consistency check is an isolated post-processing step and heavily
hand-crafted. This paper proposes a novel left-right comparative recurrent model to perform left-right consistency
checking jointly with disparity estimation. At each recurrent
step, the model produces disparity results for both views,
and then performs online left-right comparison to identify
the mismatched regions which may probably contain erroneously labeled pixels. A soft attention mechanism is introduced, which employs the learned error maps for better
guiding the model to selectively focus on refining the unreliable regions at the next recurrent step. In this way, the
generated disparity maps are progressively improved by the
proposed recurrent model. Extensive evaluations on KITTI
2015, Scene Flow and Middlebury benchmarks validate the
effectiveness of our model, demonstrating that state-of-theart stereo disparity estimation results can be achieved by
this new model.

1. Introduction
This paper aims at the problem of computing the dense
disparity map between a rectified stereo pair of images.
Stereo disparity estimation is core to many computer vision applications, including robotics and autonomous vehicles [4, 5, 16]. Finding local correspondences between two
images plays a key role in generating high-quality disparity
maps. Modern stereo matching methods rely on deep neural
networks to learn powerful visual representations and compute more accurate matching costs between left and right
views.
However, it is still challenging for the current methods
to deal with ill-posed regions, such as object occlusions,
reflective regions, and repetitive patterns. It is also ob-

Figure 1: From top to bottom: the input image, predicted
disparity map, learned attention map showing the potential erroneously labeled regions by the LRCR model, and
the real error map (difference between the predicted and
ground-truth maps).
served that the mismatched pixels between the left and right
views usually appear in the error-prone regions, including
occluded objects, textureless areas, and sophisticated image
borders (see Fig. 1). Taking advantage of disparity information from both the views to verify the left-right mutual consistency is an effective strategy to identify the unreliable regions. By doing this, the stereo disparity estimation results
can be selectively improved by being refined on the mismatched regions. Traditional left-right consistency check
is performed only as an offline post-processing step after
the disparity map generation. Moreover, it is highly handcrafted and hardwired—it only refines the pixels having errors above a mismatching threshold by interpolating their
fixed local neighbors. The results are thus fragile due to
low-quality local features and potential errors in the matching cost computation. As such, the traditional pipelines,
whose regularization steps involve hand-engineered, shallow cost aggregation and disparity optimization (SGM or

3838

