Synthesizing Images of Humans in Unseen Poses
Guha Balakrishnan
MIT

Amy Zhao
MIT

Adrian V. Dalca
MIT and MGH

Fredo Durand
MIT

balakg@mit.edu

xamyzhao@mit.edu

adalca@mit.edu

fredo@mit.edu

John Guttag
MIT
guttag@mit.edu

Abstract
We address the computational problem of novel human
pose synthesis. Given an image of a person and a desired
pose, we produce a depiction of that person in that pose, retaining the appearance of both the person and background.
We present a modular generative neural network that synthesizes unseen poses using training pairs of images and
poses taken from human action videos. Our network separates a scene into different body part and background layers, moves body parts to new locations and refines their
appearances, and composites the new foreground with a
hole-filled background. These subtasks, implemented with
separate modules, are trained jointly using only a single
target image as a supervised label. We use an adversarial
discriminator to force our network to synthesize realistic
details conditioned on pose. We demonstrate image synthesis results on three action classes: golf, yoga/workouts
and tennis, and show that our method produces accurate results within action classes as well as across action classes.
Given a sequence of desired poses, we also produce coherent videos of actions.

1. Introduction
Given an image of a person, we can imagine what that
person would look like in a different pose. We are able to
do this using a model of human appearance trained by observing many people in different contexts. In this work, we
propose an automated method to address this task. Given
an image of a person along with a target pose, we automatically synthesize a realistic image that depicts what the person would look like in that pose. We retain the appearance
of both the person and the background in the transformation, as illustrated in Fig 1.
To ensure a realistic image, we would like to retain the
appearance of the person and background, and capture body

Source Image

Target Pose

Synthesized Image

Figure 1. Our method takes an input image along with a desired
target pose, and automatically synthesizes a new image depicting
the person in that pose. We retain the person’s appearance as well
as filling in appropriate background textures.

part details consistent with the new pose. Differences in
poses can cause complex changes in the image space, involving several moving parts and self-occlusions. Subtle
details such as shading and edges should perceptually agree
with the body’s configuration. And background pixels that
become disoccluded by the body must be filled in with appropriate content.
We address these challenges by training a supervised
learning model on pairs of images and their poses. Our
model takes as input a source image and source 2D pose,
and a desired 2D target pose, and synthesizes an output image. Our key idea is to decompose this complex problem
into simpler, modular subtasks, trained jointly as one generative neural network. Our network first segments the source
image into a background layer and multiple foreground layers corresponding to different body parts, allowing it to spatially move the body parts to target locations. The moved
body parts are then modified and fused to synthesize a new
foreground image, while the background is separately filled
with appropriate texture to address gaps caused by disocclusions. Finally, the network composites the foreground and
background to produce an output image. All of these operations are performed jointly as one network, and trained
together using only a target image as a supervised label.
18340

