Depth and Transient Imaging with Compressive SPAD Array Cameras
Qilin Sun1

Xiong Dun1
Yifan Peng2,1
Wolfgang Heidrich1
1
KAUST 2 University of British Columbia

Abstract
Time-of-flight depth imaging and transient imaging are
two imaging modalities that have recently received a lot of
interest. Despite much research, existing hardware systems
are limited either in terms of temporal resolution or are
prohibitively expensive. Arrays of Single Photon Avalanche
Diodes (SPADs) promise to fill this gap by providing higher
temporal resolution at an affordable cost. Unfortunately
SPAD arrays are to date only available in relatively small
resolutions.
In this work we aim to overcome the spatial resolution
limit of SPAD arrays by employing a compressive sensing camera design. Using a DMD and custom optics, we
achieve an image resolution of up to 800×400 on SPAD Arrays of resolution 64×32. Using our new data fitting model
for the time histograms, we suppress the noise while abstracting the phase and amplitude information, so as to realize a temporal resolution of a few tens of picoseconds.

nals, i.e. single photons. Unfortunately, image sensors built
around SPAD technologies currently still suffer from low
spatial resolution (e.g. 64 × 32 pixels).
In our work we aim to overcome the spatial resolution
limit of SPAD arrays while preserving and even enhancing the time resolution by developing a compressive sensing
SPAD camera. Since SPADs work with small signals that
are inherently noisy, and compressive sensing is well known
to amplify noise, devising such a compressive SPAD camera not only requires significant innovation on the camera
hardware, but also a number of algorithmic contributions.
Specifically, our contributions include
• the design and prototyping of a compact optical system
containing imaging and re-imaging optics, as well as a
DMD-based active modulation component.
• fill factor improvements of conventional SPAD sensors
to enable the compressive sensing scenario by embedding a diffractive micro lens array (DMLA) in front of
the bare sensors.
• inverse problem formulation to reconstruct high resolution 3D volumes from captured SPAD data.

1. Introduction
Time-resolved imaging of light propagation effects has
in recent years become a major research direction. From
the now ubiquitous continuous wave ToF and RGB-D cameras, to more complex analysis of transient effects such as
light-in-flight imaging [1, 47, 23], looking around the corner [21, 46, 24], or imaging in scattering media [14, 34, 25]
the applications of high speed light transport analysis are
vast.
Unfortunately, work on these problems has been hampered by hardware limitations. On the consumer end, inexpensive time of flight cameras are available for a few
hundred dollars, but they provide a limited temporal resolution owing to modulation frequencies of only 10-130 MHz.
On the high end, the combination of fast lasers and streak
cameras provides temporal resolutions in the single digit picosecond range, but at a cost that is 2-3 orders of magnitude higher. Recently, single photon avalanche diodes have
started to emerge as an alternative hardware solution that
fills the gap both in terms of resolution and cost. SPADs
are also attractive for their ability to detect very small sig-

• proposing a temporal PSF model based on the RC gate
switching behavior of the electronics, and using it to
deconvolve and sharpen the time profile of the transient image, achieving a temporal resolution in the
range of tens of picoseconds.
• analysis and correction for phase distortions on the
SPAD array caused by on-chip signal propagation differences.

2. Related Work
Time-of-Flight Cameras Continuous wave ToF cameras
use the correlation between a sinusoidally modulated illumination source and a reference signal to measure the time
delay due to light propagation [41, 38]. These types of cameras have been widely adapted in computer vision in the
form of depth and RGB-D cameras. Recently, researchers
have found new and exciting uses of this type of hardware
beyond simple depth imaging, including transient imaging
1273

