Visual Grounding via Accumulated Attention
Chaorui Deng1∗, Qi Wu2∗ , Qingyao Wu3†, Fuyuan Hu4 , Fan Lyu4 , Mingkui Tan3†
1,3
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
Australia Centre for Robotic Vision, The University of Adelaide, Australia
4
School of Electronic & Information Engineering, Suzhou University of Science and Technology, China
1

secrdyz@mail.scut.edu.cn, 2 qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au, 3 {qyw, mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual Grounding (VG) aims to locate the most relevant
object or region in an image, based on a natural language
query. The query can be a phrase, a sentence or even a
multi-round dialogue. There are three main challenges in
VG: 1) what is the main focus in a query; 2) how to understand an image; 3) how to locate an object. Most existing
methods combine all the information curtly, which may suffer from the problem of information redundancy (i.e. ambiguous query, complicated image and a large number of
objects). In this paper, we formulate these challenges as
three attention problems and propose an accumulated attention (A-ATT) mechanism to reason among them jointly. Our
A-ATT mechanism can circularly accumulate the attention
for useful information in image, query, and objects, while
the noises are ignored gradually. We evaluate the performance of A-ATT on four popular datasets (namely ReferCOCO, ReferCOCO+, ReferCOCOg, and Guesswhat?!),
and the experimental results show the superiority of the proposed method in term of accuracy.

1. Introduction
Visual Grounding (VG) has attracted a lot of attention
in recent years [9, 17, 28, 31, 32]. Unlike object detection
which aims to detect the objects or the regions of interest
given the pre-deﬁned class labels, VG expects to understand
the natural language query and then ﬁnd out the target object of the query in the image. VG is an important technique
for a machine to understand the real-world and communicate with a person as a human does. In particular, VG can
be widely used in the visual understanding system and dialogue system of new generation intelligence devices.
VG requires a full understanding of both the image the
natural language query. However, in real-world applica∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Query from
GuessWhat?!:

Query from ReferCOCO:
woman in black

Query from ReferCOCO+:
is it a person? Yes
woman wearing glasses with smile
is the person a man? No
is it the left woman? No
Query from ReferCOCOg:
does she wear glasses? Yes
a woman in black playing a game
with her friends

Figure 1. In VG, the query can be a dialogue, a sentence or a
phrase, and the target of the query is an instance in the image.

tions, the queries can be very complex and ambiguous.
More critically, the scene in the image can be even harder
to analyze due to its complicated structure. While a person can easily understand the query and locate the target
object, it is difﬁcult for a machine to effectively grasp the
key point in the natural language and the visual content.
To illustrate these challenges, we show a practical example
in Figure 1, where the queries are from Guesswhat?! [3],
ReferCOCO, ReferCOCO+, and ReferCOCOg [31]. In this
example, the target of all queries is the woman in a black Tshirt, as located by the box. There are many irrelevant concepts in these queries, such as “man”, “friends”, “game”,
and the image depicts a complex scene with multiple instances. Thus, VG requires the machine to understand the
complex reasoning in the query, as well as the spatial and
semantic relationships among the instances in the image.
As a research direction across vision and language, VG
has beneﬁted from the development of Convolutional Neu-

7746

