Robust Depth Estimation from Auto Bracketed Images
Sunghoon Im, Hae-Gon Jeon, In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Republic of Korea
{dlarl8927, earboll, iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
As demand for advanced photographic applications on
hand-held devices grows, these electronics require the capture of high quality depth. However, under low-light conditions, most devices still suffer from low imaging quality and
inaccurate depth acquisition. To address the problem, we
present a robust depth estimation method from a short burst
shot with varied intensity (i.e., Auto Bracketing) or strong
noise (i.e., High ISO). We introduce a geometric transformation between flow and depth tailored for burst images,
enabling our learning-based multi-view stereo matching to
be performed effectively. We then describe our depth estimation pipeline that incorporates the geometric transformation into our residual-flow network. It allows our framework to produce an accurate depth map even with a bracketed image sequence. We demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods for various datasets captured by a smartphone and a DSLR camera. Moreover, we
show that the estimated depth is applicable for image quality enhancement and photographic editing.

1. Introduction
Many photographers want to capture high-quality images of indoor or night scenes that are insufficiently exposed
to light. To do so, they increase exposure time or ISO, but
these adjustments can cause other imaging problems, such
as motion blur or noise amplification. In an effort to mitigate the physical limitation of camera hardware, several image processing methods have been widely employed, such
as single image denoising [6, 4] or edge preserving filtering [29, 13]. However, those approaches often degrade the
sharpness of the image or produce cartoonish and surreal
results.
The function to take several successive shots with different camera settings called Auto-bracketing (e.g., Exposure, ISO or Flash) or in a very short time called Burst
shot has become ubiquitous in most hand-held imaging devices. These photographic techniques for gathering more
light have recently attracted interest from the field of com-

(a) Input: Exposure bracketed images

(b) Camera pose & 3D points

(c) Depth map result

(d) Exposure fusion

(e) Synthetic refocusing

Figure 1: Given exposure bracketed images (a), we estimate
camera pose (b) and depth map (c). Our results are applicable to image quality enhancement (d) and depth-aware
application (e). We compare exposure fusion results from
input images (L) and aligned images using our depth (R).

putational photography [19, 12]. Assuming that the images
are all well-aligned, they are commonly utilized for various image restorations (e.g., Denoising or HDR). However,
multiple image alignment is an important issue, since motion inevitably occurs when users press the camera shutter.
In this work, we determined that the inevitable motion, considered as a nuisance in previous burst photography [19, 12], can be used as an important clue to estimate
the depth. The estimated depth can be utilized for precise
image alignment, which rely highly on discretized homography or optical flow in the conventional methods. Moreover, we show that our depth is useful for various depthaware applications such as photographic editing or aug12946

