Joint Cuts and Matching of Partitions in One Graph
Tianshu Yu1 , Junchi Yan23( ) , Jieyi Zhao4 , Baoxin Li1
1
Arizona State Univ. 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 IBM Research 4 Univ. of Texas at Houston
{tianshuy,baoxin.li}@asu.edu, yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn (correspondence), jieyi.zhao@uth.tmc.edu

Abstract
As two fundamental problems, graph cuts and graph
matching have been intensively investigated over the
decades, resulting in vast literature in these two topics respectively. However the way of jointly applying and solving
graph cuts and matching receives few attention. In this paper, we first formalize the problem of simultaneously cutting
a graph into two partitions i.e. graph cuts and establishing their correspondence i.e. graph matching. Then we
develop an optimization algorithm by updating matching
and cutting alternatively, provided with theoretical analysis. The efficacy of our algorithm is verified on both synthetic dataset and real-world images containing similar regions or structures.

1. Introduction
Over the past few decades, exploration on graphs has
brought remarkable advances for computer vision. Images
often have strong structural correlation and are modeled as
connected graphs with nodes and edges. While nodes correspond to speciﬁc feature points, edges reveal the spatial
relation or interaction between neighboring nodes. In this
sense, graph is capable of encoding the local and global
structural information, and is a natural representation of visual input. We consider two important tasks associated with
graph structure: graph cuts (GC) and graph matching
(GM). Applications of these tasks can be found in stereo
[25], video synthesis [17], image segmentation [22] (for
graph cut/partition) and object categorization [9], action
recognition [34], and feature matching [26], etc.
Graph cuts. As the name suggests, is a task to cut one
graph into two or more partitions, so as to aggregate the
nodes with higher similarities and separate the ones without.
Conventionally, the edges is associated with ﬂow weights
measuring the transportation capacity between end nodes.
Thus cutting the graph can be casted as ﬁnding a collection
of edges, whose end nodes form a bipartite separation such
that the overall transportation on these edges is minimized.
For computer vision, pixels and their neighboring relation

are often regarded as nodes and edges, respectively. In this
fashion, graph cuts is equivalent to grouping the pixels into
two clusters taking into account their appearance and adjacency properties. With different weights or transportation
measurements, various objectives are proposed.
Graph matching. It aims to ﬁnd correspondence among
(sub-)graphs. Both unary and second-order (or higherorder) afﬁnity are considered. Since graph matching typically involves structural information beyond unary/pointwise similarity, it is in general robust against noise and local ambiguities. However, compared with linear assignment
with polynomial-time global optimum solvers such as the
Hungarian method [20], graph matching in general involves
quadratic assignment which is the known NP-hard.
This paper is motivated primarily by the interest of exploring how the above two key tasks on graphs may be
jointly considered so as to attain certain optimality not possible with each task considered independently. In particular, there are real applications of image segmentation where
graph cut alone would have difﬁculty, while graph matching
seems to be a natural part of the problem, and hence a joint
approach is called for.
Fig. 1 illustrates the key potential beneﬁts of such a joint
approach (more explanations in the caption): (balanced)
graph cuts [1] fails to produce correct partition for the image containing two swans, even though the size balance between the partition is considered. This can be explained
by the fact that GC encourages the clustered points (also
called local connectivity in this paper) to be assigned to the
same partition1 . On the other hand, if we enforce existing graph matching solvers such as reweighed random walk
(RRWM) [6] or our proposed IBGP (a side product of our
main method, see more details in Sect. 4) with a brute-force
modiﬁcation to make its input compatible with only one input graph, the result would be completely meaningless.
We draw important observation from the above example: In many scenarios, separating identical/similar objects
in an image requires a new mechanism to assign two correspondence nodes (e.g., those similar in appearance and
1 We follow a traditional setting by using the point distance as the cut
cost whereby the goal is to minimize the overall cut cost.

1705

