Dense Decoder Shortcut Connections for Single-Pass Semantic Segmentation
Piotr Bilinski
University of Oxford

Victor Prisacariu
University of Oxford

piotrb@robots.ox.ac.uk

victor@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a novel end-to-end trainable, deep, encoderdecoder architecture for single-pass semantic segmentation. Our approach is based on a cascaded architecture with feature-level long-range skip connections. The
encoder incorporates the structure of ResNeXt’s residual
building blocks and adopts the strategy of repeating a building block that aggregates a set of transformations with the
same topology. The decoder features a novel architecture,
consisting of blocks, that (i) capture context information,
(ii) generate semantic features, and (iii) enable fusion between different output resolutions. Crucially, we introduce
dense decoder shortcut connections to allow decoder blocks
to use semantic feature maps from all previous decoder levels, i.e. from all higher-level feature maps. The dense
decoder connections allow for effective information propagation from one decoder block to another, as well as for
multi-level feature fusion that significantly improves the accuracy. Importantly, these connections allow our method to
obtain state-of-the-art performance on several challenging
datasets, without the need of time-consuming multi-scale
averaging of previous works.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the process of assigning a class
label to each pixel in an image, which is pertinent in a
number of applications including scene understanding for
robotic vision, autonomous driving, localization, as well as
navigation.
Recent works on semantic segmentation have shown significant improvements in accuracy by incorporating stateof-the-art deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
based image classifiers for semantic segmentation [5, 36].
One prominent approach involves Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) [36], where the fully-connected layers are
converted into convolutional ones. We note that crucial in
this approach is the use of a skip architecture, which combines semantic information from deep, coarse layers with
appearance information from shallow, fine layers.

Most recent techniques have incorporated image pyramids for multi-scale inference and evaluation [5, 7, 9, 26,
31, 39, 54]. All such techniques take an input image and
scale it to multiple resolutions to build a set of cascading images, which are then piped, most often independently, through a (neural network) processing pipeline. This
technique provides useful properties for many applications,
such as noise reduction or image manipulation. It is widely
used in semantic segmentation as an image representation
for extracting multi-scale semantic scores, which are then
averaged across all the scales to produce a final result.
However, running the inference step for many scales separately significantly increases the processing time, thus making such an approach impractical for many real-world applications. More importantly, the multi-scale pyramid significantly increases memory requirements, making it virtually impossible to train a network end-to-end using a single, modern GPU. This indicates that the multi-scale image
pyramid is used for the inference step only, often making
the whole approach heavily-engineered.
Motivated by the above, in this paper we design a
novel end-to-end trainable deep encoder-decoder architecture, that aims to eliminate the need for multi-scale, multipass semantic segmentation, and achieves comparable or
better results using a single scale. Our approach is based
on the cascaded architecture with feature-level long-range
skip connections. The encoder incorporates the structure
of ResNeXt’s residual building blocks and adopts the strategy of repeating a building block that aggregates a set of
transformations with the same topology. The decoder features a novel architecture consisting of blocks, that capture
context information, generate semantic features and enable
fusion between different resolution levels. Crucially, we
propose to use dense decoder shortcut connections to allow decoder’s blocks to use semantic feature maps from all
previous decoder’s blocks (i.e. from all higher-level feature maps) and correct any potential errors introduced by
the previous decoder’s blocks. The dense decoder shortcut connections allow for effective information propagation
from one block of a decoder to another, and for multi-level
feature fusion that significantly improves the accuracy.

6596

