Finding “It”: Weakly-Supervised Reference-Aware Visual Grounding in
Instructional Videos
De-An Huang*, Shyamal Buch*, Lucio Dery, Animesh Garg, Li Fei-Fei, Juan Carlos Niebles
Stanford University
{dahuang, shyamal, ldery, garg, feifeili, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Grounding textual phrases in visual content with standalone image-sentence pairs is a challenging task. When
we consider grounding in instructional videos, this problem becomes profoundly more complex: the latent temporal
structure of instructional videos breaks independence assumptions and necessitates contextual understanding for
resolving ambiguous visual-linguistic cues. Furthermore,
dense annotations and video data scale mean supervised
approaches are prohibitively costly. In this work, we propose to tackle this new task with a weakly-supervised framework for reference-aware visual grounding in instructional
videos, where only the temporal alignment between the transcription and the video segment are available for supervision. We introduce the visually grounded action graph, a
structured representation capturing the latent dependency
between grounding and references in video. For optimization, we propose a new reference-aware multiple instance
learning (RA-MIL) objective for weak supervision of grounding in videos. We evaluate our approach over unconstrained
videos from YouCookII and RoboWatch, augmented with new
reference-grounding test set annotations. We demonstrate
that our jointly optimized, reference-aware approach simultaneously improves visual grounding, reference-resolution,
and generalization to unseen instructional video categories.

1. Introduction
Connecting vision and language has emerged as a prominent multi-disciplinary research problem [11]. The visual
grounding problem of connecting natural language descriptions with spatial localization in images has proved to be a
critical link in solving these multi-modal tasks [19, 28, 43].
While there have been numerous studies from both natural
language and vision communities that aim to address visual
grounding [13, 15, 20, 25, 43, 51], both the sentences and
images are obtained in a relatively controlled setting with
* indicates equal contribution lead author

Visual Grounding

…

The dog and the boy

Next, take it

…

?

…
(a) in image

…
…

Mix the greens

…

(b) in instructional video

…

Next, take it

……

…
…

(c) Our reference-aware visual grounding in video

Figure 1: What is “it” in the video frame above? (a) Captions for
visual grounding in standalone images offer fully-specified nouns
or descriptors. (b) In contrast, instructional video captions often
offer only pronouns and partially-specified descriptors, since humans can resolve the ambiguities with contextual understanding.
Furthermore, structured annotations for references and groundings
remain prohibitive. (c) To address these challenges, this work proposes a new weakly-supervised, reference-aware visual grounding
approach that explicitly resolves the visual-linguistic meaning of
referring expressions (e.g. “it” refers to the “greens”).

standalone image-sentence pairs. In this work, we aim to expand this scope by studying visual grounding in instructional
videos, where both the language transcription and the visual
appearance are unconstrained as in real-world situations.
Visual grounding in instructional video poses two unique
challenges compared to standalone image-based visual
grounding: (1) Step descriptions rely heavily on pronouns
and referring expressions to provide implicit links to crucial
visual and linguistic context. In other words, the referring
expressions (e.g. “it” in Fig. 1) no longer fully specify the
visual appearance of entities. (2) Annotations linking the
grounding and contextual references remains prohibitively

5948

