Unsupervised Learning of Depth and Ego-Motion from Monocular Video
Using 3D Geometric Constraints
Reza Mahjourian
University of Texas at Austin, Google Brain

Martin Wicke
Google Brain

D ICP Losses

Abstract
We present a novel approach for unsupervised learning
of depth and ego-motion from monocular video. Unsupervised learning removes the need for separate supervisory
signals (depth or ego-motion ground truth, or multi-view
video). Prior work in unsupervised depth learning uses
pixel-wise or gradient-based losses, which only consider
pixels in small local neighborhoods. Our main contribution is to explicitly consider the inferred 3D geometry of
the whole scene, and enforce consistency of the estimated
3D point clouds and ego-motion across consecutive frames.
This is a challenging task and is solved by a novel (approximate) backpropagation algorithm for aligning 3D structures.
We combine this novel 3D-based loss with 2D losses
based on photometric quality of frame reconstructions using estimated depth and ego-motion from adjacent frames.
We also incorporate validity masks to avoid penalizing areas in which no useful information exists.
We test our algorithm on the KITTI dataset and on a
video dataset captured on an uncalibrated mobile phone
camera. Our proposed approach consistently improves
depth estimates on both datasets, and outperforms the stateof-the-art for both depth and ego-motion. Because we only
require a simple video, learning depth and ego-motion on
large and varied datasets becomes possible. We demonstrate this by training on the low quality uncalibrated video
dataset and evaluating on KITTI, ranking among top performing prior methods which are trained on KITTI itself. 1

1. Introduction
Inferring the depth of a scene and one’s ego-motion is
one of the key challenges in fields such as robotics and autonomous driving. Being able to estimate the exact position
of objects in 3D and the scene geometry is essential for motion planning and decision making.
1 Code and data are available at http://sites.google.com/view/vid2depth

Anelia Angelova
Google Brain

Structured Point Cloud Q

Structured Point Cloud Q

t-1

t

T

t

Depth Estimate D

Depth Estimate D

t-1

t

Egomotion
Estimation
D Pixel
Losses

Input Frame X

t-1

^
Warped Frame X

t-1

Input Frame X

t

^
Warped Frame X

t

Figure 1. Overview of our method. In addition to 2D photometric losses, novel 3D geometric losses are used as supervision to
adjust unsupervised depth and ego-motion estimates by the neural network. Orange arrows represent model’s predictions. Gray
arrows represent mechanical transformations. Green arrows represent losses. The depth images shown are sample outputs from our
trained model.

Most supervised methods for learning depth and egomotion require carefully calibrated setups. This severely
limits the amount and variety of training data they can
use, which is why supervised techniques are often applied
only to a number of well-known datasets like KITTI [9]
and Cityscapes [5]. Even when ground-truth depth data
is available, it is often imperfect and causes distinct prediction artifacts. Rotating LIDAR scanners cannot produce
depth that temporally aligns with the corresponding image
taken by a camera—even if the camera and LIDAR are carefully synchronized. Structured light depth sensors—and to
a lesser extent, LIDAR and time-of-flight sensors—suffer
from noise and structural artifacts, especially in presence
of reflective, transparent, or dark surfaces. Lastly, there is
usually an offset between the depth sensor and the camera,
which causes gaps or overlaps when the point cloud is projected onto the camera’s viewpoint. These problems lead to
artifacts in models trained on such data.
15667

