Learning to Parse Wireframes in Images of Man-Made Environments
Kun Huang1 , Yifan Wang1 , Zihan Zhou2 , Tianjiao Ding1 , Shenghua Gao1 , and Yi Ma3
1
ShanghaiTech University {huangkun, wangyf, dingtj, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
2
The Pennsylvania State University zzhou@ist.psu.edu
3
University of California, Berkeley yima@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a learning-based approach to
the task of automatically extracting a “wireframe” representation for images of cluttered man-made environments.
The wireframe (see Fig. 1) contains all salient straight lines
and their junctions of the scene that encode efficiently and
accurately large-scale geometry and object shapes. To this
end, we have built a very large new dataset of over 5,000
images with wireframes thoroughly labelled by humans. We
have proposed two convolutional neural networks that are
suitable for extracting junctions and lines with large spatial
support, respectively. The networks trained on our dataset
have achieved significantly better performance than stateof-the-art methods for junction detection and line segment
detection, respectively. We have conducted extensive experiments to evaluate quantitatively and qualitatively the
wireframes obtained by our method, and have convincingly
shown that effectively and efficiently parsing wireframes
for images of man-made environments is a feasible goal
within reach. Such wireframes could benefit many important visual tasks such as feature correspondence, 3D reconstruction, vision-based mapping, localization, and navigation. The data and source code are available at https:
//github.com/huangkuns/wireframe.

1. Introduction
How to infer 3D geometric information of a scene from
2D images has been a fundamental problem in computer
vision. Conventional approaches to build a 3D model typically rely on detecting, matching, and triangulating local
image features (e.g. corners, edges, SIFT features, and
patches). One great advantage of working with local features is that the system can be somewhat oblivious to the
scene, as long as it contains sufficient distinguishable features. Meanwhile, modern applications of computer vision systems often require an autonomous agent (e.g., a
car, a robot, or a UAV) to efficiently and effectively negotiate with a physical space in cluttered man-made (indoor or
outdoor) environments. Such scenarios present significant

Figure 1. First row: Examples of typical indoor or outdoor scenes
with geometrically meaningful wireframes labelled by humans;
Second row: Wireframes automatically extracted by our method.

challenges to the current local-feature based approaches:
Man-made environments typically consist of large textureless surfaces (e.g. white walls or the ground); or they may
be full of repetitive patterns hence local features are ambiguous to match; and the visual localization system is required to work robustly and accurately over extended routes
and sometimes across very large baseline between views.
Nevertheless, the human vision system seems capable of
effortlessly localizing or navigating among such environments arguably by exploiting larger-scale (global or semiglobal) structural features or regularities of the scene. For
instance, many works [6, 21, 14, 11, 35] have demonstrated
that prior knowledge about the scene such as a Manhattan world could significantly benefit the 3D reconstruction
tasks. The Manhattan assumption can often be violated in
cluttered man-made environments, but it is rather safe to
assume that man-made environments are dominantly piecewise planar hence rich of visually salient lines (intersection
of planes) and junctions (intersection of lines). Conceptually, such junctions or lines could just be a very small “subset” among the local corner features (or SIFTs) and edge
features detected by conventional methods, but they already
encode most information about larger-scale geometry of the
scene. For simplicity, we refer to such a set of lines and their
1626

