Person Re-identification with Cascaded Pairwise Convolutions
Yicheng Wang1 , Zhenzhong Chen1∗, Feng Wu2 , Gang Wang3
1
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, China
3
Alibaba Group, China
wyc@whu.edu.cn, zzchen@whu.edu.cn, fengwu@ustc.edu.cn, wg134231@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
In this paper, a novel deep architecture named BraidNet is proposed for person re-identification. BraidNet has a
specially designed WConv layer, and the cascaded WConv
structure learns to extract the comparison features of two
images, which are robust to misalignments and color differences across cameras. Furthermore, a Channel Scaling
layer is designed to optimize the scaling factor of each input channel, which helps mitigate the zero gradient problem in the training phase. To solve the problem of imbalanced volume of negative and positive training samples, a Sample Rate Learning strategy is proposed to adaptively update the ratio between positive and negative samples in each batch. Experiments conducted on CUHK03Detected, CUHK03-Labeled, CUHK01, Market-1501 and
DukeMTMC-reID datasets demonstrate that our method
achieves competitive performance when compared to stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Person Re-ID) is the process of
discriminating whether two person images taken from different camera views belong to the same person [4]. It’s
challenging due to the problems brought by the variations of
viewpoints, poses, illumination conditions and backgrounds
[30].
The misalignment problem means that two images contain different contents in the same location, due to the variations of viewpoints and poses. The color differences across
cameras means that the cameras in different illumination
conditions take the same color into different RGB value.
To solve these problems, we propose a novel deep architecture named BraidNet. BraidNet has a type of specially designed convolutional layer: WConv. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
WConv uses two convolution kernels for each of the two in∗ Corresponding author: Zhenzhong Chen

Figure 1. Illustration of the computation in a WConv layer. The
3D boxes represent feature maps. “Conv P/Q” means convolution
with kernel P/Q.

puts and crossly sums the four intermediate outputs to form
two outputs. In our design, the cascaded WConv structure
can learn to extract the comparison features of two images,
which are robust to misalignments and color differences
across cameras.
The zero gradient problem exists in the DNN/CNN models with ReLU activation. The unit/channel which frequently makes negative response can rarely get non-zero
gradient in the backward propagation (BP) process, thus
corresponding weights to compute the response can’t be
sufficiently trained and become useless. To mitigate this
problem, we propose a simple Channel Scaling (CS) layer
which optimizes the scaling factor of each input channel, to
guide the weights away from being negative.
The imbalanced training data problem in Person Re-ID
means that the negative samples are much more than positive samples. If all the samples are used for training, the
trained model tends to make negative prediction all the time;
if only a limited percentage of negative samples is used, the
abundant information in vast negative samples may be seriously wasted [1]. To deal with this problem without predefined percentage, an online batch generating strategy named
Sample Rate Learning (SRL) is proposed. Like the Hard
Negative Mining strategy [1, 35] which selects the negative
samples with large loss on current model, the SRL strategy
tries to increase the expected loss in each batch by adaptively adjusting the ratio of positive samples and negative
samples.

1470

