Improved Lossy Image Compression with Priming and Spatially Adaptive Bit
Rates for Recurrent Networks
Nick Johnston, Damien Vincent, David Minnen, Michele Covell, Saurabh Singh, Troy Chinen,
Sung Jin Hwang, Joel Shor, George Toderici
{nickj, damienv, dminnen, covell, saurabhsingh, tchinen, sjhwang, joelshor, gtoderici}
@google.com, Google Research

Abstract
We propose a method for lossy image compression based
on recurrent, convolutional neural networks that outperforms BPG (4:2:0), WebP, JPEG2000, and JPEG as measured by MS-SSIM. We introduce three improvements over
previous research that lead to this state-of-the-art result using a single model. First, we modify the recurrent architecture to improve spatial diffusion, which allows the network
to more effectively capture and propagate image information through the network’s hidden state. Second, in addition
to lossless entropy coding, we use a spatially adaptive bit
allocation algorithm to more efficiently use the limited number of bits to encode visually complex image regions. Finally, we show that training with a pixel-wise loss weighted
by SSIM increases reconstruction quality according to multiple metrics. We evaluate our method on the Kodak and
Tecnick image sets and compare against standard codecs as
well as recently published methods based on deep neural
networks.

1. Introduction
Previous research showed that deep neural networks can
be effectively applied to the problem of lossy image compression [21, 22, 23, 10, 17, 4, 19]. Those methods extend the basic autoencoder structure and generate a binary
representation for an image by quantizing either the bottleneck layer or the corresponding latent variables. Several
options have been explored for encoding images at different bit rates including training multiple models [4], learning quantization-scaling parameters [21], and transmitting
a subset of the encoded representation within a recurrent
structure [10, 23].
Our method takes the recurrent approach and builds on
the architecture introduced by [23]. The model uses a recurrent autoencoder where each iteration encodes the residual
between the previous reconstruction and the original image
(see Figure 1). At each step, the network extracts new in-

formation from the current residual and combines it with
context stored in the hidden state of the recurrent layers. By
saving the bits from the quantized bottleneck after each iteration, the model generates a progressive encoding of the
input image.
Our method provides a significant increase in compression performance over previous models due to three improvements. First, by “priming” the network, that is, running several iterations before generating the binary codes
(in the encoder) or a reconstructed image (in the decoder),
we expand the spatial context, which allows the network
to represent more complex representations in early iterations. Second, we add support for spatially adaptive bit rates
(SABR), which dynamically adjusts the bit rate across each
image depending on the complexity of the local image content. Finally, we train our model with a more sophisticated
loss function that guides the pixel-wise loss using structural
similarity (SSIM) [26, 28]. Combining three techniques
yields a rate-distortion (RD) curve that exceeds state-of-theart codecs (BPG 444 (YCbCr 4:4:4) [5], BPG 420 (YCbCr
4:2:0), WebP [9], JPEG2000 [12], and JPEG [25]) as well as
other learned models based on deep neural networks ([21]
and [23]), as measured by MS-SSIM [27].
We review previous work in Section 2 and describe our
method in detail in Section 3. The description focuses on
the network architecture (Section 3.1), how we combine
that with hidden-state priming and diffusion (Section 3.2),
and how we use spatially adaptive bit rates (Section 3.3).
Section 3 also covers our training loss (Section 3.4), which
provides better generalization results than unweighted L1 or
L2 loss. In Section 4 we discuss the training setup used for
our networks. Section 5 summarizes the results and compares them to existing codecs and to other recent research
in neural-network-based compression [21, 19].

2. Related Work
Lossy image compression is a long-standing problem
with many standard codecs. JPEG [25] remains the
14385

