InLoc: Indoor Visual Localization with Dense Matching and View Synthesis
Hajime Taira1 Masatoshi Okutomi1 Torsten Sattler2 Mircea Cimpoi3
Marc Pollefeys2,4 Josef Sivic3,5 Tomas Pajdla3 Akihiko Torii1
1
Tokyo Institute of Technology 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
3
CIIRC, CTU in Prague∗ 4 Microsoft, Redmond 5 Inria†
Query image

Abstract
We seek to predict the 6 degree-of-freedom (6DoF) pose of
a query photograph with respect to a large indoor 3D map.
The contributions of this work are three-fold. First, we
develop a new large-scale visual localization method targeted for indoor environments. The method proceeds along
three steps: (i) efficient retrieval of candidate poses that ensures scalability to large-scale environments, (ii) pose estimation using dense matching rather than local features
to deal with textureless indoor scenes, and (iii) pose verification by virtual view synthesis to cope with significant
changes in viewpoint, scene layout, and occluders. Second, we collect a new dataset with reference 6DoF poses
for large-scale indoor localization. Query photographs are
captured by mobile phones at a different time than the reference 3D map, thus presenting a realistic indoor localization
scenario. Third, we demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art indoor localization approaches on this new challenging data.

1. Introduction
Autonomous navigation inside buildings is a key ability of
robotic intelligent systems [24, 39]. Successful navigation
requires both to localize a robot and to determine a path to
its goal. One approach to solving the localization problem
is to build a 3D map of the building and then use a camera1
to estimate the current position and orientation of the robot
(Figure 1). Imagine also the benefit of an intelligent indoor
navigation system that helps you find your way, for exam∗ CIIRC - Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics, and Cybernetics,
Czech Technical University in Prague.
† WILLOW project, Departement d’Informatique de l’École Normale
Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, PSL Research University.
1 While RGBD sensors could also be used indoors, they are often too
energy-consuming for mobile scenarios or have only a short-range to scan
close-by objects (faces). Thus, purely RGB-based localization approaches
are also relevant in indoor scenes. Obviously, indoor scenes are GPSdenied environments.

6DoF camera pose

?

Large-scale
indoor 3D maps

Database of RGBD images

Figure 1. Large-scale indoor visual localization. Given a
database of geometrically-registered RGBD images, we predict
the 6DoF camera pose of a query RGB image by retrieving candidate images, estimating candicate camera poses, and selecting
the best matching camera pose. To address inherent difficulties in
indoor visual localization, we introduce the “InLoc” approach that
performs a sequence of progressively stricter verification steps.

ple, at Chicago airport, Tokyo Metropolitan station or the
CVPR conference center. Besides intelligent systems, the
visual localization problem is also highly relevant for any
type of Mixed Reality application, including Augmented
Reality [16, 44, 73].
Due to the availability of datasets, e.g., obtained from
Flickr [38] or captured from autonomous vehicles [19, 43],
large-scale localization in urban environments has been an
active field of research [6, 9, 14, 15, 19, 20, 27, 29, 34, 38, 44,
53–57, 65, 67, 68, 76, 80, 81]. In contrast, indoor localization [11, 12, 39, 58, 59, 64, 70, 75] has received less atten-

7199

