Robust Video Content Alignment and Compensation
for Rain Removal in a CNN Framework
Jie Chen1 , Cheen-Hau Tan1 , Junhui Hou2 , Lap-Pui Chau1 , and He Li3
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
3

Singapore Technologies Dynamics Pte Ltd

{chen.jie, cheenhau, elpchau}@ntu.edu.sg, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk, lihe@stengg.com

Abstract
Rain removal is important for improving the robustness of outdoor vision based systems. Current rain removal methods show limitations either for complex dynamic
scenes shot from fast moving cameras, or under torrential
rain fall with opaque occlusions. We propose a novel derain
algorithm, which applies superpixel (SP) segmentation to
decompose the scene into depth consistent units. Alignment
of scene contents are done at the SP level, which proves to
be robust towards rain occlusion and fast camera motion.
Two alignment output tensors, i.e., optimal temporal match
tensor and sorted spatial-temporal match tensor, provide informative clues for rain streak location and occluded background contents to generate an intermediate derain output.
These tensors will be subsequently prepared as input features for a convolutional neural network to restore high
frequency details to the intermediate output for compensation of mis-alignment blur. Extensive evaluations show
that up to 5dB reconstruction PSNR advantage is achieved
over state-of-the-art methods. Visual inspection shows that
much cleaner rain removal is achieved especially for highly
dynamic scenes with heavy and opaque rainfall from a fast
moving camera.

1. Introduction
Modern intelligent systems rely more and more on visual information as input. However, in an outdoors setting,
visual input quality and in turn, system performance, could
be seriously degraded by atmospheric turbulences [11, 23].
One such turbulence, rain streaks, degrade image contrast
and visibility, obscure scene features, and could be misconstrued as scene motion by computer vision algorithms. Rain
removal is therefore vital to ensure the robustness of outdoor vision-based systems.
There are two categories of methods for rain removal –

Synthesized rain frame

Ground truth scene

VMD-CVPR17

DSC-ICCV15

DDN-CVPR17

Proposed SPAC-CNN

Figure 1: Comparison of derain outputs by different algorithms for a challenging video sequence with fast camera
motion and heavy rain fall. Image-based derain methods,
i.e., discriminative sparse coding (DSC) [22] and deep detail network (DDN) [8] fail to remove large and/or opaque
rain streaks. A video-based method via matrix decomposition (VMD) [24] creates serious blur due to fast camera
motion. Our proposed SPAC-CNN can cleanly remove the
rain streaks and preserve scene contents truthfully.
image-based methods, which rely solely on the information
of the processed frame, and video-based methods, which
also utilize temporal clues from neighboring frames. Due
to the lack of temporal information, image-based methods
face difficulties in recovering from torrential rain with large
and opaque occlusions.
To properly utilize temporal information, video-based
methods require scene content to be aligned throughout
consecutive frames. However, this requirement is challenging due to two factors – motion of the camera and dynamic scene content, i.e., presence of moving object. Previous works tackle these two issues separately. Camera
motion-induced scene content shifts can be reversed using
global frame alignment [29, 27]. However, the granularity
of global alignment is too large when scene depth range is
large; parts of scene content will be poorly aligned. Scene
16286

