Instance Embedding Transfer to Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation
Siyang Li1,2 , Bryan Seybold2 , Alexey Vorobyov2 , Alireza Fathi2 , Qin Huang1 , and C.-C. Jay Kuo1
1
University of Southern California, 2 Google AI Perception
siyangl@usc.edu, {seybold,vorobya,alirezafathi}@google.com,
qinhuang@usc.edu, cckuo@sipi.usc.edu

Abstract
We propose a method for unsupervised video object
segmentation by transferring the knowledge encapsulated
in image-based instance embedding networks. The instance embedding network produces an embedding vector
for each pixel that enables identifying all pixels belonging to the same object. Though trained on static images,
the instance embeddings are stable over consecutive video
frames, which allows us to link objects together over time.
Thus, we adapt the instance networks trained on static images to video object segmentation and incorporate the embeddings with objectness and optical flow features, without model retraining or online fine-tuning. The proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised segmentation methods in the DAVIS dataset and the FBMS dataset.

1. Introduction
One important task in video understanding is object localization in time and space. Ideally, it should be able to localize familiar or novel objects consistently over time with a
sharp object mask, which is known as video object segmentation (VOS). If no indication of which object to segment is
given, the task is known as unsupervised video object segmentation or primary object segmentation. Once an object
is segmented, visual effects and video understanding tools
can leverage that information [2, 26].
Related object segmentation tasks in static images are
currently dominated by methods based on the fully convolutional neural network (FCN) [5, 28]. These neural networks require large datasets of segmented object images
such as PASCAL [9] and COCO [27]. Video segmentation
datasets are smaller because they are more expensive to annotate [25, 32, 34]. As a result, it is more difficult to train
a neural network explicitly for video segmentation. Classic
work in video segmentation produced results using optical
flow and shallow appearance models [12, 22, 24, 31, 33, 42]
while more recent methods typically pretrain the network

Figure 1. An example of the changing segmentation target (foreground) in videos depending on motion. A car is the foreground
in the top video while a car is the background in the bottom video.
To address this issue, our method obtains embeddings for object instances and identifies representative embeddings for foreground/background and then segments the frame based on the representative embeddings. Left: the ground truth. Middle: A visualization of the embeddings projected into RGB space via PCA,
along with representative points for the foreground (magenta) and
background (blue). Right: the segmentation masks produced by
the proposed method. Best viewed in color.

on image segmentation datasets and later adapt the network to the video domain, sometimes combined with optical flow [4, 6, 17, 37, 38, 41].
In this paper, we propose a method to transfer the knowledge encapsulated in instance segmentation embeddings
learned from static images and integrate it with objectness
and optical flow to segment a moving object in video. Instead of training an FCN that directly classifies each pixel
as foreground/background as in [6, 17, 37, 38], we train
an FCN that jointly learns object instance embeddings and
semantic categories from images [11]. The distance between the learned embeddings encodes the similarity between pixels. We argue that the instance embedding is a
more useful feature to transfer from images to videos than
a foreground/background prediction. As shown in Fig. 1,
cars appear in both videos but belong to different categories
(foreground in the first video and background in the second
video). If the network is trained to directly classify cars as
foreground on the first video, it tends to classify the cars as
foreground in the second video as well. As a result, the network needs to be fine-tuned for each sequence [4]. In contrast, the instance embedding network can produce unique
16526

