Disentangled Person Image Generation
Liqian Ma1 Qianru Sun2∗ Stamatios Georgoulis1
Luc Van Gool1,3 Bernt Schiele2 Mario Fritz2
1

KU-Leuven/PSI, Toyota Motor Europe (TRACE) 3 ETH Zurich
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
{liqian.ma, sgeorgou, luc.vangool}@esat.kuleuven.be
{qsun, schiele, mfritz}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
2

Abstract
Generating novel, yet realistic, images of persons is a
challenging task due to the complex interplay between the
different image factors, such as the foreground, background
and pose information. In this work, we aim at generating such images based on a novel, two-stage reconstruction pipeline that learns a disentangled representation of
the aforementioned image factors and generates novel person images at the same time. First, a multi-branched reconstruction network is proposed to disentangle and encode the
three factors into embedding features, which are then combined to re-compose the input image itself. Second, three
corresponding mapping functions are learned in an adversarial manner in order to map Gaussian noise to the learned
embedding feature space, for each factor, respectively. Using the proposed framework, we can manipulate the foreground, background and pose of the input image, and also
sample new embedding features to generate such targeted
manipulations, that provide more control over the generation process. Experiments on the Market-1501 and Deepfashion datasets show that our model does not only generate
realistic person images with new foregrounds, backgrounds
and poses, but also manipulates the generated factors and
interpolates the in-between states. Another set of experiments on Market-1501 shows that our model can also be
beneficial for the person re-identification task1 .

1. Introduction
The process of generating realistic-looking images of
persons has several applications, like image editing, person
re-identification (re-ID), inpainting or on-demand generated
art for movie production. The recent advent of image gener∗ Corresponding author
1 Project page is at http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/
liqianma/CVPR18_DPIG/index.html
˜

Foreground (FG) sampling (fixed BG and Pose)

Background (BG) sampling (fixed FG and Pose)

Pose sampling (fixed FG and BG)

FG, BG and Pose sampling

Appearance and Pose sampling

Figure 1: Left: image sampling results on Market-1501.
Three factors, i.e. foreground, background and pose, can be
sampled independently (1st-3rd rows) and jointly (4th row).
Right: similar joint sampling results on DeepFashion.This
dataset contains almost no background, so we only disentangle the image into appearance and pose factors.
ation models, such as variational autoencoders (VAE) [12],
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [7] and autoregressive models (ARMs) (e.g. PixelRNN [34]), has provided
powerful tools towards this goal. Several papers [24, 2, 1]
have then exploited the ability of these networks to generate
sharp images in order to synthesize realistic photos of faces
and natural scenes. Recently, Ma et al. [20] proposed an
architecture to synthesize novel person images in arbitrary
poses given as input an image of that person and a new pose.
From an application perspective however, the user often
wants to have more control over the generated images (e.g.
change the background, a person’s appearance and clothing,
or the viewpoint), which is something that existing meth-

99

