Salient Object Detection Driven by Fixation Prediction
Wenguan Wang 1 , Jianbing Shen∗ 1,2 , Xingping Dong 1 , Ali Borji3
1

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
3

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE

Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, USA

wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com, {shenjianbing, dongxingping}@bit.edu.cn, aborji@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Research in visual saliency has been focused on two major types of models namely fixation prediction and salient
object detection. The relationship between the two, however, has been less explored. In this paper, we propose
to employ the former model type to identify and segment
salient objects in scenes. We build a novel neural network
called Attentive Saliency Network (ASNet)1 that learns to
detect salient objects from fixation maps. The fixation map,
derived at the upper network layers, captures a high-level
understanding of the scene. Salient object detection is then
viewed as fine-grained object-level saliency segmentation
and is progressively optimized with the guidance of the fixation map in a top-down manner. ASNet is based on a hierarchy of convolutional LSTMs (convLSTMs) that offers an
efficient recurrent mechanism for sequential refinement of
the segmentation map. Several loss functions are introduced
for boosting the performance of the ASNet. Extensive experimental evaluation shows that our proposed ASNet is capable of generating accurate segmentation maps with the help
of the computed fixation map. Our work offers a deeper insight into the mechanisms of attention and narrows the gap
between salient object detection and fixation prediction.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) has been studied extensively for more than a decade (since [37]). It has several
applications such as segmentation [52, 10], object proposal
generation [2], and image resizing [57, 50]. Recently, the
use of deep neural networks for saliency detection has been
trending. Although promising results have been achieved,
they occasionally fail to detect the most salient object in
∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen. This work was supported in
part by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4182056, the
Fok Ying Tung Education Foundation under Grant 141067, and the Specialized Fund for Joint Building Program of Beijing Municipal Education
Commission.
1 Available at: https://github.com/wenguanwang/ASNet.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Given complex scenes like (a), what are the salient
objects? We propose the Attentive Saliency Network (ASNet)
that infers the object saliency (b) from predicted fixation maps (c),
which is consistent with human attention mechanisms.

complex cluttered scenes containing several objects (such
as the ones shown in Fig. 1 (a)). Additionally, for current
computational saliency models, their connection with how
humans explicitly choose salient objects or watch natural
scenes are less clear (as discussed in [3, 6]).
In this paper, we take a further step towards a more biologically plausible SOD model equipped with high-level
prior of fixation map. The human attention prior, represented by eye movements or from a fixation prediction
model, is instinctive and more consistent with visual processing of human visual system. The suggested model not
only generates high-quality object saliency maps, but also
pushes the boundary of SOD research by building a close
connection to human fixation prediction (FP). As shown in
Fig. 1, our model infers object saliency using the fixation
prior, where this prior acts as a selective mechanism to enhance the saliency representation for the purpose of accurate object saliency inference. Our algorithm has bias on
the assumption that aligns with the core views of previous
studies [34, 4] that explored the relationship between eye
movements (implicit saliency) and explicit object saliency.
These studies confirmed a strong correlation between fixations and salient objects. Further beyond treating FP and
SOD as two separate tasks that are learned in a branched
11711

