SGAN: An Alternative Training of Generative Adversarial Networks
Tatjana Chavdarova and François Fleuret
Machine Learning group, Idiap Research Institute & École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
{firstname.lastname}@idiap.ch

Abstract
The Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have
demonstrated impressive performance for data synthesis,
and are now used in a wide range of computer vision tasks.
In spite of this success, they gained a reputation for being difficult to train, what results in a time-consuming and
human-involved development process to use them.
We consider an alternative training process, named
SGAN, in which several adversarial “local” pairs of networks are trained independently so that a “global” supervising pair of networks can be trained against them.
The goal is to train the global pair with the corresponding ensemble opponent for improved performances in terms
of mode coverage. This approach aims at increasing the
chances that learning will not stop for the global pair, preventing both to be trapped in an unsatisfactory local minimum, or to face oscillations often observed in practice. To
guarantee the latter, the global pair never affects the local
ones.
The rules of SGAN training are thus as follows: the
global generator and discriminator are trained using the
local discriminators and generators, respectively, whereas
the local networks are trained with their fixed local opponent.
Experimental results on both toy and real-world problems demonstrate that this approach outperforms standard
training in terms of better mitigating mode collapse, stability while converging and that it surprisingly, increases the
convergence speed as well.

1. Introduction
An important research effort has recently focused on
improving the convergence analysis of the Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [6]. This family of unsupervised learning algorithms provides powerful generative
models, and have found numerous and diverse applications [11, 17, 22, 34].
Different from traditional generative models, a GAN
generator represents a mapping G : z 7→ x, such that if

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of SGAN. There are N +1
pairs, of which the pair (G0 , D0 ) is not trained directly. D0
is trained with Gi , i=1, . . . , N , and G0 is trained with Di ,
i=1, . . . , N , as illustrated with the dashed line rectangles.

z follows a known distribution pz , then x follows the distribution pd of the data. Notably, this approach omits an explicit representation of pg (x), or the ability to apply directly
a maximum-likelihood maximization for training. This is
aligned with the practical need, which is that we do not
need an explicit formulation of pg (x), but rather a mean
to sample from it, preferably in a computationally efficient
manner. The training of the generator involves a discriminative model D : x 7→ y ∈ [0, 1], whose output represents
an estimated probability that x originates from the dataset.
More precisely, the algorithm consists of two training
steps. Given that there is a probability 0.5 that the input
x originates from the dataset and 0.5 that it was generated
by G, the discriminator D is trained to distinguish between
“real” and “fake” inputs, respectively. On the other hand,
G is trained to “fool” D by generating synthetic samples
indistinguishable from the real ones.
Formally, the two competing models play the following
two-player minimax–alternatively zero-sum–game:

min max E [log D(x)]+ E [log(1−D(G(z)))]. (1)
G

9407

D

x∼pd

z∼pz

