Feature Mapping for Learning Fast and Accurate 3D Pose Inference
from Synthetic Images
Mahdi Rad1
1
2

Markus Oberweger1

Vincent Lepetit2, 1

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria

Laboratoire Bordelais de Recherche en Informatique, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France
{rad, oberweger, lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We propose a simple and efficient method for exploiting
synthetic images when training a Deep Network to predict
a 3D pose from an image. The ability of using synthetic images for training a Deep Network is extremely valuable as
it is easy to create a virtually infinite training set made of
such images, while capturing and annotating real images
can be very cumbersome. However, synthetic images do
not resemble real images exactly, and using them for training can result in suboptimal performance. It was recently
shown that for exemplar-based approaches, it is possible to
learn a mapping from the exemplar representations of real
images to the exemplar representations of synthetic images.
In this paper, we show that this approach is more general,
and that a network can also be applied after the mapping to
infer a 3D pose: At run-time, given a real image of the target object, we first compute the features for the image, map
them to the feature space of synthetic images, and finally
use the resulting features as input to another network which
predicts the 3D pose. Since this network can be trained very
effectively by using synthetic images, it performs very well
in practice, and inference is faster and more accurate than
with an exemplar-based approach. We demonstrate our approach on the LINEMOD dataset for 3D object pose estimation from color images, and the NYU dataset for 3D hand
pose estimation from depth maps. We show that it allows us
to outperform the state-of-the-art on both datasets.

1. Introduction
The power of Deep Learning for inference from images
has been clearly demonstrated over the past years, however,
for many Computer Vision problems, inference is effective
only if a large amount of training data is available. Typically this data is created and labelled manually, which is
a task expensive in terms of both money and time. Compared to 2D problems where the labels can be directly de-

Figure 1: We propose a method for exploiting real and
synthetic images to predict a 3D pose from a real image.
This method allows us to outperform the state-of-the-art
on standard benchmarks. Top: The LINEMOD dataset for
3D object pose estimation from color images, and Bottom:
The NYU dataset for 3D hand pose estimation from depth
maps. Left: Estimated 3D pose using BB8 [37] and DeepPrior++ [33] for object and hand, respectively. Right: Estimated pose using the method proposed in this paper. Green
corresponds to ground truth, blue to our predictions. We
obtain the best performances reported so far on these two
datasets. (Best viewed in color)

fined in the training images, the problem is even exacerbated for 3D problems where the training images have to be
labelled with 3D data. This 3D data cannot be guessed easily by the human annotator, and needs to be estimated with
an ad hoc method, for example by using markers [19] or a
semi-automatic approach [45].
Many works therefore aimed at using synthetic images
created with computer graphics methods [1, 17, 25, 26, 42].
14663

