Learning to Evaluate Image Captioning
Yin Cui1,2 Guandao Yang1 Andreas Veit1,2 Xun Huang1,2 Serge Belongie1,2
1
2
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
Cornell Tech

Abstract
Evaluation metrics for image captioning face two challenges. Firstly, commonly used metrics such as CIDEr, METEOR, ROUGE and BLEU often do not correlate well with
human judgments. Secondly, each metric has well known
blind spots to pathological caption constructions, and rulebased metrics lack provisions to repair such blind spots
once identified. For example, the newly proposed SPICE
correlates well with human judgments, but fails to capture
the syntactic structure of a sentence. To address these two
challenges, we propose a novel learning based discriminative evaluation metric that is directly trained to distinguish
between human and machine-generated captions. In addition, we further propose a data augmentation scheme to explicitly incorporate pathological transformations as negative examples during training. The proposed metric is evaluated with three kinds of robustness tests and its correlation
with human judgments. Extensive experiments show that
the proposed data augmentation scheme not only makes our
metric more robust toward several pathological transformations, but also improves its correlation with human judgments. Our metric outperforms other metrics on both caption level human correlation in Flickr 8k and system level
human correlation in COCO. The proposed approach could
be served as a learning based evaluation metric that is complementary to existing rule-based metrics.

1. Introduction
Learning to automatically generate captions to summarize the content of an image is considered as a crucial task in
Computer Vision. The evaluation of image captioning models is generally performed using metrics such as BLEU [27],
METEOR [20], ROUGE [23] or CIDEr [31], all of which
mainly measure the word overlap between generated and
reference captions. The recently proposed SPICE [3] measures the similarity of scene graphs constructed from the
candidate and reference sentence, and shows better correlation with human judgments.
These commonly used evaluation metrics face two challenges. Firstly, many metrics fail to correlate well with hu-

Labeled training examples
a yellow bird sitting on a skateboard on a blue blanket

a close up of a person holding a banana

Learned critique

CNN

LSTM

Image representation

Caption representation

Caption Evaluation

Binary classification

Caption

Score

a cat is watching a television on a television

0.1

a cat is sitting on top of a television

0.15

a cat watching birds flying on a sony tv screen

0.95

a cat that is looking at a television

0.5

Figure 1. An overview of our proposed captioning evaluation metric. From a set of images and corresponding human written and
machine generated captions, we train a model to discriminate between human and generated captions. The model comprises three
major components: a CNN to compute image representations, an
RNN with LSTM cells to encode the caption, and a binary classifier as the critique. After training, the learned critique can be used
as a metric to evaluate the quality of candidate captions with respect to the context (i.e., the image and reference human captions).

man judgments. Metrics based on measuring word overlap
between candidate and reference captions find it difficult
to capture semantic meaning of a sentence, therefore often
lead to bad correlation with human judgments. Secondly,
each evaluation metric has its well-known blind spot, and
rule-based metrics are often inflexible to be responsive to
new pathological cases. For example, SPICE is sensitive to
the semantic meaning of a caption but tends to ignore its
syntactic quality. Liu et al. [25] shows that SPICE prefers
to give high score to long sentences with repeating clauses.
It’s not easy to let SPICE take such pathological cases into
account. Since it’s difficult to completely avoid such blind
spots, a good evaluation metric for image captioning should
15804

