Photometric Stereo in Participating Media Considering Shape-Dependent
Forward Scatter
Yuki Fujimura1
Masaaki Iiyama1
1
Kyoto University, Japan

Atsushi Hashimoto1,2
Michihiko Minoh1
2
OMRON SINIC X Corp., Japan

{fujimura, iiyama, a hasimoto, minoh}@mm.media.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Images captured in participating media such as murky
water, fog, or smoke are degraded by scattered light. Thus,
the use of traditional three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction
techniques in such environments is difficult. In this paper,
we propose a photometric stereo method for participating
media. The proposed method differs from previous studies
with respect to modeling shape-dependent forward scatter.
In the proposed model, forward scatter is described as an
analytical form using lookup tables and is represented by
spatially-variant kernels. We also propose an approximation of a large-scale dense matrix as a sparse matrix, which
enables the removal of forward scatter. Experiments with
real and synthesized data demonstrate that the proposed
method improves 3D reconstruction in participating media.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) shape reconstruction from twodimensional (2D) images is an important task in computer
vision. Numerous 3D reconstruction such as structure from
motion, shape-from-X, and multi-view stereo have been
proposed. However, reconstructing the shape of an object in
a participating medium, e.g., murky water, fog, and smoke,
remains a challenging task. In participating media, light is
attenuated and scattered by suspended particles, which degrades the quality of the captured images (Figure 1). 3D reconstruction techniques designed for clear air environments
will not work in participating media.
Several methods to reconstruct a 3D shape in participating media using photometric stereo techniques have been
proposed [11, 22, 9]. Photometric stereo methods reconstruct surface normals from images captured under different lighting conditions [24]. Note that backscatter and forward scatter occur in participating media, as shown in Figure 2; thus, the irradiance observed at a camera includes
a direct component reflected on the surface, as well as a

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Images captured in (a) pure water and (b) diluted
milk. In participating media, the quality of the captured
image is degraded by light scattering and attenuation.
backscatter and forward scatter components. Narasimhan et
al. [11] modeled single backscattering under a directional
light source in participating media and estimated surface
normals using a nonlinear optimization technique. Tsiotsios
et al. [22] assumed that backscatter saturates close to the
camera when illumination follows the inverse square law,
and subtracted the backscatter from the captured image.
These methods do not consider forward scatter. Forward
scatter depends on the object’s shape locally and globally,
and in highly turbid media such as port water, 3D reconstruction accuracy is affected by forward scatter. Although
Murez et al. [9] proposed a photometric stereo technique
that considers forward scatter, they assumed that the scene
is approximated as a plane, which enables prior calibration.
Therefore, this assumption deteriorates the estimation of
normals because forward scatter is intrinsically dependent
on the object’s shape.
We propose a forward scatter model and implement the
model into a photometric stereo framework. Differing from
previous studies [15, 9], we compute forward scatter, which
depends on the object’s shape. To overcome the mutual de-

7445

