Recovering Realistic Texture in Image Super-resolution by
Deep Spatial Feature Transform
Xintao Wang 1
1

Ke Yu1

Chao Dong2

Chen Change Loy1

CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 SenseTime Research
{wx016, yk017, ccloy}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

dongchao@sensetime.com

Abstract
Despite that convolutional neural networks (CNN)
have recently demonstrated high-quality reconstruction for
single-image super-resolution (SR), recovering natural and
realistic texture remains a challenging problem. In this paper, we show that it is possible to recover textures faithful to semantic classes. In particular, we only need to
modulate features of a few intermediate layers in a single
network conditioned on semantic segmentation probability
maps. This is made possible through a novel Spatial Feature
Transform (SFT) layer that generates affine transformation
parameters for spatial-wise feature modulation. SFT layers
can be trained end-to-end together with the SR network using the same loss function. During testing, it accepts an input image of arbitrary size and generates a high-resolution
image with just a single forward pass conditioned on the
categorical priors. Our final results show that an SR network equipped with SFT can generate more realistic and
visually pleasing textures in comparison to state-of-the-art
SRGAN [27] and EnhanceNet [38].

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution aims at recovering a highresolution (HR) image from a single low-resolution (LR)
one. The problem is ill-posed since a multiplicity of solutions exist for any given low-resolution pixel. To overcome
this problem, contemporary methods such as those based on
deep convolutional neural networks [7, 8, 9, 22, 26, 27, 23,
43, 44] constrain the solution space through learning mapping functions from external low- and high-resolution exemplar pairs. To push the solution closer to the natural manifold, new losses are proposed to replace the conventional
pixel-wise mean squared error (MSE) loss [7] that tends to
encourage blurry and overly-smoothed results. Specifically,
perceptual loss [21, 3] is introduced to optimize a superresolution model in a feature space instead of pixel space.
Ledig et al. [27] and Sajjadi et al. [38] further propose adversarial loss to encourage the network to favor solutions

building x4

Without prior

With plant
prior

plant x4

With building
prior

Without prior

With building
prior

With plant
prior

Figure 1. The extracted building and plant patches from two lowresolution images look very similar. Using adversarial loss and
perceptual loss without prior could add details that are not faithful
to the underlying class. More realistic results can be obtained with
the correct categorical prior. (Zoom in for best view).

that look more like natural images. With these loss functions the overall visual quality of reconstruction is significantly improved.
Though great strides have been made, texture recovery
in SR remains an open problem. Examples are shown in
Fig. 1. A variety of different HR patches could have very
similar LR counterparts, as shown by the building and plant
examples. Generating realistic textures faithful to the inherent class is non-trivial. The results obtained by using perceptual and adversarial losses (without prior) do add fine
details to the reconstructed HR image. But if we examine closely, these details are not reminiscent of the textures
one would usually observe. Without stronger prior information, existing methods struggle in distinguishing these LR
patches and restoring natural and realistic textures thereon.
We believe that the categorical prior, which characterizes
the semantic class of a region in an image (e.g., sky, building, plant), is crucial for constraining the plausible solution
space in SR. We demonstrate the effectiveness of categorical prior using the same example in Fig. 1. Specifically,
we try to restore the visually ambiguous plant and building pairs using two different CNN models, each of which is
specially trained on a plant dataset and a building dataset.
It is observed that generating realistic textures faithful to

606

