Structured Uncertainty Prediction Networks
Garoe Dorta 1,2 Sara Vicente 2 Lourdes Agapito 3 Neill D. F. Campbell 1 Ivor Simpson 2
1
2
3
University of Bath
Anthropics Technology Ltd.
University College London
1

{g.dorta.perez,n.campbell}@bath.ac.uk 2 {sara,ivor}@anthropics.com 3 l.agapito@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Diagonal
Gaussian

Our structured
Gaussian

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Abstract
This paper is the first work to propose a network to predict a structured uncertainty distribution for a synthesized
image. Previous approaches have been mostly limited to
predicting diagonal covariance matrices [15]. Our novel
model learns to predict a full Gaussian covariance matrix
for each reconstruction, which permits efficient sampling
and likelihood evaluation.
We demonstrate that our model can accurately reconstruct ground truth correlated residual distributions for synthetic datasets and generate plausible high frequency samples for real face images. We also illustrate the use of these
predicted covariances for structure preserving image denoising.

1. Introduction
Deep probabilistic generative models have recently become the most popular tool to synthesize novel data and reconstruct unseen examples from target image distributions.
At their heart lies a density estimation problem, which for
reconstruction models is commonly solved using a factorized Gaussian likelihood. While attractive for its simplicity,
this factorized Gaussian assumption comes at the cost of
overly-smoothed predictions, as shown in Fig. 1d. In contrast, this paper introduces the first attempt to train a deep
neural network to predict full structured covariance matrices to model the residual distributions of unseen image reconstructions. We postulate that the residuals are highly
structured and reflect limitations in model capacity – we
therefore propose to estimate the reconstruction uncertainty
using a structured Gaussian model, to capture pixel-wise
correlations which will in turn improve the sampled reconstructions, as shown in Fig. 1c and 1f.
Learning in generative models involves some form of
density estimation, where the model parameters are fitted to
generate samples from the target image distribution. This
paper concentrates on methods, such as the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [15, 23], where an explicit representation
of the data density is given by the model, however the re-

Figure 1: Given an input image (a), a simple diagonal Gaussian likelihood model learns a smooth reconstruction (d),
with an unstructured residual sample (b). When (b) is added
to (d) it generates the unrealistic image (e), demonstrating
a failure to capture residual structure. In contrast, we learn
a structured residual model, with residual samples like (c)
that, when added to (d), generate a plausible and realistic
image (f).
sults could in principle be extended to implicit approaches
in future work. In VAE models, a mapping is learned from
a latent representation to image space. These models commonly impose some conditions on the latent space, in the
form of a prior, and the nature of the residual distribution.
It is common practice to use a Gaussian likelihood, as
this provides a simple formulation for maximum likelihood
estimation. However, it is well known that samples from
factorized Gaussian distributions tend to be overly-smooth.
This effect is pronounced in common simplifications of the
likelihood, such as the mean squared error, which assumes
the errors at all pixels are i.i.d (independent and identically
distributed) or a diagonal covariance [15, 4], which allows
some local estimation of noise level but maintains the strong
and flawed assumption that pixels in the residual are uncor15477

