Deep Cost-Sensitive and Order-Preserving Feature Learning for
Cross-Population Age Estimation

1

Kai Li1,2∗, Junliang Xing1,2∗, Chi Su3 , Weiming Hu1,2,4 , Yundong Zhang5 , Stephen Maybank6
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 KingSoft Ltd.
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
5
Vimicro AI Chip Technology Corporation 6 Birkbeck University of London

{kai.li,jlxing,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn suchi@kingsoft.com raymond@vimicro.com sjmaybank@dcs.bbk.ac.uk

Large sized
source population
training data

Abstract
Facial age estimation from a face image is an important
yet very challenging task in computer vision, since humans
with different races and/or genders, exhibit quite different
patterns in their facial aging processes. To deal with the
influence of race and gender, previous methods perform age
estimation within each population separately. In practice,
however, it is often very difficult to collect and label sufficient data for each population. Therefore, it would be
helpful to exploit an existing large labeled dataset of one
(source) population to improve the age estimation performance on another (target) population with only a small labeled dataset available. In this work, we propose a Deep
Cross-Population (DCP) age estimation model to achieve
this goal. In particular, our DCP model develops a twostage training strategy. First, a novel cost-sensitive multitask loss function is designed to learn transferable aging
features by training on the source population. Second, a
novel order-preserving pair-wise loss function is designed
to align the aging features of the two populations. By doing
so, our DCP model can transfer the knowledge encoded in
the source population to the target population. Extensive
experiments on the two of the largest benchmark datasets
show that our DCP model outperforms several strong baseline methods and many state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Facial age estimation, i.e., automatically predicting the
age from a face image, is a very important yet difficult
problem in computer vision. It has many applications
such as human-computer interaction [8], age-based face retrieval [22], intelligent surveillance [34], and precision ad∗ These authors are the corresponding authors and contribute equally to
this study.

Small sized
target population
training data

Target population
testing data

Figure 1. The cross-population age estimation problem. The
source and target populations may differ in race and/or gender,
and they may have very different aging patterns.

vertising [30], etc. Despite decades of studies [20, 21, 7, 37,
9, 12, 10, 26, 2, 23, 15, 28, 1, 24, 36, 3], it still remains a
very challenging problem due to many varied factors from
face pose, expression, race, gender, image illumination, and
noise, to name a few [5].
Roughly speaking, the factors that make age estimation
difficult can be divided into two groups. The first group
of factors comes from the extrinsic appearance variations
of the face images, e.g., face pose, expression, and image
illumination [14]. The other group is determined by intrinsic human genes associated with race and gender [12]. A
large portion of previous work focusses on the first group
of factors, while the other group of intrinsic factors receives
relatively little attention.
Since different populations, e.g., African and Caucasian,
females and males, exhibit quite different aging patterns, it
is very challenging to design an age estimator which can
generalize to faces from different populations. Some previous works suggest performing age estimation within each
population separately [11, 10, 14]. However, training a separate model for each population also has its own limitations
since it is difficult and expensive to collect and label sufficient training data for each population. Based on the above
considerations, instead of resorting to labeling more data, it
is better to exploit the existing large sized training data of
one (source) population to improve the age estimation per1399

