Consensus Maximization for Semantic Region Correspondences
Pablo Speciale1 , Danda P. Paudel2 , Martin R. Oswald1 ,
Hayko Riemenschneider2 , Luc V. Gool2,4 , and Marc Pollefeys1,3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich.
3
Microsoft, Redmond, USA
{pablo, moswald, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Day / Night
Registration

Computer Vision Laboratory, D-ITET, ETH Zürich
4
VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium
{paudel, hayko, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Outdoor / Indoor
Registration

Scan / CAD
Registration

Figure 1: Example registration results. Our approach solves challenging registration problems by maximizing the number of corresponding semantic regions – such as windows, doors or balconies – for datasets from different modalities, with large amounts of noise and
outliers, little data overlap, or significantly different data statistics.

Abstract
We propose a novel method for the geometric registration of semantically labeled regions. We approximate semantic regions by ellipsoids, and leverage their convexity to
formulate the correspondence search effectively as a constrained optimization problem that maximizes the number
of matched regions, and which we solve globally optimal
in a Branch-and-Bound fashion. To this end, we derive
suitable linear matrix inequality constraints which describe
ellipsoid-to-ellipsoid assignment conditions. Our approach
is robust to large percentages of outliers and thus applicable to difficult correspondence search problems. In multiple
experiments we demonstrate the flexibility and robustness of
our approach on a number of challenging vision problems.

1. Introduction
Correspondence search is a fundamental subproblem of
many computer vision tasks including pixel matching in 3D
reconstruction as well as feature matching in shape matching, localization, retrieval or registration tasks. With the
wide availability of reliable semantic classification algorithms for images or 3D data, our goal is to leverage semantic information to resolve ambiguities and improve the
efficiency of correspondence search.
We target challenging correspondence problems with
Acknowledgements. This work has received funding from the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme project
Built2Spec, and the European Research Council project VarCity, under
grant agreements No. 637221 and 273940, respectively.

small data overlap, large amounts of noise and outliers, or
the registration of datasets with significantly different data
statistics. Figure 1 shows examples of such difficult registration problems. For instance, the registration of two 3D
models captured at day and night light conditions is extremely challenging with only classical local features such
as structure-from-motion (SfM) feature points [2, 46]. Another example is the registration of a building scan with
a corresponding computer-aided design (CAD) model in
which the data statistics of the two input meshes differ substantially. Nevertheless, higher semantic features such as
windows, doors or balconies are nowadays easy to detect
and more descriptive and robust than classical SfM features.
In this paper, we aim to unify such correspondence problems and consider the geometric registration of multiple
compact regions with semantic labels that can be linked via
an affine or projective transformation. We seek to estimate
a transformation which maximizes the number of matching regions with the same semantic label. To account for a
considerable amount of data variations, we approximate the
semantically labeled regions with ellipsoids whose properties are also beneficial for an effective global optimization
strategy. We derive necessary conditions for ellipsoid-toellipsoid inclusion test that can be embedded as constraints
into consensus maximization problem.
Contributions. We propose a global optimization framework for semantic region assignments. To account for noise
and outliers we approximate the semantic regions by ellipsoids and derive suitable linear matrix inequality (LMI)
constraints that allow for ellipsoid-to-ellipsoid correspondence testing within a consensus maximization framework.

7317

