Dynamic-structured Semantic Propagation Network
Xiaodan Liang
Carnegie Mellon University

Hongfei Zhou
Wumii Tech. Limited

Eric Xing
Petuum Inc

xiaodan1@cs.cmu.edu

hfzhou@wumii.com

eric.xing@petuum.com

Abstract
Semantic concept hierarchy is still under-explored for semantic segmentation due to the inefficiency and complicated
optimization of incorporating structural inference into dense
prediction. This lack of modeling semantic correlations also
makes prior works must tune highly-specified models for
each task due to the label discrepancy across datasets. It
severely limits the generalization capability of segmentation
models for open set concept vocabulary and annotation utilization. In this paper, we propose a Dynamic-Structured
Semantic Propagation Network (DSSPN) that builds a semantic neuron graph by explicitly incorporating the semantic
concept hierarchy into network construction. Each neuron
represents the instantiated module for recognizing a specific
type of entity such as a super-class (e.g. food) or a specific
concept (e.g. pizza). During training, DSSPN performs the
dynamic-structured neuron computation graph by only activating a sub-graph of neurons for each image in a principled
way. A dense semantic-enhanced neural block is proposed
to propagate the learned knowledge of all ancestor neurons
into each fine-grained child neuron for feature evolving. Another merit of such semantic explainable structure is the
ability of learning a unified model concurrently on diverse
datasets by selectively activating different neuron sub-graphs
for each annotation at each step. Extensive experiments on
four public semantic segmentation datasets (i.e. ADE20K,
COCO-Stuff, Cityscape and Mapillary) demonstrate the superiority of our DSSPN over state-of-the-art segmentation
models. Moreoever, we demonstrate a universal segmentation model that is jointly trained on diverse datasets can
surpass the performance of the common fine-tuning scheme
for exploiting multiple domain knowledge.

1. Introduction
Recognizing and segmenting arbitrary objects, posed
as a primary research direction in computer vision, has
achieved great success driven by the advance of convolutional neural networks (CNN). However, current segmentation models using generic deeper and wider network lay-

ers [24, 5, 40, 37, 22] still show unsatisfactory results of
recognizing objects in a large concept vocabulary with limited segmentation annotations. The reason is that they ignore
the intrinsic taxonomy and semantic hierarchy of all concepts. For example, giraffe, zebra and horse categories share
one super-class ungulate that depicts their common visual
characteristics, which makes them be easily distinguished
from cat/dog. In addition, due to diverse level of expertise
and application purposes, the target concept set of semantic segmentation can be inherently open-ended and highly
structured for each specific task/dataset. However, some few
techniques also explored the semantic hierarchy for visual
recognition by resorting to complex graphical inference [7],
hierarchical loss [31] or word embedding priors [39] on final
prediction scores. Their loss constraints can only indirectly
guide visual features to be hierarchy-aware, which is hard to
be guaranteed and often leads to inferior results compared to
generic CNN models.
Furthermore, this lack of modeling semantic hierarchy
also prohibits the research towards a universal segmentation
model that can address the segmentation of all concepts at
once. Existing works [24, 5, 40, 37] often strive to train
a task-specific model due to the label discrepancy across
dataset with limited annotations. That way largely limits
the model generation capability and deviates from human
perception that can recognize and associate all concepts by
considering the concept hierarchy. If one wants to improve
one task by fully utilizing other annotations with different
label set, prior works must remove the classification layer
and only share intermediate representations. Our target of
learning a universal segmentation model also has some connections to very recent researches in combining different
visual tasks [18, 36] or multi-modal tasks [17] in one model,
which often use several fixed network branches with specialized losses to integrate all tasks.
In this work, we aim at explicitly integrating a semantic
concept hierarchy into the dynamic network optimization,
called as Dynamic-Structured Semantic Propagation Network (DSSPN). In the spirit of curriculum learning [2] that
gradually increases the target difficulty levels and exploits
previously learned knowledge for learning new fine-grained
1752

