Gated Fusion Network for Single Image Dehazing
Wenqi Ren1∗, Lin Ma2 , Jiawei Zhang3 , Jinshan Pan4 , Xiaochun Cao1,5†, Wei Liu2 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang6
1
State Key Laboratory of Information Security (SKLOIS), IIE, CAS
2
Tencent AI Lab 3 City University of Hong Kong 4 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
5
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Merced
https://sites.google.com/site/renwenqi888/research/dehazing/gfn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an efficient algorithm to directly restore a clear image from a hazy input. The proposed algorithm hinges on an end-to-end trainable neural
network that consists of an encoder and a decoder. The
encoder is exploited to capture the context of the derived
input images, while the decoder is employed to estimate the
contribution of each input to the final dehazed result using the learned representations attributed to the encoder.
The constructed network adopts a novel fusion-based strategy which derives three inputs from an original hazy image by applying White Balance (WB), Contrast Enhancing
(CE), and Gamma Correction (GC). We compute pixel-wise
confidence maps based on the appearance differences between these different inputs to blend the information of the
derived inputs and preserve the regions with pleasant visibility. The final dehazed image is yielded by gating the
important features of the derived inputs. To train the network, we introduce a multi-scale approach such that the
halo artifacts can be avoided. Extensive experimental results on both synthetic and real-world images demonstrate
that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against the
state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
The single image dehazing problem [9, 45] aims to estimate the unknown clean image given a hazy or foggy image. This is a classical image processing problem, which
has received active research efforts in the vision communities since various high-level scene understanding tasks
[19, 29, 32, 40] require the image dehazing to recover the
clear scene. Early approaches focus on developing handcrafted features based on the statistics of clear images, such
∗ Part of this work was done while Wenqi Ren was with Tencent AI Lab
as a Visiting Scholar.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Hazy input

(b) WB of (a)

(c) CE of (a)

(d) GC of (a)

(e) Our result

(f) Weight of (b) (g) Weight of (c) (h) Weight of (d)

Figure 1. Image dehazing result. We exploit a gated fusion network for single image deblurring. (a) Hazy input. (b)-(d) are the
derived inputs. (f)-(h) are learned confidence maps for (b), (c) and
(d), respectively. (e) Our result.

as dark channel prior [9] and local max contrast [2, 33]. To
avoid hand-crafted priors, recent work [4, 14, 28, 41] automatically learns haze relevant features by convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). In the dehazing literature, the hazing process is usually modeled as,

I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A 1 − t(x) ,
(1)
where I(x) and J(x) are the observed hazy image and the
haze-free scene radiance, A is the global atmospheric light,
and t(x) is the scene transmission describing the portion of
light that is not scattered and reaches the camera sensors. In
practice, transmission and atmospheric light are unknown.
Thus, most dehazing methods try to estimate the transmission t(x) and the atmospheric light A, given a hazy image.
Estimating transmission from a hazy image is a severely
ill-posed problem. Some approaches try to use visual cues
to capture deterministic and statistical properties of hazy
images [3, 6, 8, 30]. However, these transmission approximations are inaccurate, especially in the cases of the
scenes where the colors of objects are inherently similar
to those of atmospheric lights. Note that such an erroneous transmission estimation directly affects the quality

3253

