Density Adaptive Point Set Registration
Felix Järemo Lawin, Martin Danelljan, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, Per-Erik Forssén, Michael Felsberg
Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, Sweden
{felix.jaremo-lawin, martin.danelljan, fahad.khan, per-erik.forssen, michael.felsberg}@liu.se

Abstract
Probabilistic methods for point set registration have
demonstrated competitive results in recent years. These
techniques estimate a probability distribution model of the
point clouds. While such a representation has shown
promise, it is highly sensitive to variations in the density of 3D points. This fundamental problem is primarily caused by changes in the sensor location across point
sets. We revisit the foundations of the probabilistic registration paradigm. Contrary to previous works, we model
the underlying structure of the scene as a latent probability distribution, and thereby induce invariance to point set
density changes. Both the probabilistic model of the scene
and the registration parameters are inferred by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence in an Expectation Maximization based framework. Our density-adaptive registration successfully handles severe density variations commonly encountered in terrestrial Lidar applications. We
perform extensive experiments on several challenging realworld Lidar datasets. The results demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art probabilistic methods
for multi-view registration, without the need of re-sampling.

1. Introduction
3D-point set registration is a fundamental problem in
computer vision, with applications in 3D mapping and
scene understanding. Generally, the point sets are acquired
using a 3D sensor, e.g. a Lidar or an RGBD camera. The
task is then to align point sets acquired at different positions, by estimating their relative transformations. Recently, probabilistic registration methods have shown competitive performance in different scenarios, including pairwise [19, 14, 15] and multi-view registration [10, 6].
In this work, we revisit the foundations of the probabilistic registration paradigm, leading to a reformulation of the
Expectation Maximization (EM) based approaches [10, 6].
In these approaches, a Maximum Likelihood (ML) formulation is used to simultaneously infer the transformation

Figure 1. Two example Lidar scans (top row), with significantly varying density of 3D-points. State-of-the-art probabilistic
method [6] (middle left) only aligns the regions with high density.
This is caused by the emphasis on dense regions, as visualized by
the Gaussian components in the model (black circles in bottom
left). Our method (right) successfully exploits essential information available in sparse regions, resulting in accurate registration.

parameters, and a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) of the
point distribution. Our formulation instead minimizes the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the mixture model
and a latent scene distribution.
Common acquisition sensors, including Lidar and
RGBD cameras, do not sample all surfaces in the scene
with a uniform density (figure 1, top row). The density of
3D-point observations is highly dependent on (1) the distance to the sensor, (2) the direction of the surface relative
to the sensor, and (3) inherent surface properties, such as
specularity. Despite recent advances, state-of-the art prob-

3829

