Learning Deep Sketch Abstraction
Umar Riaz Muhammad1 Yongxin Yang2 Yi-Zhe Song1
1
SketchX, Queen Mary University of London

Tao Xiang1 Timothy M. Hospedales1,2
2
The University of Edinburgh

{u.muhammad, yizhe.song, t.xiang}@qmul.ac.uk, {yongxin.yang, t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Human free-hand sketches have been studied in various
contexts including sketch recognition, synthesis and finegrained sketch-based image retrieval (FG-SBIR). A fundamental challenge for sketch analysis is to deal with drastically different human drawing styles, particularly in terms
of abstraction level. In this work, we propose the first
stroke-level sketch abstraction model based on the insight
of sketch abstraction as a process of trading off between the
recognizability of a sketch and the number of strokes used
to draw it. Concretely, we train a model for abstract sketch
generation through reinforcement learning of a stroke removal policy that learns to predict which strokes can be
safely removed without affecting recognizability. We show
that our abstraction model can be used for various sketch
analysis tasks including: (1) modeling stroke saliency and
understanding the decision of sketch recognition models,
(2) synthesizing sketches of variable abstraction for a given
category, or reference object instance in a photo, and (3)
training a FG-SBIR model with photos only, bypassing the
expensive photo-sketch pair collection step.

1. Introduction
Sketching is an intuitive process which has been used
throughout human history as a communication tool. Due
to the recent proliferation of touch-screen devices, sketch is
becoming more pervasive: sketches can now be drawn at
any time and anywhere on a smartphone using one’s finger.
Consequently sketch analysis has attracted increasing attention from the research community. Various sketch related
problems have been studied, including sketch recognition
[9, 47, 46], sketch based image retrieval [11, 18, 45, 40],
forensic sketch analysis [26, 33] and sketch synthesis [36,
15, 29].
These studies use free-hand sketches drawn by amateurs
based on either a category name, mental recollection, or a
reference photo of an object instance. A fundamental challenge in analyzing free-hand sketches is that sketches drawn
by different people for the same object category/instance

Figure 1: Sketch analysis is difficult because humans draw
sketches at very different abstraction levels. Top: different
shoe sketches drawn by different people given only the category name. Bottom: sketches are now drawn by different
people with a reference photo.
often differ significantly, especially in their levels of abstraction. Fig. 1 shows some examples of both categorylevel (drawn with only a category name) and instance-level
(drawn with a reference photo) sketches. Clearly the large
variation in abstraction levels is a challenge for either recognizing the sketch or matching it with a photo. Variation in
sketch abstraction level is expected: humans sketch to provide an abstract depiction of an object, and how abstract a
sketch is depends both on the task and the individual user’s
overall and instantaneous preference.
We present the first model of deep sketch abstraction.
Our approach to model abstraction is based on the insight
that abstraction is a process of tradeoff between recognizability and brevity/compactness (number of strokes). It is
thus intuitive that abstraction should vary with task (e.g.,
sketching for instance- rather than category-level tasks permits less abstraction as the recognition task is more finegrained), and that abstraction varies between people as their
subjective perception (what seems to be recognizable), as
might their relative preference for brevity vs identifiability. Based on the same insight, we develop a computational
model that learns to abstract concrete input sketches and estimate stroke saliency by finding the most compact subset of
input strokes for which the sketch is still recognizable. We
consider this similar to the human sketching process: before drawing an object a human has a more detailed mental
model of the object, then they work out which details can
be safely removed in conveying a compact yet recognizable
sketch depiction of the imagined object.

8014

