CRRN: Multi-Scale Guided Concurrent Reflection Removal Network
Renjie Wan†,§,∗

Boxin Shi⋆,∗

Ling-Yu Duan⋆

Ah-Hwee Tan¶

Alex C. Kot§

†

Interdisciplinary Graduate School, § School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
¶
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
⋆
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of EECS, Peking University, China
rjwan001@e.ntu.edu.sg, {shiboxin,lingyu}@pku.edu.cn, {asahtan,eackot}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Removing the undesired reflections from images taken
through the glass is of broad application to various computer vision tasks. Non-learning based methods utilize different handcrafted priors such as the separable sparse gradients caused by different levels of blurs, which often fail
due to their limited description capability to the properties of real-world reflections. In this paper, we propose the
Concurrent Reflection Removal Network (CRRN) to tackle
this problem in a unified framework. Our proposed network
integrates image appearance information and multi-scale
gradient information with human perception inspired loss
function, and is trained on a new dataset with 3250 reflection images taken under diverse real-world scenes. Extensive experiments on a public benchmark dataset show that
the proposed method performs favorably against state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
Reflections observed in front of the glass significantly
degrade the visibility of the scene behind the glass. By obstructing, deforming or blurring the background scene, reflections cause many computer vision systems likely to fail.
Reflection removal aims at enhancing the visibility of the
background scene while removing the reflections.
Most of the existing reflection removal methods are nonlearning based. They rely on the handcrafted image features

observed with special assumptions, e.g., the gradient priors
on the basis of the different blur levels between background
and reflection [28, 16, 14], the ghosting effects [21], the
content prior based on the non-local information [29], and
so on. However, these specific assumptions are often violated in real-world scenarios, since the low-level image priors they adopt only describe a limited range of the reflection
properties and project the partial observation as the whole
truth. When the structures and patterns of the background
are similar to those of the reflections, the non-learning based
methods have difficulty in simultaneously removing reflections and recovering the background [8].
To capture the reflection properties more comprehensively, recent methods have adopted the deep learning to
solve this problem [7, 3]. Existing deep learning based
methods [7, 3] show improved modeling ability that captures a variety of reflection image characteristics [22, 8].
However, they still adopt a two-stage framework for gradient inference and image inference as many non-learning
based methods [28, 14], which do not fully explore the
multi-scale information for background recovery. Moreover, they mainly rely on the pixel-wise loss ( L2 and L1
loss), that may generate blurry predictions [12, 24]. Last but
not least, existing methods are mainly trained with synthetic
images which can never capture the comprehensive information in real world image formation process completely.
To address these drawbacks, we propose the Concurrent
Reflection Removal Network (CRRN) to remove reflections
observed in the wild scenes, as illustrated in Figure 1. Our
major contributions are summarized as follows:
• In contrast to the conventional two-stage framework
that classifies the gradients, and then recovers the
background [28, 4, 14, 23], we combine the two separate stages (gradient inference and image inference) in
one unified mechanism to remove reflections concurrently.

∗ Corresponding authors. This research was carried out at the RapidRich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. The ROSE Lab is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore, and the Infocomm Media Development Authority, Singapore. This work is supported in part by the Recruitment Program
of Global Experts (Youth Program) in China (a.k.a. 1000 Youth Talents), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61661146005,
U1611461, 61390515), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No.2016YFB1001501), and the NTU-PKU Joint Research
Institute through the Ng Teng Fong Charitable Foundation.

• We propose a multi-scale guided learning network to
better preserve the background details, where the back-

4777

