A Twofold Siamese Network for Real-Time Object Tracking
Anfeng He∗† , Chong Luo‡ , Xinmei Tian† , and Wenjun Zeng‡
†

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-Spatial Information Processing and Application System,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
heanfeng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {cluo, wezeng}@microsoft.com, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Observing that Semantic features learned in an image
classification task and Appearance features learned in a
similarity matching task complement each other, we build
a twofold Siamese network, named SA-Siam, for real-time
object tracking. SA-Siam is composed of a semantic branch
and an appearance branch. Each branch is a similaritylearning Siamese network. An important design choice in
SA-Siam is to separately train the two branches to keep
the heterogeneity of the two types of features. In addition, we propose a channel attention mechanism for the
semantic branch. Channel-wise weights are computed according to the channel activations around the target position. While the inherited architecture from SiamFC [3] allows our tracker to operate beyond real-time, the twofold
design and the attention mechanism significantly improve
the tracking performance. The proposed SA-Siam outperforms all other real-time trackers by a large margin on
OTB-2013/50/100 benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is one of the most fundamental
and challenging tasks in computer vision. Given the bounding box of an unknown target in the first frame, the objective is to localize the target in all the following frames in a
video sequence. While visual object tracking finds numerous applications in surveillance, autonomous systems, and
augmented reality, it is a very challenging task. For one
reason, with only a bounding box in the first frame, it is
difficult to differentiate the unknown target from the cluttered background when the target itself moves, deforms, or
has an appearance change due to various reasons. For another, most applications demand real-time tracking. It is
∗ This work is carried out while Anfeng He is an intern in MSRA.

Ground Truth

SiamFC

ours

Figure 1. Comparing the tracking results of SiamFC and our
tracker. Thanks to the semantic features, our tracker successfully
follows the target object in case of shooting angle change or scale
change, when SiamFC fails.

even harder to design a real-time high-performance tracker.
The key to design a high-performance tracker is to find
expressive features and corresponding classifiers that are simultaneously discriminative and generalized. Being discriminative allows the tracker to differentiate the true target from the cluttered or even deceptive background. Being
generalized means that a tracker would tolerate the appearance changes of the tracked object, even when the object
is not known a priori. Conventionally, both the discrimination and the generalization power need to be strengthened
through online training process, which collects target information while tracking. However, online updating is time
consuming, especially when a large number of parameters
are involved. It is therefore very crucial to balance the tracking performance and the run-time speed.
In recent years, deep convolutional neural networks

4834

