Revisiting Oxford and Paris: Large-Scale Image Retrieval Benchmarking
Filip Radenović1

Ahmet Iscen1

Giorgos Tolias1

1 VRG, FEE, CTU in Prague

Abstract
In this paper we address issues with image retrieval
benchmarking on standard and popular Oxford 5k and
Paris 6k datasets. In particular, annotation errors, the size
of the dataset, and the level of challenge are addressed: new
annotation for both datasets is created with an extra attention to the reliability of the ground truth. Three new protocols of varying difficulty are introduced. The protocols
allow fair comparison between different methods, including those using a dataset pre-processing stage. For each
dataset, 15 new challenging queries are introduced. Finally,
a new set of 1M hard, semi-automatically cleaned distractors is selected.
An extensive1 comparison of the state-of-the-art methods is performed on the new benchmark. Different types of
methods are evaluated, ranging from local-feature-based to
modern CNN based methods. The best results are achieved
by taking the best of the two worlds. Most importantly, image retrieval appears far from being solved.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval methods have gone through significant development in the last decade, starting with descriptors based on local-features, first organized in bagof-words [41], and further expanded by spatial verification [33], hamming embedding [16], and query expansion [7]. Compact representations reducing the memory
footprint and speeding up queries started with aggregating
local descriptors [18]. Nowadays, the most efficient retrieval methods are based on fine-tuned convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [10, 37, 30].
In order to measure the progress and compare different
methods, standardized image retrieval benchmarks are used.
Besides the fact that a benchmark should simulate a realworld application, there are a number of properties that determine the quality of a benchmark: the reliability of the
annotation, the size, and the challenge level.
The authors were supported by the MSMT LL1303 ERC-CZ grant.
1 We thank Facebook for the donation of GPU servers, which made the

evaluation tractable.

Yannis Avrithis2

Ondřej Chum1

2 Inria Rennes

Errors in the annotation may systematically corrupt the
comparison of different methods. Too small datasets are
prone to over-fitting and do not allow the evaluation of the
efficiency of the methods. The reliability of the annotation
and size of the dataset are competing factors, as it is difficult to secure accurate human annotation of large datasets.
The size is commonly increased by adding a distractor set,
which contains irrelevant images that are selected in an automated manner (different tags, GPS information, etc.) Finally, benchmarks where all the methods achieve almost
perfect results [23] cannot be used for further improvement
or qualitative comparison.
Many datasets have been introduced to measure the performance of image retrieval. Oxford [33] and Paris [34]
datasets belong to the most popular ones. Numerous methods of image retrieval [7, 31, 5, 27, 47, 3, 48, 20, 37, 10] and
visual localization [9, 1] have used these datasets for evaluation. One reason for their popularity is that, in contrast to
datasets that contain small groups of 4-5 similar images like
Holidays [16] and UKBench [29], Oxford and Paris contain
queries with up to hundreds of positive images.
Despite the popularity, there are known issues with the
two datasets, which are related to all three important properties of evaluation benchmarks. First, there are errors in
the annotation, including both false positives and false negatives. Further inaccuracy is introduced by queries of different sides of a landmark, sharing the annotation despite being visually distinguishable. Second, the annotated datasets
are relatively small (5,062 and 6,392 images respectively).
Third, current methods report near-perfect results on both
the datasets. It has become difficult to draw conclusions
from quantitative evaluations, especially given the annotation errors [14].
The lack of difficulty is not caused by the fact that nontrivial instances are not present in the dataset, but due to the
annotation. The annotation was introduced about ten years
ago. At that time, the annotators had different perception of
what the limits of image retrieval are. Many instances that
are nowadays considered as a change of viewpoint expected
to be retrieved, are de facto excluded from the evaluation by
being labelled as Junk.

5706

