Learning to Extract a Video Sequence from a Single Motion-Blurred Image
Meiguang Jin Givi Meishvili Paolo Favaro
University of Bern, Switzerland
{jin, meishvili, favaro}@inf.unibe.ch

Figure 1. Multiple frames extracted from a single motion blurred image. On the left column we show the input image and two enlarged
details with different motion blur. On the columns to the right we show the estimated 7 frames and corresponding enlargements.

Abstract
We present a method to extract a video sequence from
a single motion-blurred image. Motion-blurred images are
the result of an averaging process, where instant frames are
accumulated over time during the exposure of the sensor.
Unfortunately, reversing this process is nontrivial. Firstly,
averaging destroys the temporal ordering of the frames.
Secondly, the recovery of a single frame is a blind deconvolution task, which is highly ill-posed. We present a deep
learning scheme that gradually reconstructs a temporal ordering by sequentially extracting pairs of frames. Our main
contribution is to introduce loss functions invariant to the
temporal order. This lets a neural network choose during
training what frame to output among the possible combinations. We also address the ill-posedness of deblurring by
designing a network with a large receptive field and implemented via resampling to achieve a higher computational
efficiency. Our proposed method can successfully retrieve
sharp image sequences from a single motion blurred image
and can generalize well on synthetic and real datasets captured with different cameras.

1. Introduction
It is often said that photos capture a memory, an instant in
time. Technically, however, this is not strictly true. Photos
require a finite exposure to accumulate light from the scene.
Thus, objects moving during the exposure generate motion

blur in a photo. Motion blur is an image degradation that
makes visual content less interpretable and is therefore often seen as a nuisance. However, motion blur also combines
information about both texture and motion of the objects in
a single blurry image. Hence, recovering texture and motion from motion blurred images can be used to understand
the dynamics of a scene (e.g., in entertainment with sports
or in surveillance when monitoring the traffic). The task of
recovering a blur kernel and a sharp image, whose convolution gives rise to a given blurry image, is called motion deblurring or blind deconvolution. Unfortunately, this formulation of the task is accurate only for some special cases of
motion blur. In particular, it holds in the cases when blur is
the same across an image (the so-called shift invariant blur
[19]) or when blur can be modeled as a linear combination
of a basis of shift fields (e.g., in the case of camera shake
[5]). However, in the case of multiple moving objects, also
called dynamic blur [21], a blurry image is no longer some
convolution of a blur pattern with a single sharp image. In
this case, a blurry image is the averaging over time of instant frames, where multiple objects move independently
and cause occlusions.
In this paper we introduce blind deconvolution with dynamic blur as the task of recovering a sequence of sharp
frames from a single blurry image. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
given a single motion-blurred image (left column) we aim
at recovering a sequence of 7 frames each depicting some
instantaneous motion of the objects in the scene. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first time this problem
has been posed and addressed. The two main challenges
16334

