Very Large-Scale Global SfM by Distributed Motion Averaging
Siyu Zhu∗1 , Runze Zhang ∗1 , Lei Zhou1 , Tianwei Shen1 , Tian Fang†2 , Ping Tan3 , and Long Quan1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Global Structure-from-Motion (SfM) techniques have
demonstrated superior efficiency and accuracy than the
conventional incremental approach in many recent studies. This work proposes a divide-and-conquer framework
to solve very large global SfM at the scale of millions of images. Specifically, we first divide all images into multiple
partitions that preserve strong data association for wellposed and parallel local motion averaging. Then, we solve
a global motion averaging that determines cameras at partition boundaries and a similarity transformation per partition to register all cameras in a single coordinate frame.
Finally, local and global motion averaging are iterated until convergence. Since local camera poses are fixed during
the global motion average, we can avoid caching the whole
reconstruction in memory at once. This distributed framework significantly enhances the efficiency and robustness of
large-scale motion averaging.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) has been intensively investigated in computer vision. Earlier methods are mostly
incremental, where images are reconstructed one by one [1,
34, 35, 37, 42, 50] . Recent studies [3, 5, 6, 7, 17, 18, 20, 27,
33] suggest that a global approach, reconstructing all images together, leads to better accuracy and efficiency. However, global SfM has so far only been demonstrated with
relatively small-scale data-sets at the order of a few thousand images [9, 11, 21, 33, 49]. This work is the first to
push global SfM to the scale of millions of input images,
larger than all previous works.
The key to the global SfM methods is motion averaging. The time and spatial complexity of state-of-the-art
motion averaging methods [3, 5, 6, 7, 17, 18, 20, 27, 33]
following the gradient and Hessian-based optimization approach is cubic and square respectively in the number of input images [2]. Therefore, global motion averaging quickly
reaches the memory and efficiency bottleneck as the number of input images drastically increases.
∗ Siyu Zhu and Runze Zhang equally contribute to the work as the first
authors. Siyu Zhu is with Alibaba A.I. Labs since 2017.
† Tian Fang is with Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology since 2017.

2

Altizure.com

3

Simon Fraser University

To conquer the problems above, we propose a distributed
and robust motion averaging method which is inspired by
the nested dissection algorithm [25]. We formulate the
large-scale motion averaging problem on a camera graph,
where each camera is a vertex and cameras with relative
motion constraints are linked by edges. By dividing the
original camera graph into multiple small-scale sub-graphs,
we group the variables of each sub-graph and order them
first in the Hessian matrix, while variables called separators [25] which connect multiple sub-graphs are ordered
second. Since sub-graphs excluding separators are independent with each other, we can first solve the Cholesky
factorization of each sub-graph excluding separators in a
distributed manner and then the factorization of separators.
To further reduce the communication overhead among subgraphs, we iterate each sub-graph till convergence before
solving the separators. In this paper, we call the optimization process of each sub-graph as local motion averaging and that of separators as global motion averaging.
We also introduce a similarity transformation to parameterize the camera poses of each sub-graph, so that the linearization stays the same in global motion averaging. Since
only the separators, namely the cameras connecting multiple sub-graphs, and the similarity transformations are considered in global motion averaging, the entire reconstruction is avoided to be cached in core memory at once.
Dividing the camera-graph into strongly associated subgraphs also improves the robustness of global SfM. Previous motion averaging methods often assume uniform accuracy of relative poses, which degrades reconstruction accuracy when there are both strong and weak associations
among cameras. Our framework clusters strong affiliated
cameras together and fixes their relative motions in the
global motion averaging, which can be applied to many previous motion averaging algorithms, like [11, 28, 33, 45,
48], to further improve their performance.
In experiments, we demonstrate our framework on sequential, Internet, and challenging city-scale data-sets. Remarkably, we are even able to average the camera poses
of a city-scale data-set with more than one million highresolution images in parallel. We further apply our framework to enhance the previous prestigious motion averaging
works [33, 45, 48] on both efficiency and robustness.
14568

