Rethinking the Faster R-CNN Architecture for Temporal Action Localization
Yu-Wei Chao1∗ , Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan2 , Bryan Seybold2 , David A. Ross2 , Jia Deng1 , Rahul Sukthankar2
1

2

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Google Research

{ywchao,jiadeng}@umich.edu

{svnaras,seybold,dross,sukthankar}@google.com

Abstract

a 2D image, temporal action localization aims to produce
temporal segments in a 1D sequence of frames. As a result,
many approaches to action localization have drawn inspiration from advances in object detection. A successful example is the use of region-based detectors [17, 16, 32]. These
methods first generate a collection of class-agnostic region
proposals from the full image, and go through each proposal
to classify its object class. To detect actions, one can follow
this paradigm by first generating segment proposals from
the full video, followed by classifying each proposal.
Among region-based detectors, Faster R-CNN [32] has
been widely adopted in object detection due to its competitive detection accuracy on public benchmarks [27, 12]. The
core idea is to leverage the immense capacity of deep neural
networks (DNNs) to power the two processes of proposal
generation and object classification. Given its success in
object detection in images, there is considerable interest in
employing Faster R-CNN for temporal action localization
in video. However, such a domain shift introduces several
challenges. We review the issues of Faster R-CNN in the
action localization domain, and redesign the architecture to
specifically address them. We focus on the following:
1. How to handle large variations in action durations?
The temporal extent of actions varies dramatically
compared to the size of objects in an image—from a
fraction of a second to minutes. However, Faster RCNN evaluates different scales of candidate proposals
(i.e., anchors) based on a shared feature representation,
which may not capture relevant information due to a
misalignment between the temporal scope of the feature (i.e. receptive field) and the span of the anchor.
We propose to enforce such alignment using a multitower network and dilated temporal convolutions.
2. How to utilize temporal context? The moments preceding and following an action instance contain critical information for localization and classification (arguably more so than the spatial context of an object).
A naive application of Faster R-CNN would fail to exploit this temporal context. We propose to explicitly
encode temporal context by extending the receptive
fields in proposal generation and action classification.

We propose TAL-Net, an improved approach to temporal
action localization in video that is inspired by the Faster RCNN object detection framework. TAL-Net addresses three
key shortcomings of existing approaches: (1) we improve
receptive field alignment using a multi-scale architecture
that can accommodate extreme variation in action durations; (2) we better exploit the temporal context of actions
for both proposal generation and action classification by
appropriately extending receptive fields; and (3) we explicitly consider multi-stream feature fusion and demonstrate
that fusing motion late is important. We achieve state-ofthe-art performance for both action proposal and localization on THUMOS’14 detection benchmark and competitive
performance on ActivityNet challenge.

1. Introduction
Visual understanding of human actions is a core capability in building assistive AI systems. The problem
is conventionally studied in the setup of action classification [44, 36, 29], where the goal is to perform forced-choice
classification of a temporally trimmed video clip into one of
several action classes. Despite fruitful progress, this classification setup is unrealistic, because real-world videos are
usually untrimmed and the actions of interest are typically
embedded in a background of irrelevant activities. Recent
research attention has gradually shifted to temporal action
localization in untrimmed video [23, 31, 45], where the task
is to not only identify the action class, but also detect the
start and end time of each action instance. Improvements in
temporal action localization can drive progress on a large
number of important topics ranging from immediate applications, such as extracting highlights in sports video, to
higher-level tasks, such as automatic video captioning.
Temporal action localization, like object detection, falls
under the umbrella of visual detection problems. While object detection aims to produce spatial bounding boxes in
∗ Work done in part during an internship at Google Research.

1130

