Bottom-Up and Top-Down Attention for Image Captioning
and Visual Question Answering
Peter Anderson1∗
Xiaodong He2
Chris Buehler3
Damien Teney4
5
1
Mark Johnson
Stephen Gould
Lei Zhang3
1
1

Australian National University 2 JD AI Research 3 Microsoft Research 4 University of Adelaide 5 Macquarie University

firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au, 2 xiaodong.he@jd.com, 3 {chris.buehler,leizhang}@microsoft.com
4

damien.teney@adelaide.edu.au, 5 mark.johnson@mq.edu.au

Abstract
Top-down visual attention mechanisms have been used
extensively in image captioning and visual question answering (VQA) to enable deeper image understanding through
fine-grained analysis and even multiple steps of reasoning.
In this work, we propose a combined bottom-up and topdown attention mechanism that enables attention to be calculated at the level of objects and other salient image regions. This is the natural basis for attention to be considered. Within our approach, the bottom-up mechanism
(based on Faster R-CNN) proposes image regions, each
with an associated feature vector, while the top-down mechanism determines feature weightings. Applying this approach to image captioning, our results on the MSCOCO
test server establish a new state-of-the-art for the task,
achieving CIDEr / SPICE / BLEU-4 scores of 117.9, 21.5
and 36.9, respectively. Demonstrating the broad applicability of the method, applying the same approach to VQA
we obtain first place in the 2017 VQA Challenge.

1. Introduction
Problems combining image and language understanding such as image captioning [4] and visual question answering (VQA) [12] continue to inspire considerable research at the boundary of computer vision and natural language processing. In both these tasks it is often necessary
to perform some fine-grained visual processing, or even
multiple steps of reasoning to generate high quality outputs. As a result, visual attention mechanisms have been
widely adopted in both image captioning [33, 27, 47, 45]
and VQA [11, 28, 44, 46, 49]. These mechanisms improve
performance by learning to focus on the regions of the image that are salient and are currently based on deep neural
network architectures.
∗ Work performed while interning at Microsoft.

Figure 1. Typically, attention models operate on CNN features corresponding to a uniform grid of equally-sized image regions (left).
Our approach enables attention to be calculated at the level of objects and other salient image regions (right).

In the human visual system, attention can be focused
volitionally by top-down signals determined by the current task (e.g., looking for something), and automatically
by bottom-up signals associated with unexpected, novel or
salient stimuli [3, 6]. In this paper we adopt similar terminology and refer to attention mechanisms driven by nonvisual or task-specific context as ‘top-down’, and purely visual feed-forward attention mechanisms as ‘bottom-up’.
Most conventional visual attention mechanisms used in
image captioning and VQA are of the top-down variety.
Taking as context a representation of a partially-completed
caption output, or a question relating to the image, these
mechanisms are typically trained to selectively attend to the
output of one or more layers of a convolutional neural net
(CNN). However, this approach gives little consideration to
how the image regions that are subject to attention are determined. As illustrated conceptually in Figure 1, the resulting

6077

