Scale-recurrent Network for Deep Image Deblurring
Xin Tao1,2,∗ Hongyun Gao1,2,∗ Xiaoyong Shen2 Jue Wang3 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 YouTu Lab, Tencent 3 Megvii Inc.
{xtao,hygao}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk {goodshenxy,arphid,leojia9}@gmail.com

Abstract
In single image deblurring, the “coarse-to-fine” scheme,
i.e. gradually restoring the sharp image on different resolutions in a pyramid, is very successful in both traditional
optimization-based methods and recent neural-networkbased approaches. In this paper, we investigate this strategy
and propose a Scale-recurrent Network (SRN-DeblurNet)
for this deblurring task. Compared with the many recent
learning-based approaches in [25], it has a simpler network structure, a smaller number of parameters and is easier to train. We evaluate our method on large-scale deblurring datasets with complex motion. Results show that our
method can produce better quality results than state-of-thearts, both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring has long been an important task in
computer vision and image processing. Given a motion- or
focal-blurred image, caused by camera shake, object motion
or out-of-focus, the goal of deblurring is to recover a sharp
latent image with necessary edge structures and details.
Single image deblurring is highly ill-posed. Traditional
methods applied various constraints to model characteristics of blur (e.g. uniform/non-uniform/depth-aware), and
utilized different natural image priors [1, 3, 6, 39, 14, 40,
26, 27] to regularize the solution space. Most of these methods involve heuristic parameter-tuning and expensive computation. Further, the simplified assumptions on the blur
model often hinder their performance on real-word examples, where blur is far more complex than modeled and is
entangled with in-camera image processing pipeline.
Learning-based methods have also been proposed for deblurring. Early methods [29, 34, 38] substitute a few modules or steps in traditional frameworks with learned parameters to make use of external data. More recent work
started to use end-to-end trainable networks for deblurring
images [25] and videos [18, 33, 37]. Among them, Nah et
* These two authors contributed equally to this work.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. One real example. (a) Input blurred image. (b) Result
of Sun et al. [34]. (c) Result of Nah et al. [25]. (d) Our result.

al.[25] have achieved state-of-the-art results using a multiscale convolutional neural network (CNN). This method
commences from a very coarse scale of the blurry image,
and progressively recovers the latent image at higher resolutions until the full resolution is reached. This framework
follows the multi-scale mechanism in traditional methods,
where the coarse-to-fine pipelines are common when handling large blur kernels [6].
In this paper, we explore a more effective network structure for multi-scale image deblurring. We propose the new
scale-recurrent network (SRN), which addresses two important and general issues in CNN-based deblurring systems.
Scale-recurrent Structure In well-established multiscale methods, the solver and corresponding parameters at
each scale are usually the same. This is intuitively a natural
choice since in each scale we aim to solve the same problem. It was also found that varying parameters at each scale
could introduce instability and cause the extra problems of
unrestrictive solution space. Another concern is that input
images may have different resolutions and motion scales. If
parameter tweaking in each scale is allowed, the solution
18174

