Inferring Shared Attention in Social Scene Videos
Lifeng Fan∗1 , Yixin Chen∗1 , Ping Wei†2,1 , Wenguan Wang3,1 , and Song-Chun Zhu1
1

Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning and Autonomy, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’ an, China
3
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
{lfan,ethanchen}@g.ucla.edu, pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn, wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses a new problem of inferring shared
attention in third-person social scene videos. Shared attention is a phenomenon that two or more individuals simultaneously look at a common target in social scenes. Perceiving and identifying shared attention in videos plays crucial roles in social activities and social scene understanding. We propose a spatial-temporal neural network to detect
shared attention intervals in videos and predict shared attention locations in frames. In each video frame, human
gaze directions and potential target boxes are two key features for spatially detecting shared attention in the social
scene. In temporal domain, a convolutional Long ShortTerm Memory network utilizes the temporal continuity and
transition constraints to optimize the predicted shared attention heatmap. We collect a new dataset VideoCoAtt1
from public TV show videos, containing 380 complex video
sequences with more than 492,000 frames that include diverse social scenes for shared attention study. Experiments
on this dataset show that our model can effectively infer
shared attention in videos. We also empirically verify the
effectiveness of different components in our model.

1. Introduction
Shared attention is defined as the attention focus shared
by two or more individuals on one object or human [5].
Shared attention differs from joint attention in a subtle way
and in the literature the two terms are used interchangeably
[5]. Shared attention is everywhere in our daily life and we
can observe it every now and then in almost all social interactions. Imagine in a party, usually humans can easily rec∗ Lifeng Fan and Yixin Chen contributed equally.
† Ping Wei is the corresponding author.
1 This dataset is available at: http://www.stat.ucla.edu/
lifengfan/shared_attention.
˜

Figure 1. Shared attention is everywhere in our daily life.
Shared attention is a crucial first step towards social interaction,
the primary basis of social intelligence and a precursor of Theory
of Mind [7].

ognize a group of people with shared attention and what exactly is their shared attention in the group at present. They
can join the group and form shared attention with them naturally and instantly. However, patients with autism may feel
it difficult to interact with people around them since they
lack the ability to build shared attention with others [3].
Fig. 1 shows some examples of shared attention in social
scenes and how shared attention shifts temporally as well
as who are currently involved in the shared attention.
Research in developmental psychology clearly states that
the development of skills to understand, manipulate and coordinate attentional behavior plays a pivotal role for imitation, social cognition and the development of language
[8, 15, 35]. And among the complicated cognitive functions of human minds, the ability to form, recognize and
understand shared attention is pretty crucial in human social
interactions [14, 15, 18]. All human communication, even
including linguistic communication, is only possible when
the people involved in such communications have built a

6460

