Recurrent Slice Networks for 3D Segmentation of Point Clouds
Qiangui Huang
Weiyue Wang
Ulrich Neumann
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
{qianguih,weiyuewa,uneumann}@usc.edu

Abstract
Point clouds are an efficient data format for 3D data.
However, existing 3D segmentation methods for point
clouds either do not model local dependencies [21] or require added computations [14, 23]. This work presents a
novel 3D segmentation framework, RSNet1 , to efficiently
model local structures in point clouds. The key component of the RSNet is a lightweight local dependency module. It is a combination of a novel slice pooling layer, Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) layers, and a slice unpooling layer. The slice pooling layer is designed to project
features of unordered points onto an ordered sequence of
feature vectors so that traditional end-to-end learning algorithms (RNNs) can be applied. The performance of RSNet is
validated by comprehensive experiments on the S3DIS[1],
ScanNet[3], and ShapeNet [34] datasets. In its simplest
form, RSNets surpass all previous state-of-the-art methods
on these benchmarks. And comparisons against previous
state-of-the-art methods [21, 23] demonstrate the efficiency
of RSNets.

1. Introduction
Most 3D data capturing devices (like LiDAR and depth
sensors) produce point clouds as raw outputs. However,
there are few state-of-the-art 3D segmentation algorithms
that use point clouds as inputs. The main obstacle is that
point clouds are usually unstructured and unordered, so it is
hard to apply powerful end-to-end learning algorithms. As a
compromise, many researchers transform point clouds into
alternative data formats such as voxels [31, 33, 16, 22, 32]
and multi-view renderings [22, 30, 19].
Unfortunately, information loss and quantitation artifacts
often occur in data format transformations. These can lead
to 3D segmentation performance drops as a result due to
loss of local contexts. Moreover, the 3D CNNs [31, 33,
16, 22, 13] and 2D multi-view CNNs [30, 22] designed for
1 Codes are released here https://github.com/qianguih/RSNet

Recurrent
Slice Network

Figure 1: The RSNet takes raw point clouds as inputs and
outputs semantic labels for each point.

these data formats are often time- and memory- consuming.
In this paper, we approach 3D semantic segmentation
tasks by directly dealing with point clouds. A simple network, a Recurrent Slice Network (RSNet), is designed for
3D segmentation tasks. As shown in Fig.1, the RSNet takes
as inputs raw point clouds and outputs semantic labels for
each of them.
The main challenge in handling point clouds is modeling local geometric dependencies. Since points are processed in an unstructured and unordered manner, powerful
2D segmentation methods like Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) cannot be directly generalized to them.
In RSNets, the local context problem is solved by first
projecting unordered points into ordered features and then
applying traditional end-to-end learning algorithms. The
projection is achieved by a novel slice pooling layer. In this
layer, the inputs are features of unordered points and the
output is an ordered sequence of aggregated features. Next,
RNNs are applied to model dependencies in this sequence.
Finally, a slice unpooling layer assigns features in the sequence back to points. In summary, the combination of the
slice pooling layer, RNN layers, and the slice unpooling
layer forms the local dependency module in RSNets. We
note that the local dependency module is highly efficient.
As shown in Section 3.2, the time complexity of the slice
pooling/unpooling layer is O(n) w.r.t the number of input
points and O(1) w.r.t the local context resolutions.
The performances of RSNets are validated on three challenging benchmarks. Two of them are large-scale realworld datasets, the S3DIS dataset [1] and the ScanNet
12626

