Exploring Disentangled Feature Representation Beyond Face Identification
Yu Liu1∗, Fangyin Wei2∗, Jing Shao2∗, Lu Sheng1 , Junjie Yan2 , Xiaogang Wang1
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Group Limited
{yuliu,lsheng,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, weifangyin@pku.edu.cn,
{shaojing,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com
Abstract
This paper proposes learning disentangled but complementary face features with a minimal supervision by face
identification. Specifically, we construct an identity Distilling and Dispelling Autoencoder (D2 AE) framework that
adversarially learns the identity-distilled features for identity verification and the identity-dispelled features to fool
the verification system. Thanks to the design of two-stream
cues, the learned disentangled features represent not only
the identity or attribute but the complete input image. Comprehensive evaluations further demonstrate that the proposed features not only preserve state-of-the-art identity
verification performance on LFW, but also acquire comparable discriminative power for face attribute recognition on
CelebA and LFWA. Moreover, the proposed system is ready
to semantically control the face generation/editing based on
various identities and attributes in an unsupervised manner.

1. Introduction
Learning distinctive yet universal feature representations has drawn long-lasting attention in the community of
face analysis due to its pivotal role in various face-related
problems such as face verification and attribute recognition [40, 37, 23, 5, 28, 25], as well as generative face modeling and controllable editing [29, 47, 21, 13, 21, 18]. Most
contemporary methods learn the facial features specific to
predefined supervision (e.g. identities, attributes) [43, 38,
37, 41, 39, 17, 5, 28], and thus hamper these features to
be readily generalized to the feature space for a new task
without careful fine-tuning. For example, without explicit
supervision, the learned features are likely not to reflect the
connection between two attributes smile and mouth open,
nor to relate identity-relevant attributes like gender and race
closely to identity. Therefore, learning an almighty feature
representation generalizable to any face-related tasks is significant in the field of face analysis and possibly transferable
∗ They contributed equally to this work

Input

Smiling Narrow eyes Bangs

Asian

Pale skin

Young

Old

Frowning Trump

Smiling Clinton

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Representative face applications based on the learned
face feature representations. (a) Semantic face editing such as
identity-preserving attribute modification and identity transfer and
interpolation. (b) The learned face features are trivially separable
according to different attributes, visualized by Barnes-Hut t-SNE
[30]. (c) The ROC curve on LFW face verification benchmark.
The proposed face feature achieve the accuracy of 99.80% (single
model), which outperforms most state-of-the-art methods without
loss of ability in editing identity-related attributes.

to other fields such as pedestrian analysis.
Unlike prior arts that applied multi-task supervision [17]
to extract quasi-universal features that are jointly effective
across multiple predefined tasks, in this paper, we propose a novel feature learning framework with a minimal
supervision by face identities. The learned representation
not only produces identity-distilled features that discriminatively focus on inter-personal differences with identity
supervision, but also effectively extracts the hidden identity-

2080

