Emotional Attention: A Study of Image Sentiment and Visual Attention
Shaojing Fan1 , Zhiqi Shen1 , Ming Jiang2 , Bryan L. Koenig3 , Juan Xu2 , Mohan S. Kankanhalli1 , and Qi
Zhao∗2
1

National University of Singapore

2

University of Minnesota

3

Southern Utah University

Abstract
Image sentiment influences visual perception. Emotioneliciting stimuli such as happy faces and poisonous snakes
are generally prioritized in human attention. However, little
research has evaluated the interrelationships of image sentiment and visual saliency. In this paper, we present the first study to focus on the relation between emotional properties of
an image and visual attention. We first create the EMOtional
attention dataset (EMOd). It is a diverse set of emotioneliciting images, and each image has (1) eye-tracking data
collected from 16 subjects, (2) intensive image context labels
including object contour, object sentiment, object semantic
category, and high-level perceptual attributes such as image
aesthetics and elicited emotions. We perform extensive analyses on EMOd to identify how image sentiment relates to human attention. We discover an emotion prioritization effect:
for our images, emotion-eliciting content attracts human attention strongly, but such advantage diminishes dramatically
after initial fixation. Aiming to model the human emotion prioritization computationally, we design a deep neural network
for saliency prediction, which includes a novel subnetwork
that learns the spatial and semantic context of the image
scene. The proposed network outperforms the state-of-theart on three benchmark datasets, by effectively capturing the
relative importance of human attention within an image. The
code, models, and dataset are available online at https:
//nus-sesame.top/emotionalattention/.

1. Introduction
People have a remarkable ability to attend selectively to
some regions in a scene [50, 9]. Attention selectively follows low-level image properties (e.g., intensity, color) and
semantic-level information [26, 15]. Such properties have
been incorporated in computational models that predict visual saliency with impressive performance [34, 2, 70]. These
models have been used in applications such as automated
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail: qzhao@umn.edu

Figure 1: Example images from EMOtional attention dataset
(EMOd), along with emotions that observers indicated as
strongly elicited by the images and colormaps visualizing
human attention.

image annotation and video surveillance [24, 14].
Substantial research also finds that the emotional relevance of a stimulus influences human attention [17, 13, 67,
39]. For example, people preferentially attend to emotional
stimuli (i.e., an object or scene that elicits an emotional response in the observer), such as cute babies or erotic scenes
[25, 54]. Although many neuroimaging and behavioral studies have investigated how emotional stimuli affect attention
[52, 17, 29], few computer vision studies have—due in part
to the lack of an eye-tracking dataset that includes emotional
stimuli. Advances have been made regarding semantics and
attention [57, 27, 70], but much remains unknown about how
image sentiment relates with visual saliency.
In this paper, we present the EMOtional attention dataset
(EMOd)—a human-annotated dataset focusing on image
sentiment and human attention (see Fig. 1). We perform
statistical analyses on EMOd to investigate how emotional
17521

