Multi-Agent Diverse Generative Adversarial Networks
Arnab Ghosh∗
University of Oxford, UK

Viveka Kulharia∗
University of Oxford, UK

Vinay Namboodiri
IIT Kanpur, India

arnabg@robots.ox.ac.uk

viveka@robots.ox.ac.uk

vinaypn@iitk.ac.in

Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford, UK

Puneet K. Dokania
University of Oxford, UK

philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

puneet@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose MAD-GAN, an intuitive generalization to
the Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and its conditional variants to address the well known problem of mode
collapse. First, MAD-GAN is a multi-agent GAN architecture incorporating multiple generators and one discriminator. Second, to enforce that different generators capture diverse high probability modes, the discriminator of MADGAN is designed such that along with finding the real and
fake samples, it is also required to identify the generator
that generated the given fake sample. Intuitively, to succeed
in this task, the discriminator must learn to push different
generators towards different identifiable modes. We perform extensive experiments on synthetic and real datasets
and compare MAD-GAN with different variants of GAN. We
show high quality diverse sample generations for challenging tasks such as image-to-image translation and face generation. In addition, we also show that MAD-GAN is able to
disentangle different modalities when trained using highly
challenging diverse-class dataset (e.g. dataset with images
of forests, icebergs, and bedrooms). In the end, we show its
efficacy on the unsupervised feature representation task.

1. Introduction
Generative models have attracted considerable attention
recently. The underlying idea behind such models is to attempt to capture the distribution of high-dimensional data
such as images and texts. Though these models are highly
useful in various applications, it is computationally expensive to train them as they require intractable integration
in a very high-dimensional space. This drastically limits
their applicability. However, recently there has been considerable progress in deep generative models – conglom∗ Joint first author

Figure 1: Diverse-class data generation using MADGAN. Diverse-class dataset contains images from different classes/modalities (in this case, forests, icebergs, and
bedrooms). Each row represents generations by a particular generator and each column represents generations for a
given random noise input z. As shown, once trained using this dataset, generators of MAD-GAN are able to disentangle different modalities, hence, each generator is able to
generate images from a particular modality.
erate of deep neural networks and generative models – as
they do not explicitly require the intractable integration, and
can be efficiently trained using back-propagation algorithm.
Two such famous examples are Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11] and Variational Autoencoders [14].
In this paper we focus on GANs as they are known to
produce sharp and plausible images. Briefly, GANs employ
a generator and a discriminator where both are involved in
a minimax game. The task of the discriminator is to learn
the difference between real samples (from true data distribution pd ) and fake samples (from generator distribution
pg ). Whereas, the task of the generator is to maximize the
mistakes of the discriminator. At convergence, the generator learns to produce real looking images. A few successful applications of GANs are video generation [26], image
inpainting [22], image manipulation [29], 3D object generation [27], interactive image generation using few brush
strokes [29], image super-resolution [17], diagrammatic abstract reasoning [15] and conditional GANs [20, 24].
Despite the remarkable success of GAN, it suffers from
the major problem of mode collapse [2, 7, 8, 19, 25].
18513

