Reconstructing Thin Structures of Manifold Surfaces
by Integrating Spatial Curves
Shiwei Li1

Yao Yao1

Tian Fang2

{slibc|yyaoag|quan}@cse.ust.hk
1

Long Quan1

fangtian@altizure.com

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

Altizure.com

Abstract
The manifold surface reconstruction in multi-view stereo
often fails in retaining thin structures due to incomplete and
noisy reconstructed point clouds. In this paper, we address
this problem by leveraging spatial curves. The curve representation in nature is advantageous in modeling thin and elongated structures, implying topology and connectivity information of the underlying geometry, which exactly compensates the weakness of scattered point clouds. We present
a novel surface reconstruction method using both curves
and point clouds. First, we propose a 3D curve reconstruction algorithm based on the initialize-optimize-extend
strategy. Then, tetrahedra are constructed from points and
curves, where the volumes of thin structures are robustly
preserved by the Curve-conformed Delaunay Refinement.
Finally, the mesh surface is extracted from tetrahedra by a
graph optimization. The method has been intensively evaluated on both synthetic and real-world datasets, showing
significant improvements over state-of-the-art methods.

(a) The state-of-the-art dense and surface reconstruction

(b) Our reconstructed curves (blue) and mesh surface

(c) Samples of input images and zoomed-in patches

1. Introduction
One of the general weaknesses of existing dense multiview stereo (MVS) methods is the thin structure reconstruction. Fig. 1(a) shows a typical example generated by the
state-of-the-art method in [48]: although the ground and the
windmill body are well reconstructed by point clouds and
meshes, thin windmill blades remain severely incomplete.
The main reason is that most stereo algorithms perform dense matching on local image patches. The local appearance of thin structures becomes highly varied due to
background changes, making the multi-view matching inconsistent (illustrated in Fig. 1(c)). Also, point clouds are
scattered and imply no connectivity information of the underlying geometry. Even if some dense points are recovered
for thin structures, they are usually sparse and incomplete,
and thus prone to be filtered out as outliers when extracting
the manifold surface (see the effect from dense points to
meshes in Fig. 1(a)). Moreover, thin structures are sensitive

Figure 1: (a) The point cloud and mesh reconstruction by [48].
(b) Our method reconstructs 3D curves in blue on the left and a
complete mesh on the right. (c) Samples of input images. The
zoomed-in patches of the windmill blade vary significantly due to
background changes, resulting in the incomplete surface in (a).

to the accuracy of camera geometry. If the reprojection error
of matching points is larger than the thickness of thin structures themselves, they can hardly be reconstructed [12].
To compensate the essential weaknesses of point-based
methods, we resort to another representation – 3D curves.
The curves can be computed from 2D edges of images. It’s
known that edges are more robust to image noises (in detection [44]), more tolerant to SfM errors (in matching [32])
as they are sparse and distinctive in nature, better in characterizing the topology of thin and elongated structures,
and providing connectivity information which is useful as
a constraint in surface reconstruction. Unlike dense point
12887

