Are You Talking to Me? Reasoned Visual Dialog Generation
through Adversarial Learning
Qi Wu∗1 , Peng Wang2 , Chunhua Shen1 , Ian Reid1 , and Anton van den Hengel1
1

2

Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, The University of Adelaide, Australia
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University

Abstract
The visual dialog task requires an agent to engage in a
conversation about an image with a human. It represents
an extension of the visual question answering task in that
the agent needs to answer a question about an image, but it
needs to do so in light of the previous dialog that has taken
place. The key challenge in visual dialog is thus maintaining a consistent, and natural dialog while continuing to answer questions correctly. We present a novel approach that
combines Reinforcement Learning and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to generate more human-like responses to questions. The GAN helps overcome the relative paucity of training data, and the tendency of the typical MLE-based approach to generate overly terse answers.
Critically, the GAN is tightly integrated into the attention
mechanism that generates human-interpretable reasons for
each answer. This means that the discriminative model of
the GAN has the task of assessing whether a candidate answer is generated by a human or not, given the provided
reason. This is significant because it drives the generative
model to produce high quality answers that are well supported by the associated reasoning. The method also generates the state-of-the-art results on the primary benchmark.

1. Introduction
The combined interpretation of vision and language has
enabled the development of a range of applications that
have made interesting steps towards artificial intelligence,
including image captioning [13, 36, 39], visual question
answering (VQA) [1, 24, 40], and referring expressions
[12, 14, 43]. VQA, for example, requires an agent to answer a previously unseen question about a previously unseen image, and is recognised as being an AI-Complete
problem [1]. Visual dialog [5] represents an extension to
the VQA problem whereby an agent is required to engage
∗ corresponding author; qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Question

Human-like Responses

Machine-like

Are there any large No tall buildings but large one or Yes there are.
building nearby?
two story buildings, and one clock
is in front of looks like church of.
With the clock does Yes, I think so because it’s made by I don’t know.
it look expensive? stained glass.
Do you see any
signs for church?

Yes, there is a sign with light on, Yes there are.
but not clear enough.

Figure 1: Human-like vs. Machine-like responses in a visual dialog. The
human-like responses clearly answer the questions more comprehensively,
and help to maintain a meaningful dialog.

in a dialog about an image. This is significant because it demands that the agent is able to answer a series of questions,
each of which may be predicated on the previous questions
and answers in the dialog. Visual dialog thus reflects one of
the key challenges in AI and Robotics, which is to enable
an agent capable of acting upon the world, that we might
collaborate with through dialog.
Due to the similarity between the VQA and visual dialog
tasks, VQA methods [21, 42] have been directly applied to
solve the visual dialog problem. The fact that the visual dialog challenge requires an ongoing conversation, however,
demands more than just taking into consideration the state
of the conversation thus far. Ideally, the agent should be
an engaged participant in the conversation, cooperating towards a larger goal, rather than generating single word an-

6106

