Where and Why Are They Looking? Jointly Inferring Human Attention and
Intentions in Complex Tasks
Ping Wei1,2 , Yang Liu2 , Tianmin Shu2 , Nanning Zheng1 , and Song-Chun Zhu2
1

2

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy, University of California, Los Angeles
pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn,{yangliu2014,tianmin.shu}@ucla.edu, nnzheng@xjtu.edu.cn, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses a new problem - jointly inferring
human attention, intentions, and tasks from videos. Given
an RGB-D video where a human performs a task, we answer
three questions simultaneously: 1) where the human is looking - attention prediction; 2) why the human is looking there
- intention prediction; and 3) what task the human is performing - task recognition. We propose a hierarchical model of human-attention-object (HAO) which represents tasks,
intentions, and attention under a unified framework. A task
is represented as sequential intentions which transition to
each other. An intention is composed of the human pose,
attention, and objects. A beam search algorithm is adopted for inference on the HAO graph to output the attention,
intention, and task results. We built a new video dataset of
tasks, intentions, and attention. It contains 14 task classes,
70 intention categories, 28 object classes, 809 videos, and
approximately 330,000 frames. Experiments show that our
approach outperforms existing approaches.

1. Introduction
While recognizing what a human is doing in videos has
been extensively studied over the past decades, inferring
what a human is thinking is a rarely-investigated but important problem. For example, in a scene of human-robot collaboration, a human standing still is looking around without
any body actions. To collaborate with the human, the robot
needs to know what the human is thinking, e.g. is the human
searching for anything or checking any object’s state?
Answering these questions involves inferring human attention and intentions in tasks. A task is a complex goaldriven human activity [18] and performing a task is a process of eye-hand coordination [23], as the task mop floor
shown in Fig. 1. Human attention describes where a human

Figure 1: Human attention and intention in the task mop floor.
While mopping the floor, the person is looking at the floor and his
intention is checking if the floor has been cleaned or not.

is looking [38]. It includes the attributes of 3D location, 3D
direction, and 2D location, as shown in Fig. 1.
Human intentions in our work describe the mental motivation why a human is looking at a place. In cognitive
studies, Land et al. [16] defined four basic types of human
fixation roles - locate, direct, guide, and check. As shown
in Fig. 2, we extend the four fixation roles to explain human
intentions in complex tasks: 1) locate is to identify the location of an object in a scene; 2) direct means a human directs
the hands to something or to do something; 3) guide means
a human guides an object to approach another; 4) check is
to check the object states. With different compositions of
objects and actions in various tasks, the four basic types can
be expanded into numerous categories, such as locate mop,
locate coffee jar, etc. We define these expanded categories
as human intentions in tasks. Intention prediction is to label
each video frame with one of the intention categories.
As the saying goes, ‘eyes are the windows to the soul’.
Human attention and intentions are closely related to each
other in a task. By perceiving where a human is looking, we
can infer the human’s intentions. For example, in the task
16801

