StarGAN: Unified Generative Adversarial Networks
for Multi-Domain Image-to-Image Translation
Yunjey Choi1,2 Minje Choi1,2 Munyoung Kim2,3 Jung-Woo Ha2 Sunghun Kim2,4 Jaegul Choo1,2
1
Korea University 2 Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp.
3
The College of New Jersey 4 Hong Kong University of Science & Technology

Figure 1. Multi-domain image-to-image translation results on the CelebA dataset via transferring knowledge learned from the RaFD dataset.
The first and sixth columns show input images while the remaining columns are images generated by StarGAN. Note that the images are
generated by a single generator network, and facial expression labels such as angry, happy, and fearful are from RaFD, not CelebA.

Abstract
Recent studies have shown remarkable success in imageto-image translation for two domains. However, existing
approaches have limited scalability and robustness in handling more than two domains, since different models should
be built independently for every pair of image domains. To
address this limitation, we propose StarGAN, a novel and
scalable approach that can perform image-to-image translations for multiple domains using only a single model.
Such a unified model architecture of StarGAN allows simultaneous training of multiple datasets with different domains
within a single network. This leads to StarGAN’s superior
quality of translated images compared to existing models as
well as the novel capability of flexibly translating an input
image to any desired target domain. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a facial attribute
transfer and a facial expression synthesis tasks.

1. Introduction
The task of image-to-image translation is to change a
particular aspect of a given image to another, e.g., changing
the facial expression of a person from smiling to frowning
(see Fig. 1). This task has experienced significant improvements following the introduction of generative adversarial
networks (GANs), with results ranging from changing hair
color [8], reconstructing photos from edge maps [7], and
changing the seasons of scenery images [32].
Given training data from two different domains, these
models learn to translate images from one domain to the
other. We denote the terms attribute as a meaningful feature inherent in an image such as hair color, gender or age,
and attribute value as a particular value of an attribute, e.g.,
black/blond/brown for hair color or male/female for gender.
We further denote domain as a set of images sharing the
same attribute value. For example, images of women can
18789

