DocUNet: Document Image Unwarping via A Stacked U-Net
Ke Ma1
1

Zhixin Shu1
Xue Bai2
Jue Wang2
Dimitris Samaras1
1
2
Stony Brook University
Megvii Inc.

{kemma, zhshu, samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu

2

{baixue, wangjue}@megvii.com

Abstract
Capturing document images is a common way for digitizing and recording physical documents due to the ubiquitousness of mobile cameras. To make text recognition easier, it is often desirable to digitally flatten a document image when the physical document sheet is folded or curved.
In this paper, we develop the first learning-based method to
achieve this goal. We propose a stacked U-Net [25] with intermediate supervision to directly predict the forward mapping from a distorted image to its rectified version. Because
large-scale real-world data with ground truth deformation
is difficult to obtain, we create a synthetic dataset with approximately 100 thousand images by warping non-distorted
document images. The network is trained on this dataset
with various data augmentations to improve its generalization ability. We further create a comprehensive benchmark1 that covers various real-world conditions. We evaluate the proposed model quantitatively and qualitatively on
the proposed benchmark, and compare it with previous nonlearning-based methods.

1. Introduction
Document digitization serves as an important means to
preserve existing printed documents, making them easier to
access anywhere at anytime. Traditionally, documents are
digitized with flat-bed scanners, which are non-portable, expensive devices. Recently, with the increasing popularity of
mobile cameras, taking pictures of physical documents has
become the easiest way for scanning physical documents.
Once captured, images can be further processed by text detection and recognition pipelines for content analysis and
information extraction.
A common practical problem when taking document images is that the document sheets are not in an ideal condition for scanning: they may be curved, folded or crumpled,
or laying on a complex background. Think about a crumpled receipt taken out from a pocket. All these factors could
1 http://www.cs.stonybrook.edu/

˜cvl/docunet.html

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Document image unwarping and its usefulness. (a)
shows some results from our network. The top row shows input images and the bottom shows the outputs. (b) Our network
greatly improves the effectiveness of state-of-the-art text detection
systems [10]: more words (shown in green) can be detected from
the rectified document image (bottom) than the original folded one
(top).

cause significant problems for automatic document image
analysis procedures down-stream, as shown in Fig. 1. It is
thus desirable to digitally flatten such documents in the captured images.
Flattening document images has been addressed before,
using various approaches. Some vision systems rely on
carefully designed, well calibrated hardware such as stereo
cameras [35, 29], or structured light projectors [1, 21] to
measure the 3D distortion of the documents. They produce
high quality results, but the additional hardware limits their
application. Other work [28, 36] obviate the need for extra
hardware by utilizing multi-view images to reconstruct the
3D shape of distorted document sheets. Others aim to recover the rectified document by analyzing a single image,
based on various hand-crafted low-level features such as illumination/shading [32, 37], text-lines [27, 20] etc.
This paper presents a novel learning-based method to recover arbitrarily curved and folded paper documents captured in the wild. Unlike previous techniques, our method
14700

