Variational Autoencoders for Deforming 3D Mesh Models
Qingyang Tan1,2 , Lin Gao1∗, Yu-Kun Lai 3 , Shihong Xia1∗
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University
tanqingyang14@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {gaolin, xsh}@ict.ac.cn, LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk
Abstract
3D geometric contents are becoming increasingly popular. In this paper, we study the problem of analyzing deforming 3D meshes using deep neural networks. Deforming
3D meshes are flexible to represent 3D animation sequences
as well as collections of objects of the same category, allowing diverse shapes with large-scale non-linear deformations. We propose a novel framework which we call mesh
variational autoencoders (mesh VAE), to explore the probabilistic latent space of 3D surfaces. The framework is easy
to train, and requires very few training examples. We also
propose an extended model which allows flexibly adjusting
the significance of different latent variables by altering the
prior distribution. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our general framework is able to learn a reasonable representation for a collection of deformable shapes, and produce competitive results for a variety of applications, including shape generation, shape interpolation, shape space
embedding and shape exploration, outperforming state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the development of performance capture techniques, 3D mesh sequences of deforming objects (such
as human bodies) become increasingly popular, which are
widely used in computer animation. Deforming meshes can
also be used to represent a collection of objects with different shapes and poses, where large-scale non-linear deformations are common. There are still challenging problems
to analyze deforming 3D meshes and synthesize plausible
new 3D models. From the analysis perspective, complex
deformations mean it is difficult to embed such 3D meshes
into a meaningful space using existing methods. Acquiring high quality 3D models is still time consuming, since
∗ Corresponding Author

multiple scans are usually required to address unavoidable
occlusion. Thus effectively generating plausible new models is also highly demanded.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework called mesh
variational autoencoders (mesh VAE), which leverages the
power of neural networks to explore the latent space behind
deforming 3D shapes, and is able to generate new models
not existing in the original dataset. Our mesh VAE model is
trained using a collection of 3D shapes with the same connectivity. Many existing deformable object collections satisfy this. They are not restricted to a single deformable object; examples include the MPI FAUST dataset [2] which includes human bodies of different shapes in different poses.
In general, meshes with the same connectivity can be obtained using consistent remeshing. Although convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have been widely used for image analysis and synthesis, applying them to 3D meshes is
still quite limited. Previous work focuses on generalizing
CNNs from 2D to 3D while preserving image-like regular grid connectivity, including 3D convolution over voxels (e.g. [46]), and 2D convolution over geometry images
(e.g. [37]). However, the voxel representation is inefficient
and given the practical limit can only represent rough 3D
models without details. The parameterization process to
generate geometry images involves unavoidable distortions
and may destroy useful structure information.
Our work aims to produce a generative model capable of analyzing model collections and synthesizing new
shapes. To achieve this, instead of using representations
with image-like connectivity, we propose to use a state-ofthe-art surface representation called RIMD (Rotation Invariant Mesh Difference) [9] to effectively represent deformations, along with a variational autoencoder [19]. To
cope with meshes of arbitrary connectivity, we propose to
use a fully-connected network, along with a simple reconstruction loss based on MSE (mean square error). As we
will show later, the large number of coefficients in this network can be efficiently trained, even with a small number of
15841

