Beyond Holistic Object Recognition:
Enriching Image Understanding with Part States
Cewu Lu1 , Hao Su2 , Yonglu Li1 , Yongyi Lu3 , Li Yi4 , Chi-Keung Tang3 , Leonidas J. Guibas4
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
University of California San Diego
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Stanford University
{lucewu, yonglu li}@sjtu.edu.cn haosu@eng.ucsd.edu {yluaw, cktang}@cse.ust.hk
{ericyi, guibas}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Important high-level vision tasks require rich semantic
descriptions of objects at part level. Based upon previous work on part localization, in this paper, we address the
problem of inferring rich semantics imparted by an object
part in still images. Specifically, we propose to tokenize the
semantic space as a discrete set of part states. Our modeling of part state is spatially localized, therefore, we formulate the part state inference problem as a pixel-wise annotation problem. An iterative part-state inference neural network that is efficient in time and accurate in performance
is specifically designed for this task. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed method can effectively predict the semantic states of parts and simultaneously improve
part segmentation, thus benefiting a number of visual understanding applications. The other contribution of this paper is our part state dataset which contains rich part-level
semantic annotations.

1. Introduction
Recently there has been growing interest in understanding the detailed semantics of images, because important
high-level vision tasks such as human-object interaction,
robotic manipulation and image captioning require object
understanding beyond holistic object recognition. In particular, rich description of objects at part level is necessary
since interaction among objects are often manifested as contact of the pertinent object parts.
Existing work has almost exclusively focused on part localization [26]. However, localization of object parts only
scratched the surface of understanding the rich informaCewu Lu is also a member of SJTU-SenseTime lab and AI research
institute of SJTU.

tion embodied in encapsulated by the object parts. In fact,
through scrutinizing the visual appearance of object parts,
rich semantic information about a single object and the relationships among multiple objects can be revealed. For
instance, by seeing observing a person’s hand turning the
door knob, we infer that this person may attempt to open
a door and enter a room. Figure 1 gives more examples of
part semantics, ranging from including functionality, geometry relationship, affordance, moment situation (a.k.a fluent
as in [12]), to interaction. We also notice that high-level
semantics on parts are important for robotic manipulation
tasks. For example, affordance and interaction modeling
are explored in [20] and [21] respectively.
This paper makes a significant attempt to advance the
next step: we propose to tokenize the semantic space of
relevant object parts into a discrete set of part state. Specifically, a part of an object is associated with a set of states,
each of which is characterized by a phrase that describes its
semantic meaning.
To implement this idea, we first have to define a vocabulary of part states. We address this issue by resorting to
natural language processing. We collect phrase-level human descriptions on the relevant object parts in scene images, specifically, PASCAL VOC 2010 images. Though
simple, these phrase-level descriptions carry rich semantics
(see Figure 1). The description of a particular part is readily
categorized into different discrete groups, where each group
belongs to a part-state with a summarized phrase. Note that
our part state annotations are object-centric, i.e., only the
object containing the part of interest is described by its category name, all the other objects are referred to as “something else”. Figure 2(a) shows an example of part state generation, and (b) illustrates an example of part states.
There are two desirable features associated with our
part states implementation: semantic tokenization and the
16955

