Facelet-Bank for Fast Portrait Manipulation
Ying-Cong Chen1 Huaijia Lin1 Michelle Shu3 Ruiyu Li1 Xin Tao1
Xiaoyong Shen2 Yangang Ye2 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent Youtu Lab 3 Johns Hopkins University
{ycchen, linhj, ryli, xtao}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Mshu1@jhu.edu

yangangye@tecent.com

goodshenxy@gmail.com
leojia9@gmail.com

Abstract
Digital face manipulation has become a popular and fascinating way to touch images with the prevalence of smart
phones and social networks. With a wide variety of user
preferences, facial expressions, and accessories, a general
and flexible model is necessary to accommodate different
types of facial editing. In this paper, we propose a model
to achieve this goal based on an end-to-end convolutional
neural network that supports fast inference, edit-effect control, and quick partial-model update. In addition, this model
learns from unpaired image sets with different attributes.
Experimental results show that our framework can handle
a wide range of expressions, accessories, and makeup effects. It produces high-resolution and high-quality results
in fast speed.

1. Introduction
Digital face manipulation aims to change semantically
expressive and meaningful attributes, such as smiling and
mourning, or add virtual makeup/accessories to human
faces, including mustache and eyeglasses. With the increasing popularity of smart phones and digital cameras, the demand of a practical and fast system rises drastically. Face
manipulation has attracted great interests in computer vision and graphics [14, 3, 6, 4, 33, 31, 28]. Previous methods
devoted to face beautification [19, 8], de-beautification [10],
expression manipulation [28] and age progression [14], to
name a few.
Given these many solutions, it is common knowledge
that different face makeup or attribute changes require special manipulation operations. For example, face beautification or de-beautification processes skin color and texture
while face expression manipulation focuses more on 2D or
3D geometry. With this fact, most approaches were particularly designed for individual tasks where any specialization
requires expert efforts and domain knowledge to establish
new solutions for effect generation.

(a) Original Image

(b) Get younger

(c) Add facial hair

Figure 1. Illustration of face manipulation using our model.

In the following, we elaborate on the underlying problems of face manipulation when seeking a data-driven
framework to unify many face effects. It is followed by introducing the intriguing work to construct our system with
this pursuit.

1.1. Possible Solutions and Their Problems
Direct Regression The straightforward way to learn face
editing operations from external data is to directly regress
the input (before edit) and the ground truth image after edit
[10, 5]. However, this procedure requires labeled paired
data, which in many cases is unavailable or requires intensive human labor to create. For any effects that do not exist
before, these operations cannot be established easily.
Generative Adversarial Network Recently, Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) has shown its capacity in set13541

