Few-Shot Image Recognition by Predicting Parameters from Activations
Siyuan Qiao1 Chenxi Liu1 Wei Shen1,2 Alan Yuille1
Johns Hopkins University1 Shanghai University2
{siyuan.qiao, cxliu, alan.yuille}@jhu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we are interested in the few-shot learning
problem. In particular, we focus on a challenging scenario
where the number of categories is large and the number of
examples per novel category is very limited, e.g. 1, 2, or 3.
Motivated by the close relationship between the parameters
and the activations in a neural network associated with the
same category, we propose a novel method that can adapt
a pre-trained neural network to novel categories by directly
predicting the parameters from the activations. Zero training is required in adaptation to novel categories, and fast
inference is realized by a single forward pass. We evaluate
our method by doing few-shot image recognition on the ImageNet dataset, which achieves the state-of-the-art classification accuracy on novel categories by a significant margin
while keeping comparable performance on the large-scale
categories. We also test our method on the MiniImageNet
dataset and it strongly outperforms the previous state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed rapid advances in deep
learning [20], with a particular example being visual recognition [11, 16, 28] on large-scale image datasets, e.g., ImageNet [27]. Despite their great performances on benchmark datasets, the machines exhibit clear difference with
people in the way they learn concepts. Deep learning methods typically require huge amounts of supervised training
data per concept, and the learning process could take days
using specialized hardware, i.e. GPUs. In contrast, children
are known to be able to learn novel visual concepts almost
effortlessly with a few examples after they have accumulated enough past knowledge [2]. This phenomenon motivates computer vision research on the problem of few-shot
learning, i.e., the task to learn novel concepts from only a
few examples for each category [7, 18].
Formally, in the few-shot learning problem [14, 24, 29],
we are provided with a large-scale set Dlarge with categories
Clarge and a few-shot set Dfew with categories Cfew that do not
overlap with Clarge . Dlarge has sufficient training samples for

wei.shen@t.shu.edu.cn

each category whereas Dfew has only a few examples (< 6
in this paper). The goal is to achieve good classification
performances, either on Dfew or on both Dfew and Dlarge .
We argue that a good classifier should have the following
properties: (1) It achieves reasonable performance on Cfew .
(2) Adapting to Cfew does not degrade the performance on
Clarge significantly (if any). (3) It is fast in inference and
adapts to few-shot categories with little or zero training, i.e.,
an efficient lifelong learning system [3, 4].
Both parametric and non-parametric methods have been
proposed for the few-shot learning problem. However, due
to the limited number of samples in Dfew and the imbalance between Dlarge and Dfew , parametric models usually
fail to learn well from the training samples [24]. On the
other hand, many non-parametric approaches such as nearest neighbors can adapt to the novel concepts easily without
severely forgetting the original classes. But this requires
careful designs of the distance metrics [1], which can be
difficult and sometimes empirical. To remedy this, some
previous work instead adapts feature representation to the
metrics by using siamese networks [14, 22]. As we will
show later through experiments, these methods do not fully
satisfy the properties mentioned above.
Pug Jay
SoftMax

Activations

Hen

YY

Snail

Corgi

YY

YY

YY
Figure 1: Illustration of pre-training on Dlarge (black) and
few-shot novel category adaptation to Dfew (green). The
green circles are the novel categories, and the green lines
represent the unknown parameters for categories in Cfew .
In this paper, we present an approach that meets the desired properties well. Our method starts with a pre-trained
deep neural network on Dlarge . The final classification layers

7229

