Dense 3D Regression for Hand Pose Estimation
Chengde Wan1 , Thomas Probst1 , Luc Van Gool1,3 , and Angela Yao2
1

ETH Zürich 2 University of Bonn 3 KU Leuven

Abstract

The use of deep neural networks has become the norm for
hand pose estimation[44, 26, 52, 11].

We present a simple and effective method for 3D hand
pose estimation from a single depth frame. As opposed to
previous state-of-the-art methods based on holistic 3D regression, our method works on dense pixel-wise estimation.
This is achieved by careful design choices in pose parameterization, which leverages both 2D and 3D properties of
depth map. Specifically, we decompose the pose parameters
into a set of per-pixel estimations, i.e., 2D heat maps, 3D
heat maps and unit 3D directional vector fields. The 2D/3D
joint heat maps and 3D joint offsets are estimated via multitask network cascades, which is trained end-to-end. The
pixel-wise estimations can be directly translated into a vote
casting scheme. A variant of mean shift is then used to aggregate local votes while enforcing consensus between the
the estimated 3D pose and the pixel-wise 2D and 3D estimations by design. Our method is efficient and highly accurate.
On MSRA and NYU hand dataset, our method outperforms
all previous state-of-the-art approaches by a large margin.
On the ICVL hand dataset, our method achieves similar accuracy compared to the nearly saturated result obtained
by [5] and outperforms various other proposed methods.
Code is available online1 .

In standard hand pose estimation pipelines, depth maps
are almost always treated as images. This is especially
true for deep learning-based approaches, which heavily rely
on the machinery of (2D) convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). One line of work for 3D hand poses estimation is
holistic regression, that is aiming to directly map the depth
images to 3D pose parameters such as joint angles or 3D coordinates. It bypasses having to solve for intermediate representations such as 2D coordinates and is able to capture
global constraints and correlations among different joints.
However, regressing from highly disparate domains such as
image and pose is a very challenging learning task. Furthermore, holistic regression cannot generalize to combinations of local evidence such as different individual finger
poses and suffers from translational variance and sensitivity
to hand bounding box locations.

1. Introduction
Vision-based hand pose estimation has made significant progress in recent years. The increased performance
can be attributed to two dominating trends: depth imaging and deep learning. First of all, hand pose estimation
techniques have shifted almost entirely to using only depth
inputs[34, 32, 28, 53] since commodity depth sensors such
as the MS Kinect and Intel Realsense have become widely
available. As a 2.5D source of information, depth significantly resolves much of the ambiguities present in monocular RGB input. Secondly, deep learning has fundamentally
transformed the way that vision problems are being solved.
1 https://github.com/melonwan/denseReg

CNNs have been successfully applied to 2D body pose
estimation[24, 45, 48]; in particular, fully convolutional networks (FCNs) can perform pixel-wise joint detection very
accurately [24, 48]. This is formulated as a pixel-wise classification of each pixel being the location of a joint. As
such, a second line of work in pose estimation tries to create analogous networks for detecting joints in 2D. Through
pixel-wise classification, joint detection can exploit local
patterns more explicitly than holistic regression, helping the
network to learn better feature maps. The 2D detections
and 3D regression can then be combined with a multi-task
setup [33, 31, 18, 43], either by feeding the 2D detection
heat map as an input to a 3D regression network, or by sharing the feature maps between detection and holistic regression. However, there is no guarantee that the regressed 3D
joints, if they were to be projected back to 2D, will be in
consensus with the original 2D detection heat-map. Moreover, by design, the aforementioned drawbacks of holistic
regression are still not eliminated with this line of work.
Other works in 2D detection apply inverse kinematics and
use a model-based optimization; however, the severe selfocclusion of the hand creates ambiguities which are diffi15147

