DecideNet: Counting Varying Density Crowds
Through Attention Guided Detection and Density Estimation
Jiang Liu1 , Chenqiang Gao2 , Deyu Meng3 , Alexander G. Hauptmann1
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University
1

{jiangl1,alex}@cs.cmu.edu, 2 gaocq@cqupt.edu.cn, 3 dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In real-world crowd counting applications, the crowd
densities vary greatly in spatial and temporal domains. A
detection based counting method will estimate crowds accurately in low density scenes, while its reliability in congested areas is downgraded. A regression based approach,
on the other hand, captures the general density information
in crowded regions. Without knowing the location of each
person, it tends to overestimate the count in low density areas. Thus, exclusively using either one of them is not sufficient to handle all kinds of scenes with varying densities.
To address this issue, a novel end-to-end crowd counting
framework, named DecideNet (DEteCtIon and Density Estimation Network) is proposed. It can adaptively decide the
appropriate counting mode for different locations on the image based on its real density conditions. DecideNet starts
with estimating the crowd density by generating detection
and regression based density maps separately. To capture
inevitable variation in densities, it incorporates an attention
module, meant to adaptively assess the reliability of the two
types of estimations. The final crowd counts are obtained
with the guidance of the attention module to adopt suitable
estimations from the two kinds of density maps. Experimental results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance on three challenging crowd counting datasets.

1. Introduction
The crowd counting task in the computer vision community aims at obtaining number of individuals appearing in
specific scenes. It is the essential building block for highlevel crowd analysis, including crowd monitoring [3], scene
understanding [41] and public safety management [5].
Various methods have been proposed to tackle this problem. They could generally be classified into detection and
regression based approaches. The detection based methods [8, 18, 34, 10, 43, 13] employ object detectors to lo-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Ablation studies of detection and regression based crowd
counting on the ShanghaiTech PartB (SHB) dataset [42]. Detection reliability decreases along with the increased crowd density,
resulting in underestimated counts in those areas. Counts from
density estimation tend to be overestimated in scenes with low
densities. (a) Visualization of the detection results on a image
from a Faster R-CNN [25] detector. (b) The density map on the
same image from a CNN regression network [28]. (c) The median
object detection scores from the detector used in (a) versus the
ground-truth counts. (d) The predictions from the network used in
(b) versus the true crowd counts.

calize the position for each person. The number of detections is then treated as the crowd count. Early works
[8, 34, 10] employ low-level features as region descriptors,
followed by a classifier for classification. Benefiting from
the recent progress in object detection using deep neural
networks [14, 25, 24, 12], in ideal images with relatively
large individual sizes and sparse crowd densities, detection
based counting could surpass human performance. Different from crowd counting by detection, regression based
methods [19, 23, 40, 28, 42, 2] obtain the crowd count without explicitly detecting and localizing each individual. Pre15197

