Deep Learning under Privileged Information Using Heteroscedastic Dropout
John Lambert∗, Ozan Sener∗, Silvio Savarese
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
johnwl,osener,ssilvio@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
“Better than a thousand days of diligent study is one day with
a great teacher.”
— Japanese Proverb

It is a common belief that human students require far
fewer training examples than any learning machine [38]. No
doubt this has to do with the fact that effective teachers provide much more than the correct answer to their pupils; they
provide an explanation in addition to the result.
In a typical machine learning setup, we present tuples
{(xi , yi )}ni=1 to a machine learning model. One way to introduce an “explanation” to a supervised learning system
would be to provide some sort of privileged information,
∗ Equal contribution

Test

Unlike machines, humans learn through rapid, abstract
model-building. The role of a teacher is not simply to
hammer home right or wrong answers, but rather to provide intuitive comments, comparisons, and explanations to
a pupil. This is what the Learning Under Privileged Information (LUPI) paradigm endeavors to model by utilizing
extra knowledge only available during training. We propose
a new LUPI algorithm specifically designed for Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). We propose to use a heteroscedastic dropout
(i.e. dropout with a varying variance) and make the variance of the dropout a function of privileged information.
Intuitively, this corresponds to using the privileged information to control the uncertainty of the model output. We
perform experiments using CNNs and RNNs for the tasks of
image classification and machine translation. Our method
significantly increases the sample efficiency during learning, resulting in higher accuracy with a large margin when
the number of training examples is limited. We also theoretically justify the gains in sample efficiency by providing
a generalization error bound decreasing with O( n1 ), where
n is the number of training examples, in an oracle case.

Training

Abstract
Dropout

Learned Model

(

Learned Model

Cheetah

) Cheetah

Figure 1. In Learning Under Privileged Information (LUPI)
paradigm, a teacher provides additional information during training. In this work, we propose to utilize this information in order to
control the variance of the Dropout. Since the Dropout’s variance
is not constant, we call this a Heteroscedastic Dropout. Our empirical and theoretical analysis suggests that Heteroscedastic Dropout
singificantly increses sample efficiency of both CNNs and RNNs
resulting in higher accuracy with much less data.

which we entitle x⋆ . In practice, one can incorporate the
triplets {(xi , x⋆i , yi )}ni=1 into a learning system at training
time and the testing stage continues to make use of only x,
without any access to x⋆ . In other words, the “Student” has
access to privileged information while interacting with the
“Teacher” during training, but in the test stage the “Student”
operates without the supervision of the “Teacher”. This
paradigm is called Learning Under Privileged Information
(LUPI) and was introduced by Vapnik and Vashist [38].
Vapnik and Vashist [38] provide a LUPI algorithm for
the Support Vector Machines (SVMs). From an algorithmic
perspective, the privileged information is utilized to estimate slack values of the SVM constraints. From a theoretical perspective, this algorithm accelerates
q the rate at which
1
upper bound on error drops from O
n to a far steeper

curve of O n1 , where n is the number of required samples.
Privileged information is ubiquitous: it usually exists for
almost any machine learning problem. However, we do not
see wide adoption of such methods in practice. The major obstacle is the fact that the original LUPI framework

18886

