On the Robustness of Semantic Segmentation Models to Adversarial Attacks
Anurag Arnab1 Ondrej Miksik1,2 Philip H.S. Torr1
1
University of Oxford 2 Emotech Labs
{anurag.arnab, ondrej.miksik, philip.torr}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been demonstrated
to perform exceptionally well on most recognition tasks
such as image classification and segmentation. However,
they have also been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial
examples. This phenomenon has recently attracted a lot of
attention but it has not been extensively studied on multiple, large-scale datasets and complex tasks such as semantic segmentation which often require more specialised networks with additional components such as CRFs, dilated
convolutions, skip-connections and multiscale processing.
In this paper, we present what to our knowledge is the
first rigorous evaluation of adversarial attacks on modern semantic segmentation models, using two large-scale
datasets. We analyse the effect of different network architectures, model capacity and multiscale processing, and show
that many observations made on the task of classification do
not always transfer to this more complex task. Furthermore,
we show how mean-field inference in deep structured models and multiscale processing naturally implement recently
proposed adversarial defenses. Our observations will aid
future efforts in understanding and defending against adversarial examples. Moreover, in the shorter term, we show
which segmentation models should currently be preferred in
safety-critical applications due to their inherent robustness.

1. Introduction
Computer vision has progressed to the point where Deep
Neural Network (DNN) models for most recognition tasks
such as classification or segmentation have become a widely
available commodity. State-of-the-art performance on various datasets has increased at an unprecedented pace, and
as a result, these models are now being deployed in more
and more complex systems. However, despite DNNs performing exceptionally well in absolute performance scores,
they have also been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples – images which are classified incorrectly (often with high confidence), although there is only a minimal
perceptual difference with correctly classified inputs [59].

This raises doubts about DNNs being used in safety-critical
applications such as driverless vehicles [36] or medical diagnosis [21] since the networks could inexplicably classify
a natural input incorrectly although it is almost identical to
examples it has classified correctly before (Fig. 1). Moreover, it allows the possibility of malicious agents attacking
systems that use neural networks [40, 53, 57, 23]. Hence,
the robustness of networks perturbed by adversarial noise
may be as important as the predictive accuracy on clean inputs. And if multiple models achieve comparable performance, we should always consider deploying the one which
is inherently most robust to adversarial examples in (safetycritical) production settings.
This phenomenon has recently attracted a lot of attention
and numerous strategies have been proposed to train DNNs
to be more robust to adversarial examples [29, 41, 55, 48].
However, these defenses are not universal; they have frequently been found to be vulnerable to other types of attacks [11, 9, 10, 34] and/or come at the cost of performance penalties on clean inputs [12, 31, 48]. To the best of
our knowledge, adversarial examples have not been extensively analysed beyond standard image classification models, and often on small datasets such as MNIST or CIFAR10
[48, 31, 55]. Hence, the vulnerability of modern DNNs to
adversarial attacks on more complex tasks such as semantic
segmentation in the context of real-world datasets covering
different domains remains unclear.
In this paper, we present what to our knowledge is the
first rigorous evaluation of the robustness of semantic segmentation models to adversarial attacks. We focus on semantic segmentation, since it is a significantly more complex task than image classification [5]. This has also been
witnessed by the fact that state-of-the-art semantic segmentation models are typically based on standard image classification architectures [39, 58, 33], extended by additional
components such as dilated convolutions [14, 65], specialised pooling [15, 67], skip-connections [45, 7], Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) [68, 1] and/or multiscale processing [15, 13] whose impact on the robustness has never
been thoroughly studied.
First, we analyse the robustness of various DNN ar1888

