Shift: A Zero FLOP, Zero Parameter Alternative to Spatial Convolutions
Bichen Wu, Alvin Wan∗, Xiangyu Yue∗ , Peter Jin, Sicheng Zhao,
Noah Golmant, Amir Gholaminejad, Joseph Gonzalez, Kurt Keutzer
UC Berkeley
{bichen,alvinwan,xyyue,phj,schzhao,noah.golmant,amirgh,jegonzal,keutzer}@berkeley.edu

Abstract

Shift
DF

DF

…

M

N

…

∗ Authors contributed equally.

⨷

…

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are ubiquitous in
computer vision tasks, including image classification, object detection, face recognition, and style transfer. These
tasks enable many emerging mobile applications and
Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices; however, such devices
have significant memory constraints and restrictions on the
size of over-the-air updates (e.g. 100-150MB). This in turn
imposes constraints on the size of the CNNs used in these
applications. For this reason, we focus on reducing CNN
model size while retaining accuracy, on applicable tasks.
CNNs rely on spatial convolutions with kernel sizes of
3x3 or larger to aggregate spatial information within an
image. However, spatial convolutions are very expensive
in both computation and model size, each of which grows
quadratically with respect to kernel size. In the VGG-16

M
M

…

1. Introduction and Related Work

DF
DF

…

Neural networks rely on convolutions to aggregate spatial information. However, spatial convolutions are expensive in terms of model size and computation, both of which
grow quadratically with respect to kernel size. In this paper, we present a parameter-free, FLOP-free “shift” operation as an alternative to spatial convolutions. We fuse shifts
and point-wise convolutions to construct end-to-end trainable shift-based modules, with a hyperparameter characterizing the tradeoff between accuracy and efficiency. To
demonstrate the operation’s efficacy, we replace ResNet’s
3x3 convolutions with shift-based modules for improved CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 accuracy using 60% fewer parameters; we additionally demonstrate the operation’s resilience
to parameter reduction on ImageNet, outperforming ResNet
family members. We finally show the shift operation’s applicability across domains, achieving strong performance with
fewer parameters on image classification, face verification
and style transfer.

1x1 conv

DF

DF

N

Figure 1: Illustration of a shift operation followed by a 1x1
convolution. The shift operation collect data spatially and
the 1x1 convolution mixes information across channels.

model [19], 3x3 convolutions account for 15 million parameters, and the fc1 layer, effectively a 7x7 convolution,
accounts for 102 million parameters.
Several strategies have been adopted to reduce the size
of spatial convolutions. ResNet[6] employs a “bottleneck
module,” placing two 1x1 convolutions before and after a
3x3 convolution, reducing its number of input and output
channels. Despite this, 3x3 convolutional layers still account for 50% of all parameters in ResNet models with bottleneck modules. SqueezeNet [9] adopts a “fire module,”
where the outputs of a 3x3 convolution and a 1x1 convolution are concatenated along the channel dimension. Recent networks such as ResNext [26], MobileNet [7], and
Xception [1] adopt group convolutions and depth-wise separable convolutions as alternatives to standard spatial convolutions. In theory, depth-wise convolutions require less
computation. However, it is difficult to implement depthwise convolutions efficiently in practice, as their arithmetic
intensity (ratio of FLOPs to memory accesses) is too low to
efficiently utilize hardware. Such a drawback is also mentioned in [29, 1]. ShuffleNet [29] integrates depth-wise convolutions, point-wise group convolutions, and channel-wise
shuffling to further reduce parameters and complexity. In
another work, [12] inherits the idea of a separable convolution to freeze spatial convolutions and learn only point-wise
convolutions. This does reduce the number of learnable parameters but falls short of saving FLOPs or model size.
Our approach is to sidestep spatial convolutions entirely.

9127

