Head color: re
Back color: bl
Crown color:
Wing shape: s

x
seen
Feature Generating Networks for Zero-Shot
Learning
Yongqin Xian1
1

Tobias Lorenz1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus

Bernt Schiele1
2

Zeynep Akata1,2

xg

G(z, a)

unseen
Amsterdam Machine
Learning Lab
?
University of Amsterdam
ResNet space

Abstract
Suffering from the extreme training data imbalance between seen and unseen classes, most of existing state-of-theart approaches fail to achieve satisfactory results for the
challenging generalized zero-shot learning task. To circumvent the need for labeled examples of unseen classes, we
propose a novel generative adversarial network (GAN) that
synthesizes CNN features conditioned on class-level semantic information, offering a shortcut directly from a semantic
descriptor of a class to a class-conditional feature distribution. Our proposed approach, pairing a Wasserstein GAN
with a classification loss, is able to generate sufficiently discriminative CNN features to train softmax classifiers or any
multimodal embedding method. Our experimental results
demonstrate a significant boost in accuracy over the state of
the art on five challenging datasets – CUB, FLO, SUN, AWA
and ImageNet – in both the zero-shot learning and generalized zero-shot learning settings.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has allowed to push performance considerably across a wide range of computer vision and machine
learning tasks. However, almost always, deep learning requires large amounts of training data which we are lacking
in many practical scenarios, e.g. it is impractical to annotate all the concepts that surround us, and have enough of
those annotated samples to train a deep network. Therefore, training data generation has become a hot research
topic [10, 18, 11, 37, 48, 41]. Generative Adversarial Networks [18] are particularly appealing as they allow generating realistic and sharp images conditioned, for instance, on
object categories [37, 48]. However, they do not yet generate images of sufficient quality to train deep learning architectures as demonstrated by our experimental results.
In this work, we are focusing on arguably the most extreme case of lacking data, namely zero-shot learning [24,
46, 9], where the task is to learn to classify when no labeled
examples of certain classes are available during training.

synthetic
image

CNN feature
space
CNN

f-CLSWGAN
real
image

Head color: brown
Belly color: yellow
Bill shape: pointy

CNN

Figure 1: CNN features can be extracted from: 1) real images, however in zero-shot learning we do not have access
to any real images of unseen classes, 2) synthetic images,
however they are not accurate enough to improve image
classification performance. We tackle both of these problems and propose a novel attribute conditional feature generating adversarial network formulation, i.e. f-CLSWGAN,
to generate CNN features of unseen classes.

We argue that this scenario is a great testbed for evaluating the robustness and generalization of generative models.
In particular, if the generator learns discriminative visual
data with enough variation, the generated data should be
useful for supervised learning. Hence, one contribution of
our paper is a comparison of various existing GAN-models
and another competing generative model, i.e. GMMN, for
visual feature generation. In particular, we look into both
zero-shot learning (ZSL) where the test time search space is
restricted to unseen class labels and generalized zero-shot
learning (GZSL) for being a more realistic scenario as at test
time the classifier has to decide between both seen and unseen class labels. In this context, we propose a novel GANmethod – namely f-CLSWGAN that generates features instead of images and is trained with a novel loss improving
over alternative GAN-models.
We summarize our contributions as follows. (1) We propose a novel conditional generative model f-CLSWGAN
that synthesizes CNN features of unseen classes by optimizing the Wasserstein distance regularized by a classification
loss. (2) Across five datasets with varying granularity and
sizes, we consistently improve upon the state of the art in
both the ZSL and GZSL settings. We demonstrate a prac15542

z ~ N(0

