Dual Skipping Networks
Changmao Cheng1∗, Yanwei Fu2∗, Yu-Gang Jiang1†,
Wei Liu3 , Wenlian Lu4 , Jianfeng Feng4 , Xiangyang Xue1
1
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Tencent AI Lab
2
4
School of Data Science, Fudan University
ISTBI, Fudan University

Abstract
Inspired by the recent neuroscience studies on the leftright asymmetry of the human brain in processing low and
high spatial frequency information, this paper introduces a
dual skipping network which carries out coarse-to-fine object categorization. Such a network has two branches to simultaneously deal with both coarse and fine-grained classification tasks. Specifically, we propose a layer-skipping
mechanism that learns a gating network to predict which
layers to skip in the testing stage. This layer-skipping mechanism endows the network with good flexibility and capability in practice. Evaluations are conducted on several widely
used coarse-to-fine object categorization benchmarks, and
promising results are achieved by our proposed network
model.

1. Introduction
Though there are still lots of arguments towards the exactly where and how visual analysis is processed within the
human brain, there is considerable evidence showing that
visual analysis takes place in a predominately and default
coarse-to-fine sequence [16] as shown in Fig. 1(1). The
coarse-to-fine perception is also proportional to the length
of the cerebral circuit path, i.e. time. For example, when the
image of Fig. 1(1) is very quickly shown to a person, only
very coarse visual stimuli can be perceived, such as sand
and umbrella, which is usually of low spatial frequencies.
Nevertheless, given a longer duration, fine-grained details
with relatively higher spatial frequencies can be perceived.
It is natural to ask whether our network has such a mechanism of predicting coarse information with short paths, and
fine visual stimuli with longer paths.
Another question is how the coarse-to-fine sequence is
processed in the human brain? Recent biological experi∗ Equal contribution. Email: {cmcheng16,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn
† Corresponding author. Email: ygj@fudan.edu.cn

(1)

A

B

(2)
Figure 1. (1) The coarse-to-fine sequence. (2-A) Example images to assess cerebral asymmetries for spatial frequencies. (2B) Hemispheric specialization: the left hemisphere (LH)/the right
hemisphere (RH) are predominantly involved in the local/global
letter identification. Figures from [16].

ments [16, 17, 34] reveal that functions of the two cerebral hemispheres are not exactly the same in processing of
spatial frequency information. The left hemisphere (LH)
and the right hemisphere (RH) are predominantly involved
in the high and low spatial frequency processing respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 1(2-A), the top-left figure is
a large global letter made up of small local letters, called
a Navon figure; the top-right figure is a scene image. The
bottom-left and bottom-right are sinusoidal gratings for the
images above. In Fig. 1(2-B), given the same input visual
stimuli, the highly activated regions in LH and RH are corresponding to high (in red) and low (in blue) spatial frequencies. Additionally, from the view of the evolution process, the left-right asymmetry of the brain structure may be
mostly caused by the long-term asymmetrical functions per-

4071

