Efficient Diverse Ensemble for Discriminative Co-Tracking
Kourosh Meshgi, Shigeyuki Oba, Shin Ishii
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
606–8501 Yoshida-honmachi, Kyoto, Japan
{meshgi-k,oba,ishii}@sys.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Ensemble discriminative tracking utilizes a committee of
classifiers, to label data samples, which are in turn, used for
retraining the tracker to localize the target using the collective knowledge of the committee. Committee members could
vary in their features, memory update schemes, or training
data, however, it is inevitable to have committee members
that excessively agree because of large overlaps in their
version space. To remove this redundancy and have an effective ensemble learning, it is critical for the committee to
include consistent hypotheses that differ from one-another,
covering the version space with minimum overlaps. In this
study, we propose an online ensemble tracker that directly
generates a diverse committee by generating an efficient set
of artificial training. The artificial data is sampled from the
empirical distribution of the samples taken from both target and background, whereas the process is governed by
query-by-committee to shrink the overlap between classifiers. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed scheme outperforms conventional ensemble trackers
on public benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Tracking-by-detection [3,5,19,20,22,25] as one the most
popular approaches of discriminative tracking utilizes classifier(s) to perform the classification task using object detectors. In a tracking-by-detection pipeline, several samples
are obtained from each frame of the video sequence, to be
classified and labeled by the target detector, and this information is used to re-train the classifier in a closed feedback
loop. This approach advantages from the overwhelming
maturity of the object detection literature, both in the terms
of accuracy and speed [11,13], yet struggles to keep up with
the target evolution as it rises issues such as proper strategy,
rate, and extent of the model update [32,46,55]. To adapt to
object appearance changes, the tracking-by-detection methods update the decision boundary as opposed to object appearance model in generative trackers. Imperfections of

(a) Typical ensemble state

(b) Conventional update

(c) Partial update

(d) Diversified update

Figure 1. Version space examples for ensemble classifiers. (a) All
hypotheses are consistent with the previous labeled data, but each
represents a different classifier in the version space Vt . In the next
time step, the models are updated with the new data (boxed). (b)
Updating with all of the data tend to make the hypothesis more
overlapping. (c) Random subsets of training data are given to
the hypotheses and they update without considering the rest of the
data, the hypotheses cover random areas of the version space. (d)
Random subsets of training data plus artificial generated data (proposed), trains the hypothese to be mutually uncorrelated as much
as possible, while encouraging them to cover more (unexplored)
area of the version space.

target detection and model update throughout the tracking,
manifest themselves as accumulating errors, which essentially drifts the model from the real target distribution, hence
leads to target loss and tracking failure. Such imperfections
can be caused by labeling noise, self-learning loop, sensitive online-learning schemes, improper update frequency,
non-realistic assumption about the target distribution, and
equal weights for all training samples.
Misclassification of a sample due to drastic target transformations, visual artifacts (such occlusion) or model errors not only degrades target localization accuracy, but also
confuses the classifier [22] when trained by this erroneous
label. Typically in tracking-by-detection, the classifier is
14814

