ISTA-Net: Interpretable Optimization-Inspired Deep Network for Image
Compressive Sensing
Jian Zhang, Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
jian.zhang@kaust.edu.sa, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
With the aim of developing a fast yet accurate algorithm for compressive sensing (CS) reconstruction of natural
images, we combine in this paper the merits of two existing categories of CS methods: the structure insights of traditional optimization-based methods and the speed of recent network-based ones. Specifically, we propose a novel structured deep network, dubbed ISTA-Net, which is inspired by the Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm
(ISTA) for optimizing a general ℓ1 norm CS reconstruction
model. To cast ISTA into deep network form, we develop
an effective strategy to solve the proximal mapping associated with the sparsity-inducing regularizer using nonlinear transforms. All the parameters in ISTA-Net (e.g. nonlinear transforms, shrinkage thresholds, step sizes, etc.)
are learned end-to-end, rather than being hand-crafted.
Moreover, considering that the residuals of natural images
are more compressible, an enhanced version of ISTA-Net
in the residual domain, dubbed ISTA-Net+ , is derived to
further improve CS reconstruction. Extensive CS experiments demonstrate that the proposed ISTA-Nets outperform existing state-of-the-art optimization-based and networkbased CS methods by large margins, while maintaining
fast computational speed. Our source codes are available:
http://jianzhang.tech/projects/ISTA-Net.

1. Introduction
From much fewer acquired measurements than determined by Nyquist sampling theory, Compressive Sensing
(CS) theory demonstrates that a signal can be reconstructed with high probability when it exhibits sparsity in some
transform domain [6, 11]. This novel acquisition strategy
is much more hardware-friendly and it enables image or
video capturing with a sub-Nyquist sampling rate [34, 24].
In addition, by exploiting the redundancy inherent to a signal, CS conducts sampling and compression at the same
time, which greatly alleviates the need for high transmission bandwidth and large storage space, enabling low-cost

Figure 1. CS reconstruction results produced by our proposed
ISTA-Net method and a recent network-based CS reconstruction
method (ReconNet [21]), when the CS ratio is 25%. ISTA-Net
clearly produces a higher fidelity reconstruction.

on-sensor data compression. CS has been applied in many
practical applications, including but not limited to singlepixel imaging [11, 33], accelerating magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) [26], wireless tele-monitoring [50] and cognitive radio communication [36].
Mathematically, the purpose of CS reconstruction is to
infer the original signal x ∈ RN from its randomized CS measurements y = Φx ∈ RM . Here, Φ ∈ RM ×N is a
linear random projection (matrix). Because M ≪ N , this
inverse problem is typically ill-posed, whereby the CS ratio is defined as M
N . In this paper, we mainly focus on CS
reconstruction of natural images. However, it is worth noting that our proposed framework can be easily extended to
videos and other types of data.
In the past decade, a great deal of image CS reconstruction methods have been developed [31, 10, 15, 21]. Most
traditional methods exploit some structured sparsity as an
image prior and then solve a sparsity-regularized optimization problem in an iterative fashion [18, 22, 46, 45, 28].
Based on some well-studied image formation models and
intrinsic image properties, these methods enjoy the advantages of strong convergence and theoretical analysis in most
cases. However, they usually suffer from high computational complexity, and they are also faced with the challenges
of choosing optimal transforms and tuning parameters in
their solvers. Fueled by the powerful learning ability of
deep networks, several deep network-based image CS re-

1828

