COCO-Stuff: Thing and Stuff Classes in Context
Holger Caesar1 Jasper Uijlings2 Vittorio Ferrari1 2
University of Edinburgh1 Google AI Perception2

Abstract
Semantic classes can be either things (objects with a
well-defined shape, e.g. car, person) or stuff (amorphous
background regions, e.g. grass, sky). While lots of classification and detection works focus on thing classes, less attention has been given to stuff classes. Nonetheless, stuff
classes are important as they allow to explain important
aspects of an image, including (1) scene type; (2) which
thing classes are likely to be present and their location
(through contextual reasoning); (3) physical attributes, material types and geometric properties of the scene. To understand stuff and things in context we introduce COCOStuff 1 , which augments all 164K images of the COCO 2017
dataset with pixel-wise annotations for 91 stuff classes. We
introduce an efficient stuff annotation protocol based on superpixels, which leverages the original thing annotations.
We quantify the speed versus quality trade-off of our protocol and explore the relation between annotation time and
boundary complexity. Furthermore, we use COCO-Stuff to
analyze: (a) the importance of stuff and thing classes in
terms of their surface cover and how frequently they are
mentioned in image captions; (b) the spatial relations between stuff and things, highlighting the rich contextual relations that make our dataset unique; (c) the performance of
a modern semantic segmentation method on stuff and thing
classes, and whether stuff is easier to segment than things.

1. Introduction
Most of the recent object detection efforts have focused
on recognizing and localizing thing classes, such as cat and
car. Such classes have a specific size [21, 27] and shape [21,
51, 55, 39, 17, 14], and identifiable parts (e.g. a car has
wheels). Indeed, the main recognition challenges [18, 43,
35] are all about things. In contrast, much less attention has
been given to stuff classes, such as grass and sky, which are
amorphous and have no distinct parts (e.g. a piece of grass
is still grass). In this paper we ask: Is this strong focus on
things justified?
To appreciate the importance of stuff, consider that it
makes up the majority of our visual surroundings. For ex1 http://calvin.inf.ed.ac.uk/datasets/coco-stuff

A large long train on a steel track.
A blue and yellow transit train leaving the station.
A train crossing beneath a city bridge with brick towers.
A train passing by an over bridge with a railway track (..).
A train is getting ready to leave the train station.

Figure 1: (left) An example image, (middle) its thing annotations
in COCO [35] and (right) enriched stuff and thing annotations
in COCO-Stuff. Just having the train, person, bench and potted
plant does not tell us much about the context of the scene, but with
stuff and thing labels we can infer the position and orientation of
the train, its stuff-thing interactions (train leaving the station) and
thing-thing interactions (person waiting for a different train). This
is also visible in the captions written by humans. Whereas the captions only mention one thing (train), they describe a multitude of
different stuff classes (track, station, bridge, tower, railway), stuffthing interactions (train leaving the station, train crossing beneath
a city bridge) and spatial arrangements (on, beneath).

ample, sky, walls and most ground types are stuff. Furthermore, stuff often determines the type of a scene, so it can
be very descriptive for an image (e.g. in a beach scene the
beach and water are the essential elements, more so than
people and volleyball). Stuff is also crucial for reasoning
about things: Stuff captures the 3D layout of the scene and
therefore heavily constrains the possible locations of things.
The contact points between stuff and things are critical for
determining depth ordering and relative positions of things,
which supports understanding the relations between them.
Finally, stuff provides context helping to recognize small or
uncommon things, e.g. a metal thing in the sky is likely an
aeroplane, while a metal thing in the water is likely a boat.
For all these reasons, stuff plays an important role in scene
understanding and we feel it deserves more attention.
In this paper we introduce the COCO-Stuff dataset,
which augments the popular COCO [35] with pixel-wise
annotations for a rich and diverse set of 91 stuff classes. The
original COCO dataset already provides outline-level annotation for 80 thing classes. The additional stuff annotations
enable the study of stuff-thing interactions in the complex
COCO images. To illustrate the added value of our stuff an11209

