The Best of Both Worlds: Combining CNNs and
Geometric Constraints for Hierarchical Motion Segmentation
Pia Bideau

Aruni RoyChowdhury
Rakesh R. Menon
Erik Learned-Miller
College of Information and Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{pbideau, arunirc, rrmenon, elm}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Traditional methods of motion segmentation use powerful geometric constraints to understand motion, but fail
to leverage the semantics of high-level image understanding. Modern CNN methods of motion analysis, on the
other hand, excel at identifying well-known structures, but
may not precisely characterize well-known geometric constraints. In this work, we build a new statistical model
of rigid motion flow based on classical perspective projection constraints. We then combine piecewise rigid motions
into complex deformable and articulated objects, guided by
semantic segmentation from CNNs and a second “objectlevel” statistical model. This combination of classical geometric knowledge combined with the pattern recognition
abilities of CNNs yields excellent performance on a wide
range of motion segmentation benchmarks, from complex
geometric scenes to camouflaged animals.

1. Introduction

Figure 1: A hierarchical model for motion segmentation.
The first level of our method estimates rigid motion components from optical flow. The second level groups these components based upon object proposals from SharpMask [35]
to form object motion models.

Understanding motion is fundamental to our understanding of the world, from predicting the immediate future to
understanding actions and interactions, and even in defining
objectness itself. In this work we revisit the classic problem
of motion segmentation in moving camera videos, a first
step in understanding and interpreting motion.
Motion segmentation is an intriguing problem in that it
combines subareas of vision in which geometry is a powerful constraint–the understanding of how images will change
under camera motion–with “messy” problems like segmentation and the deformation of flexible moving objects, in
which there are virtually no hard geometric constraints.
This has given rise to a range of methods–some that use
mostly geometric techniques while largely ignoring appearance [16, 3, 48], and others that try to learn the entire
pipeline using CNN architectures [43, 44, 18] attempting to
learn both the image patterns and the flow patterns in CNNs.

Methods that use motion cues alone, without appearance
models of moving objects, are likely to fail in cases where
flow is noisy, ambiguous, or hard to determine. Such purely
“geometric” approaches are often not sufficient to understand motion well. The appearance of what is moving must
also be considered. This suggests using deep learning methods to solve the problem.
Of course, CNNs are excellent at modeling the appearance of objects [23, 40, 14]. They excel at finding objects
in static images and videos [12, 25, 37]. They are also very
good at segmenting objects [8, 49, 24, 13, 26, 38], exceeding performance of pre-CNN methods. However, there are
cases where appearance alone is simply not enough to segment well. Such cases are highlighted by the Camouflaged
Animal motion segmentation data set [3], in which moving
objects are virtually invisible in many of the static frames.
1508

