Defense against Adversarial Attacks Using
High-Level Representation Guided Denoiser
Fangzhou Liao∗, Ming Liang∗, Yinpeng Dong, Tianyu Pang, Xiaolin Hu†, Jun Zhu
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua Lab of Brain and Intelligence,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, BNRist Lab
Tsinghua University, 100084 China
{liaofangzhou, liangming.tsinghua}@gmail.com, {dyp17, pty17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xlhu, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples,
which poses a threat to their application in security sensitive systems. We propose high-level representation guided
denoiser (HGD) as a defense for image classification. Standard denoiser suffers from the error amplification effect, in
which small residual adversarial noise is progressively amplified and leads to wrong classifications. HGD overcomes
this problem by using a loss function defined as the difference between the target model’s outputs activated by the
clean image and denoised image. Compared with ensemble
adversarial training which is the state-of-the-art defending
method on large images, HGD has three advantages. First,
with HGD as a defense, the target model is more robust to
either white-box or black-box adversarial attacks. Second,
HGD can be trained on a small subset of the images and
generalizes well to other images and unseen classes. Third,
HGD can be transferred to defend models other than the
one guiding it. In NIPS competition on defense against adversarial attacks, our HGD solution won the first place and
outperformed other models by a large margin. 1

Figure 1: The idea of high-level representation guided denoiser. The difference between the original image and adversarial image is tiny, but the difference is amplified in
high-level representation (logits for example) of a CNN. We
use the distance over high-level representations to guide the
training of an image denoiser to suppress the influence of
adversarial perturbation.

1. Introduction
As many other machine learning models [2], neural networks are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples
[30, 7]. Adversarial examples are maliciously designed inputs to attack a target model. They have small perturbations
on original inputs but can mislead the target model. Adversarial examples can be transferred across different models
[30, 21]. This transferability enables black-box adversarial attacks without knowing the weights and structures of
the target model. Black-box attacks have been shown to be
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
1 Code: https://github.com/lfz/Guided-Denoise.

feasible in real-world scenarios [22], which poses a potential threat to security-sensitive deep learning applications,
such as identity authentication and autonomous driving. It
is thus important to find effective defenses against adversarial attacks.
Since adversarial examples are constructed by adding
noises to original images, a natural idea is to denoise adversarial examples before sending them to the target model
(Figure 1). We explored two models for denoising adversarial examples, and found that the noise level could indeed be
reduced. These results demonstrate the feasibility of the de11778

