Free supervision from video games
Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin
philkr@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Deep networks are extremely hungry for data. They devour hundreds of thousands of labeled images to learn robust and semantically meaningful feature representations.
Current networks are so data hungry that collecting labeled
data has become as important as designing the networks
themselves. Unfortunately, manual data collection is both
expensive and time consuming. We present an alternative,
and show how ground truth labels for many vision tasks
are easily extracted from video games in real time as we
play them. We interface the popular Microsoft R DirectX R
rendering API, and inject specialized rendering code into
the game as it is running. This code produces ground truth
labels for instance segmentation, semantic labeling, depth
estimation, optical flow, intrinsic image decomposition, and
instance tracking. Instead of labeling images, a researcher
now simply plays video games all day long. Our method
is general and works on a wide range of video games. We
collected a dataset of 220k training images, and 60k test
images across 3 video games, and evaluate state of the art
optical flow, depth estimation and intrinsic image decomposition algorithms. Our video game data is visually closer to
real world images, than other synthetic dataset.

1. Introduction
Supervised deep learning is the engine of computer vision, and good datasets are its fuel. Researchers use them
to develop novel architectures and models, evaluate their
performance, and measure the general progress of the field.
Traditionally, most datasets were collected by human annotators, mimicking some part of the human perception system. Examples include boundary detection [1], segmentation [1], semantic labeling [29, 42], depth estimation [42],
and many more. However, human annotations have two
clear drawbacks: They are expensive to collect, and they
bias research towards fields in which labels are readily
available. Consider recent datasets image captioning [29],
visual reasoning [24], image [12] or scene recognition [45]
datasets. Each spurred a proliferation of algorithms, mod-

els and training objectives in their respective field. In other
fields, such as depth estimation, optical flow, or intrinsic
image decomposition, human labels are much harder to obtain. This led researchers to either focus on problems with
plentiful human annotations, or abandon human labels and
supervised learning all together [13,19,35]. Neither of these
solutions is truly satisfying.
In this paper, we propose a different solution: we collect
more labels. We use video games to produce ground truth
labels without the need for human supervision. We obtain
the ground truth labels through a wrapper around the commonly used DirectX R 11 API. Our wrapper intercepts and
modifies any rendering calls by the video game. We reverse
engineered the DirectX HLSL binary shader format, which
allows us to inject arbitrary code into the rendering pipeline.
We force the game to render our ground truth labels in addition to the final image. Our wrapper labels the images in
real time without slowing the game down, allowing a seamless gaming experience in the name of science.
Our method collects a virtually infinite stream of tracked
instance segmentations, semantic labels, depth, optical flow
and albedo, paired with the gamer’s actions, and a partial
internal game state. For examples, see Figure 1. Very few
of these labels are easily obtained through human annotations, and thus complement existing datasets. In an effort
to increase the visual diversity of the collected data, we use
multiple different video games, simulating a wide range of
human visual experiences: starting with the survivalist life
of an early cave men in Far Cry Primal [43], to the jours of
a medieval warrior in The Witcher 3 [8], and culminating
in the challenges facing a modern American man in Grand
Theft Auto V [39]. Each game’s features different environments, weather conditions, and a full day night cycle.
We collected a dataset of 220k training images, and 60k
test images across our three video games, and evaluate state
of the art optical flow and depth estimation algorithms. The
new dataset is more challenging that existing ones. Finally,
we evaluate the visual similarity between our dataset and
other real world datasets, and show that our dataset is closest to real world benchmarks, while being absolutely free to
collect.
12955

