Robust Classification with Convolutional Prototype Learning
Hong-Ming Yang1,2 , Xu-Yao Zhang1,2 , Fei Yin1,2 , Cheng-Lin Liu1,2,3
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China
3
CAS Center for Excellence of Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, P.R. China
{hongming.yang, xyz, fyin, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely
used for image classification. Despite its high accuracies,
CNN has been shown to be easily fooled by some adversarial examples, indicating that CNN is not robust enough
for pattern classification. In this paper, we argue that the
lack of robustness for CNN is caused by the softmax layer,
which is a totally discriminative model and based on the assumption of closed world (i.e., with a fixed number of categories). To improve the robustness, we propose a novel
learning framework called convolutional prototype learning (CPL). The advantage of using prototypes is that it can
well handle the open world recognition problem and therefore improve the robustness. Under the framework of CPL, we design multiple classification criteria to train the
network. Moreover, a prototype loss (PL) is proposed as
a regularization to improve the intra-class compactness of
the feature representation, which can be viewed as a generative model based on the Gaussian assumption of different
classes. Experiments on several datasets demonstrate that
CPL can achieve comparable or even better results than
traditional CNN, and from the robustness perspective, CPL shows great advantages for both the rejection and incremental category learning tasks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks [16] (CNNs) have achieved great success for pattern recognition
and computer vision, leading to important progress in a variety of tasks, like image classification [15, 8, 7, 34], object
detection [1, 29, 9], instance segmentation [28, 6] and so
on.
Despite the success of CNN, it still suffer from some serious problems. One example is the existence of adversarial samples [37], when we add small noises or make some
small changes to the initial samples, CNN will give different predictions for these samples with high confidence, al-

Figure 1. Feature representation learned by traditional CNN model
on MNIST. Different colors represent different classes. It is shown
that the inter-class variation is even smaller than the intra-class
variation.

though visually we can hardly find any significant changes
in the images. Another example is the rejection ability of
CNN, when feed a sample from an unseen class to CNN, it will still allocate the sample to a known class with
high confidence. These two phenomena indicate that CNN
is not robust, though it can achieve human-level or even better accuracy on some specific datasets, its performance will
degenerate obviously in the complex scenes of the reality.
This greatly limits the application of CNN in real worlds.
The main reasons for these problems include two aspects:
First, CNN is a purely discriminative model, it essentially
learns a partition of the “whole” feature space, therefore, the
samples from unseen classes are still predicted to some specific regions under the partition, and CNN still views these
samples as some known classes with high confidence. This
explains why the rejection ability of CNN is poor; Second,
from the perspective of representation learning, the learned
representation of CNN is linear separable, see Fig. 1 for an
illustration, and under this kind of representation, the interclass distance is sometimes even smaller than the intra-class
distance, this significantly reduces the robustness of CNN in
real and complicated environments.
Several methods have been proposed to improve the ro-

3474

