Real-World Repetition Estimation by Div, Grad and Curl
Tom F. H. Runia
Cees G. M. Snoek
Arnold W. M. Smeulders
QUVA Deep Vision Lab, University of Amsterdam
{runia,cgmsnoek,a.w.m.smeulders}@uva.nl

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating repetition in video,
such as performing push-ups, cutting a melon or playing
violin. Existing work shows good results under the assumption of static and stationary periodicity. As realistic
video is rarely perfectly static and stationary, the often preferred Fourier-based measurements is inapt. Instead, we
adopt the wavelet transform to better handle non-static and
non-stationary video dynamics. From the flow field and its
differentials, we derive three fundamental motion types and
three motion continuities of intrinsic periodicity in 3D. On
top of this, the 2D perception of 3D periodicity considers
two extreme viewpoints. What follows are 18 fundamental
cases of recurrent perception in 2D. In practice, to deal
with the variety of repetitive appearance, our theory implies
measuring time-varying flow Ft and its differentials ∇Ft ,
∇ · Ft and ∇ × Ft over segmented foreground motion. For
experiments, we introduce the new QUVA Repetition dataset,
reflecting reality by including non-static and non-stationary
videos. On the task of counting repetitions in video, we obtain
favorable results compared to a deep learning alternative.

1. Introduction
Visual repetition is ubiquitous in the world around us. It is
present in activities like rowing, music-making and cooking.
It arises in natural and urban environments: traffic patterns,
blinking lights, and leaves in the wind. Rhythm and repetition are used to approximate velocity, estimate progress and
to trigger attention [13]. In computer vision, understanding
repetition in video is important as it can serve action classification [9, 17], action localization [14, 24], human motion
analysis [1, 21], 3D reconstruction [3] and camera calibration
[12]. Estimating repetition remains challenging. First and
foremost, repetition appears in many forms due to its variety
in motion pattern and motion continuity. The viewpoint is
crucial for the perception of recurrence. In practice, camera
motion makes repetition estimation inevitably hard.
Existing work on repetition estimation in video [15, 19]
reports good results under the assumption that the motion is

Figure 1. Four examples of visual repetition under realistic circumstances. The first two rows show oscillatory translation under two
different viewpoints. Similarly for constant rotation in the bottom
rows. The abstraction on the left symbolizes the perceived flow in
2D, to be detailed in Section 3.

well-localized (static) and strongly periodic (stationary). In
short, existing work focuses on video that is static in every
aspect of repetition. As real life is more complex, our method
relies on motion foreground segmentation to localize the
salient motion and handle non-static video. Furthermore,
we found fixed-period Fourier analysis [7, 19, 20] to be
unsuitable for repetition estimation in real-world video as nonstationarity often appears. To permit non-stationary video
dynamics, we adopt the wavelet transform for decomposing
video signals into a time-frequency spectrum.
We reconsider the theory of repetition [19, 8] starting
from the divergence, gradient and curl operators acting on
the 3D flow field. We derive three motion types and three
motion continuities. What follows are 3 × 3 fundamental
cases of intrinsic periodicity in 3D. For the 2D perception
of 3D intrinsic periodicity, the observer’s viewpoint can be
somewhere in the continuous range between two viewpoint
extremes. Ultimately, we distinguish 18 fundamental cases
for the 2D perception of 3D intrinsic periodic motion.
The contributions of our work are the following. (1) Starting from the first principles of 3D periodicity and its perception in 2D, we derive 18 fundamentally different cases of

9009

