Towards Human-Machine Cooperation:
Self-supervised Sample Mining for Object Detection
Keze Wang1,2
Xiaopeng Yan1
Dongyu Zhang1∗
Lei Zhang2
Liang Lin1,3
2
3
Sun Yat-sen University
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
SenseTime Research

1

kezewang@gmail.com; yanxp3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; zhangdy27@mail.sysu.edu.cn
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk; linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Though quite challenging, leveraging large-scale unlabeled or partially labeled images in a cost-effective way
has increasingly attracted interests for its great importance
to computer vision. To tackle this problem, many Active
Learning (AL) methods have been developed. However,
these methods mainly define their sample selection criteria within a single image context, leading to the suboptimal robustness and impractical solution for large-scale object detection. In this paper, aiming to remedy the drawbacks of existing AL methods, we present a principled
Self-supervised Sample Mining (SSM) process accounting
for the real challenges in object detection. Specifically,
our SSM process concentrates on automatically discovering
and pseudo-labeling reliable region proposals for enhancing the object detector via the introduced cross image validation, i.e., pasting these proposals into different labeled
images to comprehensively measure their values under different image contexts. By resorting to the SSM process, we
propose a new AL framework for gradually incorporating
unlabeled or partially labeled data into the model learning
while minimizing the annotating effort of users. Extensive
experiments on two public benchmarks clearly demonstrate
our proposed framework can achieve the comparable performance to the state-of-the-art methods with significantly
fewer annotations.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, object detection has gained incredible
improvements both in accuracy and efficiency, benefiting
from the remarkable success of deep Convolutional Neural
Nets (CNNs) [19][33][14]. Through producing candidate
object regions of input images, object detection is converted
into the region classification task, e.g., R-CNN [12]. Recently, more powerful neural network architectures such as
∗ Corresponding author is Dongyu Zhang.

ResNet [14] have further pushed the object detection performance into new records. Behind these successes, massive
data collection and annotation such as MS-COCO [25] are
indispensable yet quite expensive. Under such a circumstance, there is an increasing demand of leveraging largescale unlabeled data to promote the detection performance
in an incremental learning manner. However, to achieve this
goal, there remain two technical issues: i) Object annotation
for training is usually labor-intensive. Compared with other
visual recognition task (e.g., image classification), annotating object requests to provide both the category label and
bounding box of an object. In order to reduce the burden of
active users, it is highly required to develop human-machine
cooperation based approaches to self-annotate most of the
unlabeled data; ii) Picking out the training samples that are
advantageous to boost the detection performance is a nontrivial task. As figured out in [32, 15], existing detection
benchmarks usually contain an overwhelming number of
“easy” examples and a small number of “hard” ones (i.e.,
informative samples with various illuminations, deformations, occlusions and other intra-class variations). Utilizing
these “hard” samples is a key to train the model more effectively and efficiently. However, as pointed out in [39],
due to following a long-tail distribution, these examples are
quite uncommon. Hence, it is a sophisticated task to find
“hard” yet informative samples.
To address the aforementioned issues, we investigate
sample mining techniques to incrementally improve object
detectors with minimal user effort. Recently, Active Learning (AL) [9, 22, 31, 23, 26] proposed to progressively select and annotate most informative unlabeled samples for
user annotation to boost the model. Hence, the sample selection criteria play a crucial role in AL, and are typically
defined according to the prediction certainty (confidence)
or other informative criteria like diversity of samples. Recently, many AL methods [37, 24, 36] have been developed
for training deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
However, their sample selection criteria are dominantly performed under a single sample context. This make them sen-

1605

