Leveraging Unlabeled Data for Crowd Counting by Learning to Rank
Xialei Liu
Computer Vision Center
Barcelona, Spain

Joost van de Weijer
Computer Vision Center
Barcelona, Spain

Andrew D. Bagdanov
MICC, University of Florence
Florence, Italy

xialei@cvc.uab.es

joost@cvc.uab.es

andrew.bagdanov@unifi.it

Abstract
We propose a novel crowd counting approach that leverages abundantly available unlabeled crowd imagery in
a learning-to-rank framework. To induce a ranking of
cropped images , we use the observation that any sub-image
of a crowded scene image is guaranteed to contain the same
number or fewer persons than the super-image. This allows us to address the problem of limited size of existing
datasets for crowd counting. We collect two crowd scene
datasets from Google using keyword searches and queryby-example image retrieval, respectively. We demonstrate
how to efficiently learn from these unlabeled datasets by incorporating learning-to-rank in a multi-task network which
simultaneously ranks images and estimates crowd density
maps. Experiments on two of the most challenging crowd
counting datasets show that our approach obtains state-ofthe-art results.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting and crowd density estimation techniques aim to count the number of persons in crowded
scenes. They are essential in video surveillance [3], safety
monitoring, and behavior analysis [29]. Person counting
and density estimation are instances of a broader class of
classical counting problems in computer vision. Counting
semantic image features is important in medical and biological image processing [18], vehicle counting [25], and
numerous other application contexts.
Despite the attention the crowd counting problem has received, both classically and in the recent computer vision
literature, it remains a difficult task in practice. Perspective distortion, clutter, occlusion, non-uniform distribution
of people, complex illumination, scale variation, and a host
of other scene-incidental imaging conditions render person counting and crowd density estimation in unconstrained
images an extremely daunting problem. Techniques for
crowd counting have been recently improved using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). These recent approaches

I1

I1

I2

I3

I2

I3

C(I1) ≥ C(I2) ≥ C(I3)
Figure 1. Using ranked sub-images for self-supervised training.
We sample a decreasing sequence of sub-images I1 , I2 , and I3
from an unlabeled image. Though we do not know the exact person counts C(Ii ), we use the fact that C(I1 ) ≥ C(I2 ) ≥ C(I3 )
as self-supervision to learn representations for person counting.

include scale-aware regression models [25], multi-column
CNNs [37], and switching networks [1]. As with most CNN
architectures, however, these person counting and crowd
density estimation techniques are highly data-driven. Even
modestly deep architectures for visual recognition require
massive amounts of labeled training data for learning. For
person counting, the labeling burden is even more onerous
than usual. Training data for person counting requires that
each individual person be meticulously labeled in training
images. It is for this reason that person counting and crowd
density estimation datasets tend to have only a few hundred
images available for training. As a consequence, the ability
to train these sophisticated CNN-based models suffers.
Recently, self-supervised learning has received more attention because it provides an alternative to collecting large
hand-labeled datasets. Self-supervised learning is based on
17661

