MovieGraphs: Towards Understanding Human-Centric Situations from Videos
Paul Vicol1,2 Makarand Tapaswi1,2 Lluís Castrejón3 Sanja Fidler1,2
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms
{pvicol, makarand, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu, lluis.enric.castrejon.subira@umontreal.ca

http://moviegraphs.cs.toronto.edu
Video Clip
caucasian

compassionate
worried

his leg braces slow him down
0:56-1:02

kid

friend

to run

frustrated
scared

encourages

male

Summary Int.

Attribute

Topic

Relationship

Reason

Interaction

Timestamp

Forrest Gump
caucasian

0:00-0:13

kid

to not get beaten

hit

enemy

that he is a dummy
insults
he is different from them
0:00-0:10

Playing

Character

0:24-0:28.5

with rocks

Bus ride

Legend

female
Jenny Curran

Talk with stranger

runs from

aggressive

hateful
violent

to get him
0:19.5-1:02

Escape

Bullying

Description:
0:34-1:02

chases
Bullies

Scene: Field Road
Situation: Bullying
As Jenny and Forrest are on the road, three
boys start throwing rocks at Forrest.
Jenny urges him to run from them. While
Forrest runs, his leg braces fall apart.

Family altercation

Bedtime

Football game

Figure 1: An example from the MovieGraphs dataset. Each of the 7637 video clips is annotated with: 1) a graph that captures the characters
in the scene and their attributes, interactions (with topics and reasons), relationships, and time stamps; 2) a situation label that captures the
overarching theme of the interactions; 3) a scene label showing where the action takes place; and 4) a natural language description of the
clip. The graphs at the bottom show situations that occur before and after the one depicted in the main panel.

Abstract
There is growing interest in artificial intelligence to build
socially intelligent robots. This requires machines to have
the ability to “read” people’s emotions, motivations, and
other factors that affect behavior. Towards this goal, we introduce a novel dataset called MovieGraphs which provides
detailed, graph-based annotations of social situations depicted in movie clips. Each graph consists of several types of
nodes, to capture who is present in the clip, their emotional
and physical attributes, their relationships (i.e., parent/child),
and the interactions between them. Most interactions are
associated with topics that provide additional details, and
reasons that give motivations for actions. In addition, most
interactions and many attributes are grounded in the video
with time stamps. We provide a thorough analysis of our
dataset, showing interesting common-sense correlations between different social aspects of scenes, as well as across

scenes over time. We propose a method for querying videos
and text with graphs, and show that: 1) our graphs contain
rich and sufficient information to summarize and localize
each scene; and 2) subgraphs allow us to describe situations at an abstract level and retrieve multiple semantically
relevant situations. We also propose methods for interaction understanding via ordering, and reason understanding.
MovieGraphs is the first benchmark to focus on inferred
properties of human-centric situations, and opens up an
exciting avenue towards socially-intelligent AI agents.

1. Introduction
An important part of effective interaction is behaving
appropriately in a given situation. People typically know
how to talk to their boss, react to a worried parent or a
naughty child, or cheer up a friend. This requires proper
reading of people’s emotions, understanding their mood,

8581

