Compare and Contrast: Learning Prominent Visual Differences
Steven Chen
Kristen Grauman
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Relative attribute models can compare images in terms
of all detected properties or attributes, exhaustively predicting which image is fancier, more natural, and so on without
any regard to ordering. However, when humans compare
images, certain differences will naturally stick out and come
to mind first. These most noticeable differences, or prominent differences, are likely to be described first. In addition,
many differences, although present, may not be mentioned
at all. In this work, we introduce and model prominent differences, a rich new functionality for comparing images. We
collect instance-level annotations of most noticeable differences, and build a model trained on relative attribute features that predicts prominent differences for unseen pairs.
We test our model on the challenging UT-Zap50K shoes and
LFW10 faces datasets, and outperform an array of baseline
methods. We then demonstrate how our prominence model
improves two vision tasks, image search and description
generation, enabling more natural communication between
people and vision systems.

1. Introduction
Suppose you are asked to compare and contrast two different shoes, shown in Figure 1. You might say that the
left shoe is more formal than the right shoe, then perhaps
state that the left shoe is more shiny and less comfortable
than the right shoe. As soon as you are given the images,
these differences stick out and are most noticeable. However, consider that the two shoes have a huge number of
differences. For instance, the left shoe is more rugged than
the right shoe, and also darker. Although these other differences are certainly present and true, they are much less
noticeable to us, and we would likely mention them later, or
not at all.
In general, when we perform any comparison task on
a pair of images, certain differences stick out as being
most noticeable out of the space of all discernible differences. These most noticeable differences, or prominent differences, stand out and would be described first, while most
other differences are not as noticeable and would typically
not be mentioned in a description.

Figure 1: When we compare images, certain differences stick out over others. Although all the attribute statements on the left are true, the prominent
differences in bold stand out and would often be described first, whereas
the others may not even be mentioned.

In this work, we introduce and learn prominent differences in images, expressing them through relative attributes.
When people compare images, they can describe differences in their attributes, human-nameable visual properties of images [9, 14, 20, 24, 26, 34, 43] used to describe
anything from materials (smooth, furry) and parts (has
leg, has glasses) to styles (sporty, formal) and expressions
(smiling, sad). Relative attributes, or attributes that indicate an image’s attribute strength relative to other images,
provide an intuitive and meaningful representation for visual comparison, and have been widely used for vision
tasks [7,20,29,37,40,41,45–47]. Relative attributes express
comparisons of attribute strength (e.g., image X is smiling
more than Y, but smiling less than Z), and are the natural
vocabulary of our proposed prominent differences.
Prominent differences have many practical applications
in vision. Humans interact with vision systems as both users
and supervisors, and naturally communicate prominence.
For instance, in an interactive search task, where humans
provide comparative feedback (e.g., I would like to see images like this shoe, but more formal [20]), the attributes that
people elect to comment on are prominent differences. In
zero-shot learning with relative attributes [14, 34], where
humans describe unseen visual categories to a machine
by comparing with seen categories, prominence could enhance learning by better understanding these comparisons.
Prominent differences are the properties humans provide
first when making comparisons, and thus directly influence
how humans interpret comparison descriptions. Prominence could also be used to highlight the differences that

1267

