Frustum PointNets for 3D Object Detection from RGB-D Data
Charles R. Qi1∗
Wei Liu2
Chenxia Wu2
Hao Su3
Leonidas J. Guibas1
1
2
3
Stanford University
Nuro, Inc.
UC San Diego

Abstract
In this work, we study 3D object detection from RGBD data in both indoor and outdoor scenes. While previous
methods focus on images or 3D voxels, often obscuring natural 3D patterns and invariances of 3D data, we directly
operate on raw point clouds by popping up RGB-D scans.
However, a key challenge of this approach is how to efficiently localize objects in point clouds of large-scale scenes
(region proposal). Instead of solely relying on 3D proposals, our method leverages both mature 2D object detectors and advanced 3D deep learning for object localization,
achieving efficiency as well as high recall for even small objects. Benefited from learning directly in raw point clouds,
our method is also able to precisely estimate 3D bounding boxes even under strong occlusion or with very sparse
points. Evaluated on KITTI and SUN RGB-D 3D detection
benchmarks, our method outperforms the state of the art by
remarkable margins while having real-time capability.

1. Introduction
Recently, great progress has been made on 2D image understanding tasks, such as object detection [10] and instance
segmentation [11]. However, beyond getting 2D bounding
boxes or pixel masks, 3D understanding is eagerly in demand in many applications such as autonomous driving and
augmented reality (AR). With the popularity of 3D sensors
deployed on mobile devices and autonomous vehicles, more
and more 3D data is captured and processed. In this work,
we study one of the most important 3D perception tasks –
3D object detection, which classifies the object category and
estimates oriented 3D bounding boxes of physical objects
from 3D sensor data.
While 3D sensor data is often in the form of point clouds,
how to represent point cloud and what deep net architectures to use for 3D object detection remains an open problem. Most existing works convert 3D point clouds to images by projection [30, 21] or to volumetric grids by quantization [33, 18, 21] and then apply convolutional networks.
∗ Majority of the work done as an intern at Nuro, Inc.

depth to point cloud
3D box (from PointNet)

2D region (from CNN) to 3D frustum

Figure 1. 3D object detection pipeline. Given RGB-D data, we
first generate 2D object region proposals in the RGB image using a
CNN. Each 2D region is then extruded to a 3D viewing frustum in
which we get a point cloud from depth data. Finally, our frustum
PointNet predicts a (oriented and amodal) 3D bounding box for
the object from the points in frustum.

This data representation transformation, however, may obscure natural 3D patterns and invariances of the data. Recently, a number of papers have proposed to process point
clouds directly without converting them to other formats.
For example, [20, 22] proposed new types of deep net architectures, called PointNets, which have shown superior performance and efficiency in several 3D understanding tasks
such as object classification and semantic segmentation.
While PointNets are capable of classifying a whole point
cloud or predicting a semantic class for each point in a point
cloud, it is unclear how this architecture can be used for
instance-level 3D object detection. Towards this goal, we
have to address one key challenge: how to efficiently propose possible locations of 3D objects in a 3D space. Imitating the practice in image detection, it is straightforward
to enumerate candidate 3D boxes by sliding windows [7]
or by 3D region proposal networks such as [27]. However,
the computational complexity of 3D search typically grows
cubically with respect to resolution and becomes too expensive for large scenes or real-time applications such as
autonomous driving.
Instead, in this work, we reduce the search space following the dimension reduction principle: we take the advantage of mature 2D object detectors (Fig. 1). First, we
extract the 3D bounding frustum of an object by extruding
2D bounding boxes from image detectors. Then, within the
3D space trimmed by each of the 3D frustums, we consecutively perform 3D object instance segmentation and amodal
1918

