Recurrent Residual Module for Fast Inference in Videos
Bowen Pan1† , Wuwei Lin1† , Xiaolin Fang2¶ , Chaoqin Huang1† , Bolei Zhou3§ , Cewu Lu1‡∗
1
†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

{googletornado,linwuwei13, huangchaoqin}@sjtu.edu.cn, ¶ fxlfang@gmail.com
§

bzhou@csail.mit.edu; ‡ lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have made
impressive progress in many video recognition tasks such
as video pose estimation and video object detection. However, CNN inference on video is computationally expensive
due to processing dense frames individually. In this work,
we propose a framework called Recurrent Residual Module
(RRM) to accelerate the CNN inference for video recognition
tasks. This framework has a novel design of using the similarity of the intermediate feature maps of two consecutive
frames, to largely reduce the redundant computation. One
unique property of the proposed method compared to previous work is that feature maps of each frame are precisely
computed. The experiments show that, while maintaining
the similar recognition performance, our RRM yields averagely 2× acceleration on the commonly used CNNs such
as AlexNet, ResNet, deep compression model (thus 8−12×
faster than the original dense models using the efficient inference engine), and impressively 9× acceleration on some
binary networks such as XNOR-Nets (thus 500× faster than
the original model). We further verify the effectiveness of the
RRM on speeding up CNNs for video pose estimation and
video object detection.

1. Introduction
Video understanding is one of the long-standing topics
in computer vision. Recently, deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) advanced different tasks of video understanding, such as video classification [33, 59, 58, 60],
video pose estimation [16, 5], and video object detection [18, 17, 47, 39, 45, 46]. However, using CNNs to
process the dense frames of videos is computationally expensive while it becomes unaffordable as the video goes longer.
Meanwhile, millions of videos are shared on the Internet,
where processing and extracting useful information remains
a challenge. With the video datasets becoming larger and
∗ The corresponding author is Cewu Lu. Cewu Lu is also member of AI
research institution at SJTU. This work was done when Xiaolin Fang was
an intern at MVIG lab of Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

larger [49, 1, 33, 34, 15, 41], training and evaluating neural
networks for video recognition are more challenging. For
example, for Youtube-8M dataset [1] with over 8 million
video clips, it will take 50 years for a CPU to extract the
deep features using a standard CNN model.
One of the bottlenecks for video understanding using
CNNs is the frame-by-frame CNN inference. A one-minute
video contains thousands of frames thus the model inference becomes much slower in comparison with processing a
single image. However, different from a set of independent
images, consecutive frames in a video clip are usually similar.
Thus, the high-level semantic feature maps in the deep convolutional neural networks of the consecutive frames will also
be similar. Intuitively, we can leverage the frame similarity to
reduce some redundant computation in the frame-by-frame
video CNN inference. An attractive recursive schema is as
follows:
R(It ) = R(It−1 ) + G(It − It−1 ),

(1)

where R is the deep CNN feature, G is a fast and shallow
network that only processes the frame difference between
frame It and It−1 in a video clip. Ideally, G should be
both efficient and accurate to extract the residual feature.
However, it remains challenging to implement such a schema
due to the nonlinearity of CNNs.
Some previous works have tried to address this nonlinearity. Zhu et al. [61] proposed deep feature flow framework
which utilizes the flow field to propagate the deep feature
maps. However, these estimated feature maps will cause a
drop on performance compared to the original feature maps.
Kang et al. [32] developed a NoScope system to perform the
fast binary query of the absence of a specific category. It is
fast but not generic enough for other video recognition tasks.
We propose the framework of Recurrent Residual Module
(RRM) to thoroughly address the nonlinear issue of CNNs
in Eq. 1. The nonlinearity of CNNs results from the pooling
layers and activation functions, while the computationally expensive layers such as convolution layer and fully-connected
layer are linear. Thus for two consecutive frame inferences,
if we are able to share the overlapped calculation of these
linear layers, a large amount of the computation can be elim11536

