Zero-shot Recognition via Semantic Embeddings and Knowledge Graphs
Xiaolong Wang∗
Yufei Ye∗
Abhinav Gupta
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We consider the problem of zero-shot recognition: learning a visual classifier for a category with zero training examples, just using the word embedding of the category and
its relationship to other categories, which visual data are
provided. The key to dealing with the unfamiliar or novel
category is to transfer knowledge obtained from familiar
classes to describe the unfamiliar class. In this paper, we
build upon the recently introduced Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) and propose an approach that uses both
semantic embeddings and the categorical relationships to
predict the classifiers. Given a learned knowledge graph
(KG), our approach takes as input semantic embeddings for
each node (representing visual category). After a series of
graph convolutions, we predict the visual classifier for each
category. During training, the visual classifiers for a few
categories are given to learn the GCN parameters. At test
time, these filters are used to predict the visual classifiers of
unseen categories. We show that our approach is robust to
noise in the KG. More importantly, our approach provides
significant improvement in performance compared to the current state-of-the-art results (from 2 ∼ 3% on some metrics
to whopping 20% on a few).

1. Introduction
Consider the animal category “okapi”. Even though we
might have never heard of this category or seen visual examples in the past, we can still learn a good visual classifier based on the following description: ”zebra-striped four
legged animal with a brown torso and a deer-like face” (Test
yourself on figure 1). On the other hand, our current recognition algorithms still operate in closed world conditions: that
is, they can only recognize the categories they are trained
with. Adding a new category requires collecting thousands
of training examples and then retraining the classifiers. To
tackle this problem, zero-shot learning is often used.
The key to dealing with the unfamiliar or novel category
is to transfer knowledge obtained from familiar classes to describe the unfamiliar classes (generalization). There are two
∗ Indicates equal contribution.

Figure 1. Can you find “okapi” in these images? Okapi is ” zebrastriped four legged animal with a brown torso and a deer-like
face”. In this paper, we focus on the problem of zero-shot learning
where visual classifiers are learned from semantic embeddings and
relationships to other categories.

paradigms of transferring knowledge. The first paradigm
is to use implicit knowledge representations, i.e. semantic
embeddings. In this approach, one learns a vector representation of different categories using text data and then learns
a mapping between the vector representation to visual classifier directly [34, 13]. However, these methods are limited
by the generalization power of the semantic models and the
mapping models themselves. It is also hard to learn semantic
embeddings from structured information.
The alternative and less-explored paradigm for zero-shot
learning is to use explicit knowledge bases or knowledge
graphs. In this paradigm, one explicitly represents the knowledge as rules or relationships between objects. These relationships can then be used to learn zero-shot classifiers for
new categories. The simplest example would be to learn
visual classifiers of compositional categories. Given classifiers of primitive visual concepts as inputs, [33] applies
a simple composition rule to generate classifiers for new
complex concepts. However, in the general form, the relationships can be more complex than simple compositionality.
An interesting question we want to explore is if we can use
structured information and complex relationships to learn
visual classifiers without seeing any examples.
In this paper, we propose to distill both the implicit knowledge representations (i.e. word embedding) and explicit
relationships (i.e. knowledge graph) for learning visual classifiers of novel classes. We build a knowledge graph where
each node corresponds to a semantic category. These nodes
are linked via relationship edges. The input to each node of
the graph is the vector representation (semantic embedding)
of each category. We then use Graph Convolutional Network
16857

