Group Consistent Similarity Learning via Deep CRF for Person Re-Identification
Dapeng Chen1,3 Dan Xu2 Hongsheng Li1† Nicu Sebe2 Xiaogang Wang1†
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento
3
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{dpchen, hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

{dan.xu, niculae.sebe}@unitn.it

Abstract

same person pair

Person re-identification benefits greatly from deep neural
networks (DNN) to learn accurate similarity metrics and
robust feature embeddings. However, most of the current
methods impose only local constraints for similarity learning. In this paper, we incorporate constraints on large image groups by combining the CRF with deep neural networks. The proposed method aims to learn the “local similarity” metrics for image pairs while taking into account
the dependencies from all the images in a group, forming
“group similarities”. Our method involves multiple images
to model the relationships among the local and global similarities in a unified CRF during training, while combines
multi-scale local similarities as the predicted similarity in
testing. We adopt an approximate inference scheme for estimating the group similarity, enabling end-to-end training.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
model that combines DNN and CRF for learning robust
multi-scale local similarities. The overall results outperform those by state-of-the-arts with considerable margins
on three widely-used benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is a critical task in intelligent video surveillance, aiming to associate the same people across different cameras. It is generally formulated as a
ranking problem: given a probe image of a person, the algorithm needs to rank all gallery images based on their similarities w.r.t. the probe image. The ranking performance
heavily relies on the quality of similarity metric, which is
usually learned from the data.
Encouraged by the remarkable success of deep neural networks (DNN), the Re-ID community also employs
DNNs for end-to-end similarity learning. A common practice is to employ local constraints. For instance, most meth† H. Li and X. Wang are the co-corresponding authors.

diﬀerent person pair
person B

person A

(a) pairwise loss

(b) triplet loss

person C

(c) quardruplet loss

probe image

local sim.
group sim.

gallery images

(d) proposed CRF-based model

Figure 1: Illustration of different constraints for similarity learning. (a)
pairwise loss, (b) triplet loss, (c) quardruplet loss, and (d) proposed CRF
based model. The green lines connect positive pairs whose in-between
distances need to be minimized, while red lines indicate the negative pairs
whose in-between distances need to be maximized.

ods straightforwardly make use of the pairwise constraints
between image samples [1, 38, 40] (Fig. 1a), trying to minimize the distances between positive pairs while maximizing
the distances between negative pairs. Beyond the pairwise
constraints, several methods adopt the triplet loss [9, 48, 14]
to enforce a correct ranking order (Fig. 1b). Recently, a
quadruplet loss [7] is proposed to further improve the triplet
loss by reducing the intra-class variations and enlarging the
inter-class variations (Fig 1c). To make use of these local
constraints with DNNs, existing approaches have to sample
small cliques such as pairs, triplets or quadruplets, which
are further used to organize training batches and construct
the optimization losses, making the learning of similarity
metric largely dependent on the sampling strategies. As
most of the local constraints can be easily satisfied by the
learned similarity metrics during training, local constraints
are less efficient to contribute useful learning signals. Furthermore, with stochastic gradient descent method, the con18649

