Learning Rich Features for Image Manipulation Detection
Peng Zhou1
Xintong Han1
Vlad I. Morariu2 ∗
Larry S. Davis1
1
2
University of Maryland, College Park
Adobe Research
pengzhou@umd.edu {xintong,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu morariu@adobe.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the advances of image editing techniques and userfriendly editing software, low-cost tampered or manipulated
image generation processes have become widely available.
Among tampering techniques, splicing, copy-move, and removal are the most common manipulations. Image splicing
copies regions from an authentic image and pastes them to
other images, copy-move copies and pastes regions within
the same image, and removal eliminates regions from an
authentic image followed by inpainting. Sometimes, postprocessing like Gaussian smoothing will be applied after
these tampering techniques. Examples of these manipulations are shown in Figure 1. Even with careful inspection,
humans find it difficult to recognize the tampered regions.
∗ The work was done while the author was at the University of Maryland

Splicing
Copy-move
Removal

Image manipulation detection is different from traditional semantic object detection because it pays more attention to tampering artifacts than to image content, which
suggests that richer features need to be learned. We propose a two-stream Faster R-CNN network and train it endto-end to detect the tampered regions given a manipulated
image. One of the two streams is an RGB stream whose purpose is to extract features from the RGB image input to find
tampering artifacts like strong contrast difference, unnatural tampered boundaries, and so on. The other is a noise
stream that leverages the noise features extracted from a
steganalysis rich model filter layer to discover the noise inconsistency between authentic and tampered regions. We
then fuse features from the two streams through a bilinear
pooling layer to further incorporate spatial co-occurrence
of these two modalities. Experiments on four standard image manipulation datasets demonstrate that our two-stream
framework outperforms each individual stream, and also
achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to alternative methods with robustness to resizing and compression.

Authentic image Tampered image Ground-truth mask

Figure 1. Examples of tampered images that have undergone different tampering techniques. From the top to bottom are the examples showing manipulations of splicing, copy-move and removal.

As a result, distinguishing authentic images from tampered images has become increasingly challenging. The
emerging research focusing on this topic — image forensics — is of great importance because it seeks to prevent attackers from using their tampered images for unscrupulous
business or political purposes. In contrast to current object
detection networks [28, 18, 10, 32, 16, 31] which aim to detect all objects of different categories in an image, a network
for image manipulation detection would aim to detect only
the tampered regions (usually objects). We investigate how
to adopt object detection networks to perform image manipulation detection by exploring both RGB image content and
image noise features.
Recent work on image forensics utilizes clues such as local noise features [35, 26] and Camera Filter Array (CFA)
patterns [19] to classify a specific patch or pixel [11] in an
image as tampered or not, and localize the tampered regions
[19, 9, 6]. Most of these methods focus on a single tampering technique. A recently proposed architecture [2] based
on a Long Short Term Network (LSTM) segments tampered
patches, showing robustness to multiple tampering tech11053

