Factoring Shape, Pose, and Layout from the 2D Image of a 3D Scene
Shubham Tulsiani, Saurabh Gupta, David Fouhey, Alexei A. Efros, Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley
{shubhtuls, sgupta, dfouhey, efros, malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to take a single 2D image of
a scene and recover the 3D structure in terms of a small
set of factors: a layout representing the enclosing surfaces
as well as a set of objects represented in terms of shape and
pose. We propose a convolutional neural network-based approach to predict this representation and benchmark it on a
large dataset of indoor scenes. Our experiments evaluate a
number of practical design questions, demonstrate that we
can infer this representation, and quantitatively and qualitatively demonstrate its merits compared to alternate representations.

1. Introduction
How should we represent the 3D structure of the scene in
Figure 1? Most current methods for 3D scene understanding produce one of two representations: i) a 2.5D image of
the scene such as depth [7, 26] or surface normals [4, 9];
or ii) a volumetric occupancy grid/voxels representation in
terms of a single voxel grid [5, 10, 33]. Accordingly, they
miss a great deal. First, all of these representations erase
distinctions between objects and would represent Figure 1
as an undifferentiated soup of surfaces or volumes rather
than a set of chairs next to a table. Moreover, the 2.5D representations intrinsically cannot say anything about the invisible portions of scenes such as the thickness of a table or
presence of chair legs. While in principle voxel-based representations can answer these questions, they mix together
beliefs about shape and pose and cannot account for the fact
that it is easy to see that the chair has a thin back but difficult
to determine its exact depth.
We present an alternative: we should think of scenes as
being composed of a distinct set of factors. One represents
the layout, which we define as the scene surfaces that enclose the viewer, such as the walls and floor, represented in
terms of their full, amodal extent i.e. what the scene would
look like without the objects. The others represent a discrete
set of objects which are in turn factored into 3D shape (voxels) and pose (location and rotation). This representation
Project website with code: https://shubhtuls.github.io/
factored3d/

a

b

c

d

e

f

Figure 1: Our 3D representation. Given a single 2D image (a)
we infer a 3D representation which is factored in terms of a set of
objects inside an enclosed volume. We show it from the camera
view in (b) and a novel view in (c). By virtue of being factored,
our representation trivially enables answering questions that are
impossible in other ones. For example, we can give the scene (d)
without any objects; (e) without the table; or (f) answer “what
would it be like if I moved the chair”. These and all results best
viewed in color on screen.

solves a number of key problems: rather than a muddled
mess of voxels, the scene is organized into discrete entities,
permitting subsequent tasks to reason in terms of questions
like “what would the scene be like if I moved that chair.”
In terms of reconstruction itself, the factored approach does
not conflate uncertainties in pose and shape, and automatically allocates voxel resolution, enabling high resolution
output for free.
One needs a way to infer this representation from single 2D images. We thus propose an approach in Section 3
which is summarized in Figure 2. Starting with an image
and generic object proposals, we use convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) to predict both the layout, i.e. amodal
scene surfaces, as well as the underlying shape and pose
of objects. We train this method using synthetic data [30],
although we show it on both synthetic and natural data.
We investigate a number of aspects of our method in Section 4. Since our approach is the first method to tackle this
task and many design decisions are non-obvious, we first
present extensive ablations in Section 4.3. We then demonstrate that we can infer the full representation and find current performance limitations in Section 4.4. Next, since one
1302

