SO-Net: Self-Organizing Network for Point Cloud Analysis
Jiaxin Li
Ben M. Chen
Gim Hee Lee
National University of Singapore

Abstract
This paper presents SO-Net, a permutation invariant architecture for deep learning with orderless point clouds.
The SO-Net models the spatial distribution of point cloud
by building a Self-Organizing Map (SOM). Based on the
SOM, SO-Net performs hierarchical feature extraction on
individual points and SOM nodes, and ultimately represents
the input point cloud by a single feature vector. The receptive field of the network can be systematically adjusted
by conducting point-to-node k nearest neighbor search. In
recognition tasks such as point cloud reconstruction, classification, object part segmentation and shape retrieval, our
proposed network demonstrates performance that is similar
with or better than state-of-the-art approaches. In addition,
the training speed is significantly faster than existing point
cloud recognition networks because of the parallelizability
and simplicity of the proposed architecture. Our code is
available at the project website.1

1. Introduction
After many years of intensive research, convolutional
neural networks (ConvNets) is now the foundation for
many state-of-the-art computer vision algorithms, e.g. image recognition, object classification and semantic segmentation etc. Despite the great success of ConvNets for 2D
images, the use of deep learning on 3D data remains a
challenging problem. Although 3D convolution networks
(3D ConvNets) can be applied to 3D data that is rasterized
into voxel representations, most computations are redundant because of the sparsity of most 3D data. Additionally,
the performance of naive 3D ConvNets is largely limited
by the resolution loss and exponentially growing computational cost. Meanwhile, the accelerating development of
depth sensors, and the huge demand from applications such
as autonomous vehicles make it imperative to process 3D
data efficiently. Recent availability of 3D datasets including ModelNet [37], ShapeNet [8], 2D-3D-S [2] adds on to
the popularity of research on 3D data.
1 https://github.com/lijx10/SO-Net

Figure 1. Our SO-Net applies hierarchical feature aggregation using SOM. Point clouds are converted into SOM node features and
a global feature vector that can be applied to classification, autoencoder reconstruction, part segmentation and shape retrieval etc.

To avoid the shortcomings of naive voxelization, one option is to explicitly exploit the sparsity of the voxel grids
[35, 21, 11]. Although the sparse design allows higher grid
resolution, the induced complexity and limitations make it
difficult to realize large scale or flexible deep networks [30].
Another option is to utilize scalable indexing structures including kd-tree [4], octree [25]. Deep networks based on
these structures have shown encouraging results. Compared
to tree based structures, point cloud representation is mathematically more concise and straight-forward because each
point is simply represented by a 3-vector. Additionally,
point clouds can be easily acquired with popular sensors
such as the RGB-D cameras, LiDAR, or conventional cameras with the help of the Structure-from-Motion (SfM) algorithm. Despite the widespread usage and easy acquisition
of point clouds, recognition tasks with point clouds still remain challenging. Traditional deep learning methods such
as ConvNets are not applicable because point clouds are
spatially irregular, and can be permutated arbitrarily. Due
to these difficulties, few attempts has been made to apply
deep learning techniques directly to point clouds until the
very recent PointNet [26].
Despite being a pioneer in applying deep learning to
point clouds, PointNet is unable to handle local feature extraction adequately. PointNet++ [28] is later proposed to address this problem by building a pyramid-like feature aggregation scheme, but the point sampling and grouping strategy
in [28] does not reveal the spatial distribution of the input
point cloud. Kd-Net [18] build a kd-tree for the input point
cloud, followed by hierarchical feature extractions from the
leaves to root. Kd-Net explicitly utilizes the spatial distri19397

