DensePose: Dense Human Pose Estimation In The Wild
Rıza Alp Güler∗
INRIA-CentraleSupélec

Natalia Neverova
Facebook AI Research

Iasonas Kokkinos
Facebook AI Research

riza.guler@inria.fr

nneverova@fb.com

iasonask@fb.com

DensePose COCO Dataset

DensePose-RCNN Results

Figure 1: Dense pose estimation aims at mapping all human pixels of an RGB image to the 3D surface of the human body.
We introduce DensePose-COCO, a large-scale ground-truth dataset containing manually annotated image-to-surface correspondences for 50K images, and train DensePose-RCNN to densely regress UV coordinates at multiple frames per second.
Left: The image and the regressed correspondence by DensePose-RCNN. Middle: DensePose-COCO Dataset annotations.
Right: Partitioning and UV parametrization of the body surface.

Abstract
In this work we establish dense correspondences between an RGB image and a surface-based representation
of the human body, a task we refer to as dense human pose
estimation. We gather dense correspondences for 50K persons appearing in the COCO dataset by introducing an efficient annotation pipeline. We then use our dataset to train
CNN-based systems that deliver dense correspondence ‘in
the wild’, namely in the presence of background, occlusions
and scale variations. We improve our training set’s effectiveness by training an inpainting network that can fill in
missing ground truth values and report improvements with
respect to the best results that would be achievable in the
past. We experiment with fully-convolutional networks and
region-based models and observe a superiority of the latter.
We further improve accuracy through cascading, obtaining
a system that delivers highly-accurate results at multiple
frames per second on a single gpu. Supplementary materials, data, code, and videos are provided on the project
page http://densepose.org.

1. Introduction
This work aims at pushing further the envelope of human
understanding in images by establishing dense correspon1 Rıza Alp Güler was with Facebook AI Research during this work.

dences between a 2D image and a 3D, surface-based representation of the human body. We can understand this task as
involving several other problems, such as object detection,
pose estimation, part and instance segmentation either as
special cases or prerequisites. Addressing this task has applications in problems that require going beyond plain landmark localization, such as graphics, augmented reality, or
human-computer interaction, and could also be a stepping
stone towards general 3D-based object understanding.
The task of establishing dense correspondences from an
image to a surface-based model has been addressed mostly
in the setting where a depth sensor is available [43, 34, 46].
Instead, we establish dense image-to-surface correspondences using as sole input the RGB values of a single image.
Several other works have recently aimed at recovering
dense correspondences between pairs [3] or sets of RGB images [50, 10] in an unsupervised setting. More recently, [44]
used the equivariance principle in order to align sets of images to a common coordinate system, while following the
general idea of groupwise image alignment, e.g. [24, 22].
While these works target general categories, ours is focused on arguably the most important one, humans. For
humans one can simplify the task by exploiting parametric deformable surface models, such as the Skinned MultiPerson Linear (SMPL) model [2], or the more recent Adam
model [15] obtained through controlled 3D surface acquisition. Turning to the task of image-to-surface mapping,
17297

