Generative Modeling using the Sliced Wasserstein Distance
Ishan Deshpande
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign

Ziyu Zhang
Snap Inc.
Los Angeles

Alexander Schwing
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign

ideshpa2@illinois.edu

zzhang3@snap.com

aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) are very successful
at modeling distributions from given samples, even in the
high-dimensional case. However, their formulation is also
known to be hard to optimize and often not stable. While
this is particularly true for early GAN formulations, there
has been significant empirically motivated and theoretically
founded progress to improve stability, for instance, by using
the Wasserstein distance rather than the Jenson-Shannon
divergence. Here, we consider an alternative formulation for
generative modeling based on random projections which, in
its simplest form, results in a single objective rather than a
saddle-point formulation. By augmenting this approach with
a discriminator we improve its accuracy. We found our approach to be significantly more stable compared to even the
improved Wasserstein GAN. Further, unlike the traditional
GAN loss, the loss formulated in our method is a good measure of the actual distance between the distributions and, for
the first time for GAN training, we are able to show estimates
for the same.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling is a topic of increasing importance.
In contrast to discriminative approaches, where significant
progress has been made in the last decades, generative models are still at their infancy. This is partly due to the fact
that the output space considered when modeling a distribution over data is often significantly larger. Because of this
large output space, classical generative models such as probabilistic semantic indexing [10], restricted Boltzmann machines [30], or latent Dirichlet allocation [4] have to sample
from high-dimensional distributions, which is challenging.
Instead, in recent years, progress in generative modeling
suggests to make use of the manifold assumption, i.e., to
sample from simple distributions and subsequently transform
the sample via function approximators such as deep nets to
yield the desired output. Variational autoencoders [14] and
adversarial nets [8] are among the algorithms which follow

Figure 1. Generated samples from the LSUN bedrooms dataset.

this paradigm. Variational autoencoders are based on the
principle of a variational lower bound which is maximized.
Their probabilistic interpretation is appealing, but they are
known to produce samples that are often overly smooth
when considering images. In contrast, generative adversarial
nets are often intuitively explained using a two-player game
analogy. They are known to produce sharp examples, but,
among others due to the saddle-point formulation inherent
to two-player games, optimization is finicky, as justified by
the many papers addressing this topic [1, 9, 31, 26, 27, 22,
20, 25, 13, 11, 19]. Among the most pressing issues are
mode dropping, vanishing gradients, training instability, and
sensitivity to parameter initialization.
To address some of the issues, most notably vanishing
gradients, Arjovsky et al. [2] recently introduced a variant
of GANs based on the Wasserstein distance rather than the
classical Jensen-Shannon divergence. Their approach employs the Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality which results in
a saddle-point objective, just like the original GAN framework. However, optimization of saddle-point objectives is
challenging, particularly if neither of the directions is convex
or concave. Hence, optimization of the Wasserstein GANs
remains tricky as suggested by recent improvements [9].
Special techniques, e.g., [24, 23] are generally necessary but
practically not used.
In this paper we improve the stability of Wasserstein
GAN training by developing a mechanism based on random
projections as opposed to using the Kantorovich-Rubinstein

3483

