Pyramid Stereo Matching Network
Jia-Ren Chang
Yong-Sheng Chen
Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
{followwar.cs00g, yschen}@nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
Recent work has shown that depth estimation from a
stereo pair of images can be formulated as a supervised
learning task to be resolved with convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, current architectures rely on
patch-based Siamese networks, lacking the means to exploit context information for finding correspondence in illposed regions. To tackle this problem, we propose PSMNet, a pyramid stereo matching network consisting of two
main modules: spatial pyramid pooling and 3D CNN. The
spatial pyramid pooling module takes advantage of the capacity of global context information by aggregating context in different scales and locations to form a cost volume.
The 3D CNN learns to regularize cost volume using stacked
multiple hourglass networks in conjunction with intermediate supervision. The proposed approach was evaluated
on several benchmark datasets. Our method ranked first in
the KITTI 2012 and 2015 leaderboards before March 18,
2018. The codes of PSMNet are available at: https:
//github.com/JiaRenChang/PSMNet.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation from stereo images is essential to computer vision applications, including autonomous driving for
vehicles, 3D model reconstruction, and object detection and
recognition [4, 31]. Given a pair of rectiﬁed stereo images,
the goal of depth estimation is to compute the disparity d
for each pixel in the reference image. Disparity refers to the
horizontal displacement between a pair of corresponding
pixels on the left and right images. For the pixel (x, y) in the
left image, if its corresponding point is found at (x − d, y)
in the right image, then the depth of this pixel is calculated
by fdB , where f is the camera's focal length and B is the
distance between two camera centers.
The typical pipeline for stereo matching involves the
ﬁnding of corresponding points based on matching cost
and post-processing. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been applied to learn how to match
corresponding points in MC-CNN [30]. Early approaches

using CNNs treated the problem of correspondence estimation as similarity computation [27, 30], where CNNs
compute the similarity score for a pair of image patches
to further determine whether they are matched. Although
CNN yields signiﬁcant gains compared to conventional approaches in terms of both accuracy and speed, it is still
difﬁcult to ﬁnd accurate corresponding points in inherently
ill-posed regions such as occlusion areas, repeated patterns,
textureless regions, and reﬂective surfaces. Solely applying
the intensity-consistency constraint between different viewpoints is generally insufﬁcient for accurate correspondence
estimation in such ill-posed regions, and is useless in textureless regions. Therefore, regional support from global
context information must be incorporated into stereo matching.
One major problem with current CNN-based stereo
matching methods is how to effectively exploit context information. Some studies attempt to incorporate semantic information to largely reﬁne cost volumes or disparity
maps [8, 13, 27]. The Displets [8] method utilizes object
information by modeling 3D vehicles to resolve ambiguities in stereo matching. ResMatchNet [27] learns to measure reﬂective conﬁdence for the disparity maps to improve
performance in ill-posed regions. GC-Net [13] employs the
encoder-decoder architecture to merge multiscale features
for cost volume regularization.
In this work, we propose a novel pyramid stereo matching network (PSMNet) to exploit global context information
in stereo matching. Spatial pyramid pooling (SPP) [9, 32]
and dilated convolution [2, 29] are used to enlarge the receptive ﬁelds. In this way, PSMNet extends pixel-level features to region-level features with different scales of receptive ﬁelds; the resultant combined global and local feature
clues are used to form the cost volume for reliable disparity estimation. Moreover, we design a stacked hourglass
3D CNN in conjunction with intermediate supervision to
regularize the cost volume. The stacked hourglass 3D CNN
repeatedly processes the cost volume in a top-down/bottomup manner to further improve the utilization of global context information.
Our main contributions are listed below:

5410

