Language-Based Image Editing with Recurrent Attentive Models
Jianbo Chen∗ , Yelong Shen† , Jianfeng Gao† , Jingjing Liu† , Xiaodong Liu†
University of California, Berkeley∗ and Microsoft Research†
jianbochen@berkeley.edu
yeshen, jfgao, jingjl, xiaodl@microsoft.com

Abstract
We investigate the problem of Language-Based Image
Editing (LBIE). Given a source image and a natural
language description, we want to generate a target image
by editing the source image based on the description.
We propose a generic modeling framework for two subtasks of LBIE: language-based image segmentation and
image colorization. The framework uses recurrent attentive models to fuse image and language features. Instead
of using a fixed step size, we introduce for each region
of the image a termination gate to dynamically determine after each inference step whether to continue extrapolating additional information from the textual description.
The effectiveness of the framework is validated on three
datasets. First, we introduce a synthetic dataset, called
CoSaL, to evaluate the end-to-end performance of our LBIE
system. Second, we show that the framework leads to
state-of-the-art performance on image segmentation on the
ReferIt dataset. Third, we present the first language-based
colorization result on the Oxford-102 Flowers dataset.

Figure 1. In an interactive design interface, a sketch of shoes is
presented to a customer, who then gives a verbal instruction on
how to modify the design: “The insole of the shoes should be
brown. The vamp and the heel should be purple and shining”. The
system colorizes the sketch following the customer’s instruction.
(images from [11]).

Figure 2. The image on the left is an initial virtual environment.
The user provides a textual description: “The afternoon light
flooded the little room from the window, shining the ground in
front of a brown bookshelf made of wood. Besides the bookshelf
lies a sofa with light-colored cushions. There is a blue carpet in
front of the sofa, and a clock with dark contours above it...”. The
system modifies the virtual environment into the target image on
the right.

1. Introduction
In this work, we aim to develop an automatic LanguageBased Image Editing (LBIE) system. Given a source image,
which can be a sketch, a grayscale image or a natural image,
the system will automatically generate a target image by
editing the source image following natural language instructions provided by users. Such a system has a wide range
of applications from Computer-Aided Design (CAD) to
Virtual Reality (VR). As illustrated in Figure 1, a fashion
designer presents a sketch of a pair of new shoes (i.e., the
source image) to a customer, who can provide modifications on the style and color in verbal description, which can
then be taken by the LBIE system to change the original
design. The final output (i.e., the target image) is the revised
and enriched design that meets the customers requirement.
Figure 2 showcases the use of LBIE for VR. While most
VR systems still use button-controlled or touchscreen inter-

Figure 3. Left: sketch image. Middle: grayscale image. Right:
color image (from [18]). A language-based image editing system
will take either of the first two images as the input, and generate the
third color image following a natural language expression: “The
flower has red petals with yellow stigmas in the middle”,.

face, LBIE provides a natural user interface for future VR
systems, where users can easily modify the virtual environment via natural language instructions.
LBIE covers a broad range of tasks in image generation: shape, color, size, texture, position, etc. This paper
focuses on two basic sub-tasks: language-based segmentation and colorization for shapes and colors. As shown in
18721

