Sketch-a-Classifier: Sketch-based Photo Classifier Generation
Conghui Hu1 Da Li1 Yi-Zhe Song1 Tao Xiang1 Timothy M. Hospedales1,2
1
2
SketchX, Queen Mary University of London
The University of Edinburgh
{c.hu, da.li, yizhe.song, t.xiang}@qmul.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

01234

Abstract
Contemporary deep learning techniques have made image recognition a reasonably reliable technology. However training effective photo classifiers typically takes numerous examples which limits image recognition’s scalability and applicability to scenarios where images may not be
available. This has motivated investigation into zero-shot
learning, which addresses the issue via knowledge transfer
from other modalities such as text. In this paper we investigate an alternative approach of synthesizing image classifiers: almost directly from a user’s imagination, via freehand sketch. This approach doesn’t require the category to
be nameable or describable via attributes as per zero-shot
learning. We achieve this via training a model regression
network to map from free-hand sketch space to the space
of photo classifiers. It turns out that this mapping can be
learned in a category-agnostic way, allowing photo classifiers for new categories to be synthesized by user with no
need for annotated training photos. We also demonstrate
that this modality of classifier generation can also be used
to enhance the granularity of an existing photo classifier, or
as a complement to name-based zero-shot learning.

1. Introduction
With the maturing of sophisticated deep learning techniques, the conventional image recognition problem has
begun to approach a solved problem [25, 6]. However
these great successes depend on large-scale labeled image
datasets like ImageNet [6]. This dependence limits the
scalability of the – otherwise highly successful – current
paradigm. This is because we can’t guarantee sufficient
annotated examples for all possible concepts – particularly
rare (e.g., rare animals) or emerging (e.g., new man-made
objects) categories. This limitation has motivated extensive
research into zero-shot learning [29, 11, 1, 15], which aims
to learn a cross-modal mapping from a domain where categories can be described to the image domain. In this way
classifiers can be synthesized given a category description
such as attributes [5] or word-vectors [23].
The zero-shot learning (ZSL) approach to approach to

9ÿ

 
89 ÿ

9

9ÿ

2345ÿ
 01


9

0567



Figure 1: Sketch a Classifier: Illustrative Schematic. MRN:
model regression network, which takes a sketch classifier or
sketch as input and outputs a photo classifier. For example,
during training we have a sketch classifier or sketch of dog,
then we train our model regression network to regress to dog
photo classifier. At testing time, given a sketch classifier or
sketch of an unseen category(e.g., cat), we can use the pretrained MRN to generate a corresponding photo classifier.
avoiding per-category data annotation is appealing but has
the drawback that it depends on categories being clearly
nameable or cleanly describable via attributes [1]. Attributes must be arranged in a pre-determined ontology and
so suffer from a different kind of scalability barrier than normal image category annotation [23]. Meanwhile, although
more convenient, the efficacy of naming-based approaches
that rely on word-vectors depends on having no ambiguity
in the category names, and an adequate number of consistent references to the visual concept name in a text corpora
to learn meaningful word-vectors. This means that name
(word-vector) based ZSL may not be suitable for emerging categories where there is not yet widespread agreement
on the name or a large corpora of references to the named
concept for word-vector training. It is also unsuited for specialist categories where large text corpora simply may not
exist [1]; or for polysemous concept names (apple computer

9136

