Mobile Video Object Detection with Temporally-Aware Feature Maps
Mason Liu
Georgia Tech∗

Menglong Zhu
Google

masonliuw@gatech.edu

menglong@google.com

Abstract
This paper introduces an online model for object detection in videos designed to run in real-time on lowpowered mobile and embedded devices. Our approach combines fast single-image object detection with convolutional
long short term memory (LSTM) layers to create an interweaved recurrent-convolutional architecture. Additionally,
we propose an efficient Bottleneck-LSTM layer that significantly reduces computational cost compared to regular
LSTMs. Our network achieves temporal awareness by using Bottleneck-LSTMs to refine and propagate feature maps
across frames. This approach is substantially faster than existing detection methods in video, outperforming the fastest
single-frame models in model size and computational cost
while attaining accuracy comparable to much more expensive single-frame models on the Imagenet VID 2015 dataset.
Our model reaches a real-time inference speed of up to 15
FPS on a mobile CPU.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks [24, 35, 36, 12] have been
firmly established as the state-of-the-art in single-image object detection [8, 11, 32, 28, 4]. However, the large memory overhead and slow computation time of these networks
have limited their practical applications. In particular, efficiency is a primary consideration when designing models
for mobile and embedded platforms. Recently, new architectures [17, 40] have allowed neural networks to run on
low computational budgets with competitive performance
in single-image object detection. However, the video domain presents the additional opportunity and challenge of
leveraging temporal cues, and it has been unclear how to
make a comparably efficient detection framework for video
scenes. This paper investigates the idea of building upon
these single-frame models by adding temporal awareness
while preserving their speed and low resource consumption.
Videos contain various temporal cues which can be ex∗ This work was done while interning at Google.

Figure 1: Most recent video object detection methods still
partially rely on single-image detectors, meaning that a key
step in the process fails to utilize temporal information. Our
work augments these base detectors by directly incorporating temporal context without sacrificing the efficiency of the
fastest single-image detectors.

ploited to obtain more accurate and stable object detection
than in single images. Since videos exhibit temporal continuity, objects in adjacent frames will remain in similar locations and detections will not vary substantially. Hence,
detection information from earlier frames can be used to refine predictions at the current frame. For instance, since the
network is able to view an object at different poses across
frames, it may be able to detect the object more accurately.
The network will also become more confident about predictions over time, reducing the problem of instability in
single-image object detection [37].
Recent work has shown that this continuity extends into
the feature space, and intermediate feature maps extracted
from neighboring frames of video are also highly correlated
[43]. In our work, we are interested in adding temporal
awareness in the feature space as opposed to only on the
final detections due to the greater quantity of information

5686

