Correlation Tracking via Joint Discrimination and Reliability Learning
Chong Sun1 , Dong Wang1∗, Huchuan Lu1 , Ming-Hsuan Yang2
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Merced, USA
waynecool@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wdice,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
For visual tracking, an ideal filter learned by the correlation filter (CF) method should take both discrimination and
reliability information. However, existing attempts usually
focus on the former one while pay less attention to reliability learning. This may make the learned filter be dominated
by the unexpected salient regions on the feature map, thereby resulting in model degradation. To address this issue, we
propose a novel CF-based optimization problem to jointly
model the discrimination and reliability information. First,
we treat the filter as the element-wise product of a base filter and a reliability term. The base filter is aimed to learn
the discrimination information between the target and backgrounds, and the reliability term encourages the final filter
to focus on more reliable regions. Second, we introduce
a local response consistency regular term to emphasize equal contributions of different regions and avoid the tracker
being dominated by unreliable regions. The proposed optimization problem can be solved using the alternating direction method and speeded up in the Fourier domain. We
conduct extensive experiments on the OTB-2013, OTB-2015
and VOT-2016 datasets to evaluate the proposed tracker.
Experimental results show that our tracker performs favorably against other state-of-the-art trackers.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is a hot topic for its wide applications in
many computer vision tasks, such as video surveillance, behaviour analysis, augmented reality, to name a few. Though
many trackers [12, 26, 20, 25, 16] have been proposed to
address this task, designing a robust visual tracking system
is still challenging as the tracked target may undergo large
deformations, rotations and other challenges.
Numerous recent studies apply the correlation filter (CF)
for robust visual tracking. With low computational load,
the CF-based tracker can exploit large numbers of cycli∗ Corresponding Author

CF2

C-COT

ECO

DRT

Figure 1. Example tracking results of different methods on the
OTB dataset. Our tracker (DRT) has comparable or better results
compared with the existing best tracker ECO.

cally shifted samples for learning, thus showing superior
performance. However, as the correlation filter takes the
entire image as the positive sample and the cyclically shifted images as negative ones, the learned filters are likely to
be influenced by the background regions. Existing methods (e.g. [8, 10, 5]) address this problem by incorporating
a spatial regularization on the filter, so that the learned filter weights focus on the central part of the target object.
In [14], the authors prove that the correlation filter method
can be used to simulate the conventional ridge regression
method. By multiplying the filter with a binary mask, the
tracker is able to generate the real training samples having
the same size as the target object, and thus better suppressing the background regions. However, this method has two limitations: first, it exploits the augmented Lagrangian
method for model learning, which limits the model extension; second, even though the background region outside
the bounding box is suppressed, the tracker may also be influenced by the background region inside the bounding box.
With the great success of deep convolutional neural network (CNN) in object detection and classification, more
and more CF based trackers resort to the pre-trained CNN model for robust target representation [29, 28, 5]. Since
most of CNN models are pre-trained with respect to the task

489

