Robust Physical-World Attacks on Deep Learning Visual Classification
Kevin Eykholt∗1 , Ivan Evtimov*2 , Earlence Fernandes2 , Bo Li3 ,
Amir Rahmati4 , Chaowei Xiao1 , Atul Prakash1 , Tadayoshi Kohno2 , and Dawn Song3
1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2
University of Washington
3
University of California, Berkeley
4
Samsung Research America and Stony Brook University

Abstract
Recent studies show that the state-of-the-art deep neural
networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial examples,
resulting from small-magnitude perturbations added to the
input. Given that that emerging physical systems are using DNNs in safety-critical situations, adversarial examples
could mislead these systems and cause dangerous situations.
Therefore, understanding adversarial examples in the physical world is an important step towards developing resilient
learning algorithms. We propose a general attack algorithm,
Robust Physical Perturbations (RP2 ), to generate robust
visual adversarial perturbations under different physical
conditions. Using the real-world case of road sign classification, we show that adversarial examples generated using
RP2 achieve high targeted misclassification rates against
standard-architecture road sign classifiers in the physical
world under various environmental conditions, including
viewpoints. Due to the current lack of a standardized testing
method, we propose a two-stage evaluation methodology for
robust physical adversarial examples consisting of lab and
field tests. Using this methodology, we evaluate the efficacy
of physical adversarial manipulations on real objects. With
a perturbation in the form of only black and white stickers,
we attack a real stop sign, causing targeted misclassification
in 100% of the images obtained in lab settings, and in 84.8%
of the captured video frames obtained on a moving vehicle
(field test) for the target classifier.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved state-ofthe-art, and sometimes human-competitive, performance
on many computer vision tasks [11, 14, 36]. Based on
∗ These authors contributed equally.

these successes, they are increasingly being used as part
of control pipelines in physical systems such as cars [8, 17],
UAVs [4, 24], and robots [40]. Recent work, however, has
demonstrated that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations [5, 9, 10, 15, 16, 22, 25, 29, 30, 35]. These carefully
crafted modifications to the (visual) input of DNNs can cause
the systems they control to misbehave in unexpected and
potentially dangerous ways.
This threat has gained recent attention, and work in
computer vision has made great progress in understanding
the space of adversarial examples, beginning in the digital domain (e.g. by modifying images corresponding to a
scene) [9, 22, 25, 35], and more recently in the physical domain [1, 2, 13, 32]. Along similar lines, our work contributes
to the understanding of adversarial examples when perturbations are physically added to the objects themselves. We
choose road sign classification as our target domain for several reasons: (1) The relative visual simplicity of road signs
make it challenging to hide perturbations. (2) Road signs
exist in a noisy unconstrained environment with changing
physical conditions such as the distance and angle of the
viewing camera, implying that physical adversarial perturbations should be robust against considerable environmental
instability. (3) Road signs play an important role in transportation safety. (4) A reasonable threat model for transportation is that an attacker might not have control over a vehicle’s
systems, but is able to modify the objects in the physical
world that a vehicle might depend on to make crucial safety
decisions.
The main challenge with generating robust physical perturbations is environmental variability. Cyber-physical systems operate in noisy physical environments that can destroy perturbations created using current digital-only algorithms [19]. For our chosen application area, the most dynamic environmental change is the distance and angle of

1625

