Unsupervised Person Image Synthesis in Arbitrary Poses
Albert Pumarola

Antonio Agudo
Alberto Sanfeliu
Francesc Moreno-Noguer
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial (CSIC-UPC)
08028, Barcelona, Spain

Figure 1: Given an original image of a person (left) and a desired body pose defined by a 2D skeleton (bottom-row), our
model generates new photo-realistic images of the person under that pose (top-row). The main contribution of our work is to
train this generative model with unlabeled data.

Abstract
We present a novel approach for synthesizing photorealistic images of people in arbitrary poses using generative adversarial learning. Given an input image of a person and a desired pose represented by a 2D skeleton, our
model renders the image of the same person under the new
pose, synthesizing novel views of the parts visible in the input image and hallucinating those that are not seen. This
problem has recently been addressed in a supervised manner [16, 35], i.e., during training the ground truth images
under the new poses are given to the network. We go beyond these approaches by proposing a fully unsupervised
strategy. We tackle this challenging scenario by splitting
the problem into two principal subtasks. First, we consider
a pose conditioned bidirectional generator that maps back
the initially rendered image to the original pose, hence being directly comparable to the input image without the need
to resort to any training image. Second, we devise a novel
loss function that incorporates content and style terms, and
aims at producing images of high perceptual quality. Extensive experiments conducted on the DeepFashion dataset
demonstrate that the images rendered by our model are very
close in appearance to those obtained by fully supervised
approaches.

1. Introduction
Being able to generate novel photo-realistic views of a
person in an arbitrary pose from a single image would open
the door to many new exciting applications in different areas, including fashion and e-commerce business, photography technologies to automatically edit and animate still images, and the movie industry to name a few. Addressing
this task without explicitly capturing the underlying processes involved in the image formation such as estimating
the 3D geometry of the body, hair and clothes, and the appearance and reflectance models of the visible and occluded
parts seems an extremely complex endeavor. Nevertheless,
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [3] have shown
impressive results in rendering new realistic images, e.g.,
faces [8, 22], indoor scenes [32] and clothes [39], by directly learning a generative model from data. Very recently,
they have been used for the particular problem we consider
in this paper of multi-view person image generation from
single-view images [16, 35]. While the results shown by
both these approaches are very promising, they suffer from
the same fundamental limitation in that are methods trained
in a fully supervised manner, that is, they need to be trained
with pairs of images of the same person dressing exactly
the same clothes and under two different poses. This requires from specific datasets, typically in the fashion do18620

