LIME: Live Intrinsic Material Estimation
Abhimitra Meka 1, 2
Maxim Maximov 1, 2
Michael Zollhöfer 1, 2, 3
Avishek Chatterjee 1, 2
Hans-Peter Seidel 1, 2
Christian Richardt 4
Christian Theobalt 1, 2
1

MPI Informatics

2

Saarland Informatics Campus

Live Monocular Material Estimation
Input

Segmentation

3

Stanford University

4

University of Bath

Live Mixed-Reality Applications
Material

Live Material Cloning

Figure 1. Our approach enables the real-time estimation of the material of general objects (left) from just a single monocular color image.
This enables exciting live mixed-reality applications (right), such as for example cloning a real-world material onto a virtual object.

Abstract
We present the first end-to-end approach for real-time material estimation for general object shapes with uniform material that only requires a single color image as input. In
addition to Lambertian surface properties, our approach
fully automatically computes the specular albedo, material
shininess, and a foreground segmentation. We tackle this challenging and ill-posed inverse rendering problem using recent
advances in image-to-image translation techniques based
on deep convolutional encoder–decoder architectures. The
underlying core representations of our approach are specular
shading, diffuse shading and mirror images, which allow to
learn the effective and accurate separation of diffuse and specular albedo. In addition, we propose a novel highly efficient
perceptual rendering loss that mimics real-world image formation and obtains intermediate results even during run time.
The estimation of material parameters at real-time frame rates
enables exciting mixed-reality applications, such as seamless
illumination-consistent integration of virtual objects into realworld scenes, and virtual material cloning. We demonstrate
our approach in a live setup, compare it to the state of the art,
and demonstrate its effectiveness through quantitative and
qualitative evaluation.

the scope of real-time implementation due to the resulting
dense optimization problem. Previous real-time approaches
have thus predominantly focused on estimating diffuse
materials [31, 33]. In this work, we tackle a much harder
inverse problem by additionally estimating specular material
properties, such as specular color and material shininess, as
well as segmentation masks for general objects of uniform
material from a single color image or video in real time.

1. Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning enable the automatic
learning of underlying natural subspace constraints directly
from large training data, while also reducing the need to
solve the expensive dense non-linear optimization problem
directly. Some recent work has successfully demonstrated
the capability of convolutional neural networks to solve
the inverse rendering problem of separating material from
illumination, particularly in the context of single material
objects. Current approaches estimate material from one
[12, 28] or more images [21, 44]. Georgoulis et al. [12] learn
BRDF parameters and outdoor environment maps from
single images of specular objects from a specific class (cars,
chairs and couches only). Kim et al. [21] estimate BRDF
parameters from multiple RGB input images in 90 ms. Shi
et al. [41] perform intrinsic image decomposition of a single
object image into diffuse and specular layers but do not solve
the denser and more complex material estimation problem.

The estimation of material properties from a single monocular
color image is a high-dimensional and underconstrained
problem. The blind deconvolution nature of the problem has
attracted usage of complex setups and, more recently, various
natural and handcrafted priors, but has yet remained outside

Most of these methods take a direct approach to parameter
regression without any additional supervision, due to which
the network may not necessarily learn to perform the
physical deconvolution operation that is intrinsic to inverse
rendering, and hence runs the risk of simply overfitting
16315

