Ordinal Depth Supervision for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Georgios Pavlakos1 , Xiaowei Zhou2 , Kostas Daniilidis1
1
University of Pennsylvania 2 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has been one of the most remarkable successes for deep learning approaches. Leveraging large-scale datasets with extensive 2D annotations has
immensely benefited 2D pose estimation [55, 34, 31, 61],
semantic part labeling [11, 57] and multi-person pose estimation [15, 30, 9]. In contrast, the complexity of collecting
images with corresponding 3D ground truth has constrained
3D human pose datasets in small scale [19] or strictly in
studio settings [42, 16]. The goal of this paper is to demonstrate that in the absence of accurate 3D ground truth, endto-end learning can be competitive by using weaker supervision in the form of ordinal depth of the joints (Figure 1).
Aiming to boost end-to-end discriminative approaches,

Ordinal depth relations
Z(right ankle) < Z(right hip)
Z(left knee) > Z(right knee)
Z(right elbow) > Z(right wrist)
Z(left shoulder) < Z(right shoulder)
Z(right knee) < Z(left hip)
Z(left wrist) = Z(left elbow)
Z(head) > Z(right ankle)
Z(right hip) = Z(left hip)
Z(right ankle) < Z(neck)

2D keypoints

Testing

Our ability to train end-to-end systems for 3D human
pose estimation from single images is currently constrained
by the limited availability of 3D annotations for natural images. Most datasets are captured using Motion Capture
(MoCap) systems in a studio setting and it is difficult to
reach the variability of 2D human pose datasets, like MPII
or LSP. To alleviate the need for accurate 3D ground truth,
we propose to use a weaker supervision signal provided by
the ordinal depths of human joints. This information can be
acquired by human annotators for a wide range of images
and poses. We showcase the effectiveness and flexibility of
training Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) with these ordinal relations in different settings, always achieving competitive performance with ConvNets trained with accurate
3D joint coordinates. Additionally, to demonstrate the potential of the approach, we augment the popular LSP and
MPII datasets with ordinal depth annotations. This extension allows us to present quantitative and qualitative evaluation in non-studio conditions. Simultaneously, these ordinal annotations can be easily incorporated in the training
procedure of typical ConvNets for 3D human pose. Through
this inclusion we achieve new state-of-the-art performance
for the relevant benchmarks and validate the effectiveness
of ordinal depth supervision for 3D human pose.

Training

Abstract

Input image

ConvNet

3D human pose

Figure 1: Summary of our approach. In the absence of accurate 3D ground truth we propose the use of ordinal depth
relations (closer-farther) of the human body joints for endto-end training of 3D human pose estimation systems.

different techniques attempt to augment the training data.
Synthetic examples can be produced in abundance [13, 53],
but there is no guarantee that they come from the same distribution as natural images. Multi-view systems for accurate capture of 3D ground truth can work outdoors [26], but
they need to be synchronized and calibrated, so data collection is not practical and hard to scale. These limitations
have favored reconstruction approaches, e.g., [5, 25], which
employ reliable 2D pose detectors and recover 3D pose in a
subsequent step using the 2D joint estimates. Unfortunately,
even in the presence of perfect 2D correspondences, the final 3D reconstruction can be erroneous. This 2D-to-3D reconstruction ambiguity is mainly attributed to the binary
ordinal depth relations of the joints (closer-farther) [45].
Leveraging image-based evidences, such as occlusion and
shading, can largely resolve the ambiguity, yet this information is discarded by reconstruction approaches.
Motivated by the particular power of ordinal depth relations at resolving reconstruction ambiguities and the fact
that this information can be acquired by human annotators,
we propose to use ordinal depth relations to train ConvNets
17307

