Occlusion-Aware Rolling Shutter Rectification of 3D Scenes
Subeesh Vasu1 , Mahesh Mohan M. R.2 , A. N. Rajagopalan3
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
subeeshvasu@gmail.com1 , ee14d023@ee.iitm.ac.in2 raju@ee.iitm.ac.in3

Abstract
A vast majority of contemporary cameras employ rolling
shutter (RS) mechanism to capture images. Due to the sequential mechanism, images acquired with a moving camera are subjected to rolling shutter effect which manifests as
geometric distortions. In this work, we consider the specific
scenario of a fast moving camera wherein the rolling shutter distortions not only are predominant but also become
depth-dependent which in turn results in intra-frame occlusions. To this end, we develop a first-of-its-kind pipeline to
recover the latent image of a 3D scene from a set of such
RS distorted images. The proposed approach sequentially
recovers both the camera motion and scene structure while
accounting for RS and occlusion effects. Subsequently, we
perform depth and occlusion-aware rectification of RS images to yield the desired latent image. Our experiments on
synthetic and real image sequences reveal that the proposed
approach achieves state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
The world of consumer photography is experiencing a
proliferation of low-budget commercial cameras, which are
generally built upon CMOS sensors. Most CMOS cameras
employ a rolling shutter (RS) mechanism in which the pixels on the sensor plane are exposed in a row-wise manner
from top to bottom with a constant inter-row delay. Because
of this, images and videos captured using a moving RS camera are often affected by image distortions which are a hindrance to scene understanding. Often, even a small camera
motion causes visible geometric distortions in the captured
image, since the camera motion experienced by each row
can be different from other rows, leading to the so-called
rolling shutter effect [15, 31, 30, 29] which is increasingly
becoming a common nuisance factor in photography.
Geometric distortions that stem from RS effects violate
the properties of the perspective camera model. Removing
these distortions from the captured images (also called as
RS rectification) will not only create a pleasing visualization, but will also allow us to use the rectified images for

applications such as geometric analysis [17] by employing
algorithms that are designed to work with images obtained
from global shutter cameras.
Several works have attempted problem of RS rectification but under different assumptions. The works in
[25, 10, 39] try to remove RS distortions assuming translational motion of the camera. While [9] uses a zooming
and translational motion model, [8] employs an affine motion model. An affine RS rectification model for videos shot
by cameras attached to moving vehicles is proposed in [3].
While [15] uses a homography mixture model, [13, 31] assumes pure rotational motion of the camera. Works also
exist [30, 29] that have proposed single image RS rectification. While [30] attempts to exploit the presence of straight
lines in urban scenes, [29] uses features learned through a
deep neural network to perform RS rectification.
It must be noted that, none of these works are designed
to handle depth-dependent RS distortions induced by 3D
scenes. However, there exist works which have attempted
to address related problems assuming depth-dependent RS
distortions. Examples relevant to our scenario include
stereo [32], sparse and dense 3D reconstruction [22, 33] and
absolute pose estimation [2, 27] using RS images. However,
most of these works assume the availability of camera motion from GPS/INS readings and are not aimed at addressing
the problem of image rectification in 3D scenes.
In this paper, we attempt to solve the challenging problem of latent image restoration (i.e., RS rectification) from
a set of RS frames, which are affected by depth-dependent
geometric distortions as well as occlusion effects. The problem of interest is very ill-posed, since many inter-dependent
components such as the camera motion causing the distortions and scene geometry are also unknown. To break the
underlying inter-dependencies among these unknowns, we
solve for each unknowns in a sequential manner, while ensuring that the individual sub-problems are robust enough
to handle the associated dependencies. Following the literature in multi-view stereo and multi-image restoration
schemes, we adopt a layered model to represent the underlying 3D scene, wherein we express the 3D scene as a
combination of a number of scene planes.

636

