Self-supervised Multi-level Face Model Learning
for Monocular Reconstruction at over 250 Hz
Ayush Tewari1,2 Michael Zollhöfer1,2,3 Pablo Garrido1,2 Florian Bernard1,2
Hyeongwoo Kim1,2 Patrick Pérez4 Christian Theobalt1,2
1
MPI Informatics 2 Saarland Informatics Campus 3 Stanford University 4 Technicolor

Our novel monocular reconstruction approach estimates high-quality facial geometry, skin reflectance (including facial hair)
and incident illumination at over 250 Hz. A trainable multi-level face representation is learned jointly with the feed forward
inverse rendering network. End-to-end training is based on a self-supervised loss that requires no dense ground truth.

Abstract
The reconstruction of dense 3D models of face geometry and appearance from a single image is highly challenging and ill-posed. To constrain the problem, many approaches rely on strong priors, such as parametric face
models learned from limited 3D scan data. However, prior
models restrict generalization of the true diversity in facial geometry, skin reflectance and illumination. To alleviate this problem, we present the first approach that jointly
learns 1) a regressor for face shape, expression, reflectance
and illumination on the basis of 2) a concurrently learned
parametric face model. Our multi-level face model combines the advantage of 3D Morphable Models for regularization with the out-of-space generalization of a learned
corrective space. We train end-to-end on in-the-wild images without dense annotations by fusing a convolutional
encoder with a differentiable expert-designed renderer and
a self-supervised training loss, both defined at multiple detail levels. Our approach compares favorably to the stateof-the-art in terms of reconstruction quality, better generalizes to real world faces, and runs at over 250 Hz.

1. Introduction
Monocular face reconstruction has drawn an incredible
amount of attention in computer vision and graphics in the
last decades. The goal is to estimate a high-quality personalized model of a human face from just a single photograph. Such a model ideally comprises several interpretable
semantic dimensions, e.g., 3D facial shape and expressions

as well as surface reflectance properties. Research in this
area is motivated by the increasing availability of face images, e.g., captured by webcams at home, as well as a wide
range of important applications across several fields, such
as facial motion capture, content creation for games and
movies, virtual and augmented reality, and communication.
The reconstruction of faces from a single photograph is
a highly challenging and ill-posed inverse problem, since
the image formation process convolves multiple complex
physical dimensions (geometry, reflectance and illumination) into a single color measurement per pixel. To deal
with this ill-posedness, researchers have made additional
prior assumptions, such as constraining faces to lie in
a low-dimensional subspace, e.g., 3D Morphable Models
(3DMM) [8] learned from scan databases of limited size.
Many state-of-the-art optimization-based [6, 7, 52, 61, 26]
and learning-based face reconstruction approaches [16, 48,
49, 62, 60] heavily rely on such priors. While these algorithms yield impressive results, they do not generalize well
beyond the restricted low-dimensional subspace of the underlying model. Consequently, the reconstructed 3D face
may lack important facial details, contain incorrect facial
features and not align well to an image. For example,
beards have shown to drastically deteriorate the reconstruction quality of algorithms that are trained on pure synthetic
data [48, 49, 54] or employ a 3DMM for regularization
[8, 61, 26, 62, 60]. Some approaches try to prevent these
failures via heuristics, e.g., a separate segmentation method
to disambiguate disjunct skin and hair regions [52]. Recent
methods refine a fitted prior by adding fine-scale details, either based on shape-from-shading [26, 48] or pre-learned
regressors [16, 49]. However, these approaches rely on

2549

