Visual Feature Attribution using Wasserstein GANs
Christian F. Baumgartner1
Ender Konukoglu1
1

Lisa M. Koch2
Kerem Can Tezcan1
Jia Xi Ang1
for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative∗

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich

2

Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zurich

Abstract
Attributing the pixels of an input image to a certain category is an important and well-studied problem in computer
vision, with applications ranging from weakly supervised
localisation to understanding hidden effects in the data.
In recent years, approaches based on interpreting a previously trained neural network classifier have become the
de facto state-of-the-art and are commonly used on medical as well as natural image datasets. In this paper, we
discuss a limitation of these approaches which may lead
to only a subset of the category specific features being detected. To address this problem we develop a novel feature attribution technique based on Wasserstein Generative
Adversarial Networks (WGAN), which does not suffer from
this limitation. We show that our proposed method performs
substantially better than the state-of-the-art for visual attribution on a synthetic dataset and on real 3D neuroimaging
data from patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). For AD patients the method
produces compellingly realistic disease effect maps which
are very close to the observed effects.

1. Introduction
In this paper we address the problem of visual attribution, which we define as detecting and visualising evidence
of a particular category in an image. Pinpointing all evidence of a class is important for a variety of tasks such
as weakly supervised localisation or segmentation of structures [41, 43, 65], and better understanding disease effects,
and physiological or pathological processes in medical images [67, 18, 12, 19, 13, 27, 54, 30, 31, 63].
Currently, the most frequently used approach to address
the visual attribution problem is training a neural network
classifier to predict the categories of a set of images and then
following one of two strategies: analysing the gradients of
∗ Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from
the Alzheimers Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database
(adni.loni.usc.edu).

Unpaired 3D Training Data

Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)

Alzheimer's Disease (AD)

M(x)

AD Test

Pred. Disease Eﬀ.

Obs. Disease Eﬀ.

Figure 1. Our proposed method learns a map generating function
M (x) from unlabelled training data. Given a test image, this function will generate an image-specific visual attribution map which
highlights the features unique to that category. The method is of
particular interest for creating medical disease effect maps. We
show that on neuroimaging data the method predicts effects in very
good agreement with the actual observed effects.

the prediction with respect to an input image [27, 5, 54] or
analysing the activations of the feature maps for the image
[65, 41, 43] to determine which part of the image was responsible for making the associated prediction.
Visual attribution based directly on neural network classifiers may, under some circumstances, produce undesired
results. It is known that such classifiers base their decisions
on certain salient regions rather than the whole object of interest. It was recently shown that during training neural networks minimise the mutual information between input and
output layers, thereby compressing the input features [50].
These findings suggest that a classifier may ignore features
with low discriminative power if stronger features with redundant information about the target are available. In other
words, neural network training may be working in opposition to the goal of visual attribution. As a consequence, if
there is evidence for a class at multiple locations in the image (such as multiple lesions in medical images) some locations may not influence the classification result and may
thus not be detected. We demonstrate this effect on a synthetic dataset in our experiments.
18309

