Disentangling Factors of Variation by Mixing Them
Qiyang Hu1∗ Attila Szabó1∗ Tiziano Portenier1 Paolo Favaro1
1
University of Bern, Switzerland
1

{hu, szabo, portenier, favaro}@inf.unibe.ch

Abstract
We propose an approach to learn image representations
that consist of disentangled factors of variation without exploiting any manual labeling or data domain knowledge. A
factor of variation corresponds to an image attribute that
can be discerned consistently across a set of images, such
as the pose or color of objects. Our disentangled representation consists of a concatenation of feature chunks, each
chunk representing a factor of variation. It supports applications such as transferring attributes from one image
to another, by simply mixing and unmixing feature chunks,
and classification or retrieval based on one or several attributes, by considering a user-specified subset of feature
chunks. We learn our representation without any labeling
or knowledge of the data domain, using an autoencoder architecture with two novel training objectives: first, we propose an invariance objective to encourage that encoding of
each attribute, and decoding of each chunk, are invariant to
changes in other attributes and chunks, respectively; second, we include a classification objective, which ensures
that each chunk corresponds to a consistently discernible
attribute in the represented image, hence avoiding degenerate feature mappings where some chunks are completely
ignored. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
on the MNIST, Sprites, and CelebA datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep learning techniques have led to highly successful
natural image representations, some focusing on synthesis
of detailed, high resolution images of photographic quality [5, 14], and others on disentangling image features into
semantically meaningful properties [6, 22, 25].
In this paper, we learn a disentangled image representation that separates the feature vector into multiple chunks,
each chunk representing intuitively interpretable properties,
or factors of variation, of the image. We propose a completely unsupervised approach that does not require any la∗ The authors contributed equally.

Matthias Zwicker2
2
University of Maryland, USA
2

zwicker@cs.umd.edu

beled data, such as pairs of images where only one factor of variation changes (different viewpoints, for example) [22, 28]. The basic assumption of our technique is that
images can be represented by a set of factors of variation,
each one corresponding to a semantically meaningful image attribute. In addition, each factor of variation can be
encoded using its own feature vector, which we call a feature chunk. That is, images are simply represented as concatenations of feature chunks, in a given order. We obtain
disentanglement of feature chunks by leveraging autoencoders, and as a key contribution of this paper, by developing a novel invariance objective. The goal of the invariance
objective is that each attribute is encoded into a chunk invariant to changes in other attributes, and that each chunk
is decoded into an attribute invariant to changes in other
chunks. We implement this objective using a sequence of
two feature mixing and unmixing autoencoders.
The invariance objective using feature mixing on its own,
however, does not guarantee that each feature chunk represents a meaningful factor of variation. Instead, the autoencoder could represent the image with a single chunk, and ignore all the others. This is called the shortcut problem [28].
We address the shortcut problem with a classification constraint, which forces each chunk to have a consistent, discernible effect on the generated image.
We demonstrate successful results of our approach on
several datasets, where we obtain representations consisting of feature chunks that determine semantically meaningful image properties. In summary, we make the following
contributions: 1) A novel architecture to learn image representations of disentangled factors of variation without using
any annotation or data domain knowledge, and where the
representation consists of a concatenation of a fixed number
of feature chunks. Our approach can learn several factors of
variation simultaneously; 2) A novel invariance objective
to obtain disentanglement by encouraging invariant encoding and decoding of image attributes and feature chunks, respectively; 3) A novel classification constraint to ensure that
each feature chunk represents a consistent, discernible factor of variation of the represented image; 4) An evaluation
on the MNIST, Sprites, and CelebA datasets to demonstrate
13399

