Structured Attention Guided Convolutional Neural Fields
for Monocular Depth Estimation
Dan Xu1 , Wei Wang1 , Hao Tang1 , Hong Liu2∗ , Nicu Sebe1 , Elisa Ricci1,3∗
1
Multimedia and Human Understanding Group, University of Trento,
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University,
3
Technologies of Vision Group, Fondazione Bruno Kessler
{dan.xu, wei.wang, hao.tang, niculae.sebe, e.ricci}@unitn.it

hongliu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent works have shown the benefit of integrating Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) models into deep architectures for improving pixel-level prediction tasks. Following
this line of research, in this paper we introduce a novel approach for monocular depth estimation. Similarly to previous works, our method employs a continuous CRF to fuse
multi-scale information derived from different layers of a
front-end Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Differently
from past works, our approach benefits from a structured attention model which automatically regulates the amount of
information transferred between corresponding features at
different scales. Importantly, the proposed attention model
is seamlessly integrated into the CRF, allowing end-to-end
training of the entire architecture. Our extensive experimental evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed method which is competitive with previous methods
on the KITTI benchmark and outperforms the state of the
art on the NYU Depth V2 dataset.

1. Introduction
The problem of recovering depth information from images has been widely studied in computer vision. Traditional approaches operate by considering multiple observations of the scene of interest, e.g. derived from two or more
cameras or corresponding to different lighting conditions.
More recently, the research community has attempted to
relax the multi-view assumption by addressing the task of
monocular depth estimation as a supervised learning problem. Specifically, given a large training set of pairs of images and associated depth maps, depth prediction is casted
as a pixel-level regression problem, i.e. a model is learned to
directly predict the depth value corresponding to each pixel
of an RGB image.
In the last few years several approaches have been
proposed for addressing this task and remarkable perfor∗ corresponding author.

a

b

c

d

Figure 1. Monocular depth prediction from different CRF-based
models: Xu et al. [36] (c) and ours (d). (a) and (b) are the input
RGB image and the corresponding ground truth depth map.

mance has been achieved thanks to deep learning models
[5, 6, 22, 36, 18]. Recently, various Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) architectures have been proposed, tackling
different sub-problems such as how to jointly estimate depth
maps and semantic labels [35], how to build models robust
to noise or how to combine multi-scale features [10]. Focusing on the latter issue, recent works have shown that CRFs
can be integrated into deep architectures [22, 31] and can
be exploited to optimally fuse the multi-scale information
derived from inner layers of a CNN [36].
Inspired by these works, in this paper we also propose
to exploit the flexibility of graphical models for multi-scale
monocular depth estimation. However, we significantly depart from previous methods and we argue that more accurate estimates can be obtained operating not only at the prediction level but exploiting directly the internal CNN feature representations. To this aim, we design a novel CRF
model which automatically learns robust multi-scale features by integrating an attention mechanism. Our attention
model allows to automatically regulate how much information should flow between related features at different scales.
13917

