HashGAN: Deep Learning to Hash with Pair Conditional Wasserstein GAN
Yue Cao, Bin Liu, Mingsheng Long∗, Jianmin Wang
KLiss, MOE; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Software
Beijing Key Laboratory for Industrial Big Data System and Application
{caoyue10,liubinthss}@gmail.com, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning to hash improves image retrieval performance by end-to-end representation learning and hash coding from training data with pairwise similarity information.
Subject to the scarcity of similarity information that is often
expensive to collect for many application domains, existing
deep learning to hash methods may overfit the training data
and result in substantial loss of retrieval quality. This paper
presents HashGAN, a novel architecture for deep learning
to hash, which learns compact binary hash codes from both
real images and diverse images synthesized by generative
models. The main idea is to augment the training data with
nearly real images synthesized from a new Pair Conditional
Wasserstein GAN (PC-WGAN) conditioned on the pairwise
similarity information. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that HashGAN can generate high-quality binary hash codes
and yield state-of-the-art image retrieval performance on
three benchmarks, NUS-WIDE, CIFAR-10, and MS-COCO.

1. Introduction
In the big data era, large-scale and high-dimensional media data has been pervasive in search engines and social networks. To guarantee retrieval quality and computation efficiency, approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) search has attracted increasing attention. Parallel to the traditional indexing methods [21], another advantageous solution is hashing methods [37], which transform high-dimensional media data into compact binary codes and generate similar binary codes for similar data items. This paper will focus on
the learning to hash methods [37] that build data-dependent
hash encoding schemes for efficient image retrieval, which
have shown better performance than data-independent hashing methods, e.g. Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [12].
Many learning to hash methods have been proposed to
enable efficient ANN search by Hamming ranking of compact binary hash codes [19, 13, 28, 11, 25, 36, 41]. Recently,
∗ Corresponding author: M. Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn).

deep learning to hash methods [40, 20, 34, 10, 42, 22, 24, 6]
have shown that deep neural networks can enable end-toend representation learning and hash coding with nonlinear
hash functions. These deep learning to hash methods have
shown state-of-the-art results on many datasets. In particular, it proves crucial to jointly learn similarity-preserving
representations and control quantization error of converting
continuous representations to binary codes [42, 22, 24, 6].
However, the encouraging performance comes only by
large-scale image data where sufficient supervised information is available in the forms of pointwise labels or pairwise
similarity. In many image retrieval applications, the supervised information available may be insufficient, especially
for new domains. And it is usually costly or even prohibitive
to annotate sufficient training data for deep learning to hash.
Subject to the scarcity of similarity information, existing
deep learning to hash methods [42, 6] may overfit the training images and result in substantial loss of retrieval quality.
This paper presents HashGAN, a novel deep architecture
for deep learning to hash, which learns compact binary hash
codes from both real images and large-scale synthesized
images. We propose a novel Pair Conditional Wasserstein
GAN (PC-WGAN), which synthesizes discriminative and
diverse images by conditioning on the pairwise similarity
information. To the best of our knowledge, PC-WGAN is
the first GAN that enables image synthesis by incorporating
pairwise similarity information. Well-specified loss functions including cosine cross-entropy loss and cosine quantization loss are proposed for similarity-preserving learning
and quantization error control. The proposed HashGAN can
be trained end-to-end by back-propagation in a minimax optimization mechanism. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that HashGAN can generate high-quality binary hash codes
and yield state-of-the-art multimedia retrieval performance
on three datasets, NUS-WIDE, CIFAR-10, and MS-COCO.

2. Related Work
Hashing Methods. Existing hashing methods [2, 4, 19,
13, 28, 11, 25, 41] consist of unsupervised and supervised

1287

