When will you do what? - Anticipating Temporal Occurrences of Activities
Yazan Abu Farha, Alexander Richard, Juergen Gall
University of Bonn, Germany
{abufarha,richard,gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Analyzing human actions in videos has gained increased
attention recently. While most works focus on classifying
and labeling observed video frames or anticipating the very
recent future, making long-term predictions over more than
just a few seconds is a task with many practical applications
that has not yet been addressed. In this paper, we propose
two methods to predict a considerably large amount of future actions and their durations. Both, a CNN and an RNN
are trained to learn future video labels based on previously
seen content. We show that our methods generate accurate
predictions of the future even for long videos with a huge
amount of different actions and can even deal with noisy or
erroneous input information.

1. Introduction
In the last years, we have seen a tremendous progress
in the capabilities of computer systems to classify and segment activities in videos, e.g. [25, 22, 10]. These systems,
however, analyze the past or in the case of real-time systems the present with a delay of a few milliseconds. For
applications, where a moving system has to react or interact
with humans, this is insufficient. For instance, collaborative robots that work closely with humans have to anticipate the activities of a human in the future. In contrast to
humans that are very good in anticipating activities, developing methods that anticipate future activities from video
data is very challenging and has just recently received an
increase of interest.
Current works anticipate activities only for a very short
time horizon of a few seconds. While early activity detection addresses the problem of inferring the class label of an
action at the point when the activity starts or shortly thereafter [23, 5, 14, 24], other works predict the class label of
the action that will happen next [19, 6, 9]. In the recent work
[15], the starting time of the future activity is estimated as
well.
In this work, we go beyond the recognition of an ongoing
activity or the anticipation of the next activity. We address

the problem of anticipating all activities that will be happening within a time horizon of up to 5 minutes. This includes
the classes and order of the activities that will occur as well
as when each activity will start and end. Figure 5 shows a
few example predictions.
To address this problem, we propose two novel approaches for this task. In both cases, we first infer the activities from the observed part of the video using an RNNHMM [22]. The first approach builds on a recurrent neural network (RNN) that predicts for a given sequence of inferred activities the remaining duration of the ongoing activity as well as the duration and class of the next activity.
The anticipated activities are then fed back to the RNN in
order to anticipate activities for a longer time horizon. The
second approach builds on a convolutional neural network
(CNN). To this end, we convert the temporal sequence of
inferred activities in a matrix that encodes both the length
and the action label information. The CNN then predicts a
matrix that encodes the length and the action labels of the
anticipated activities. In contrast to the RNN approach, the
CNN approach anticipates all activities in one pass.
We have evaluated the two approaches on two challenging datasets that contain long sequences and large variations. Both approaches outperform by a large margin two
baselines, a grammar based baseline and a nearest neighbor
baseline. While the RNN and CNN perform similarly for a
long time horizon of more than 40 seconds, the RNN performs better for shorter time horizons less than 20 seconds.
Both approaches also outperform the method of [30] that
does not anticipate activities directly but visual representations of future frames, which can then be used to classify
the activities.

2. Related Work
Predicting future frames, poses or image segmentations
in videos has been studied in several works [20, 16, 13,
31, 11, 27, 18, 29, 33, 32, 17, 12]. Approaches that predict future frames at a pixel-level, however, are limited to
a few frames. Instead of predicting frames, a deep network
is trained in [30] to predict visual representations of future
frames. The predicted visual representations can then be
15343

