Conditional Image-to-Image translation
Jianxin Lin1
Yingce Xia1
Tao Qin2
Zhibo Chen1
Tie-Yan Liu2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
linjx@mail.ustc.edu.cn

yingce.xia@gmail.com

{taoqin, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Image-to-image translation tasks have been widely investigated with Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
and dual learning. However, existing models lack the ability to control the translated results in the target domain and
their results usually lack of diversity in the sense that a fixed
image usually leads to (almost) deterministic translation result. In this paper, we study a new problem, conditional
image-to-image translation, which is to translate an image
from the source domain to the target domain conditioned on
a given image in the target domain. It requires that the generated image should inherit some domain-specific features
of the conditional image from the target domain. Therefore,
changing the conditional image in the target domain will
lead to diverse translation results for a fixed input image
from the source domain, and therefore the conditional input image helps to control the translation results. We tackle
this problem with unpaired data based on GANs and dual learning. We twist two conditional translation models
(one translation from A domain to B domain, and the other
one from B domain to A domain) together for inputs combination and reconstruction while preserving domain independent features. We carry out experiments on men’s faces
from-to women’s faces translation and edges to shoes&bags
translations. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation covers a large variety of
computer vision problems, including image stylization [4],
segmentation [13] and saliency detection [5]. It aims at
learning a mapping that can convert an image from a source
domain to a target domain, while preserving the main presentations of the input images. For example, in the aforementioned three tasks, an input image might be converted
to a portrait similar to Van Gogh’s styles, a heat map splitted into different regions, or a pencil sketch, while the
edges and outlines remain unchanged. Since it is usual-

chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

ly hard to collect a large amount of parallel data for such
tasks, unsupervised learning algorithms have been widely
adopted. Particularly, the generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [6] and dual learning [7, 21] are extensively studied
in image-to-image translations. [22, 9, 25] tackle imageto-image translation by the aforementioned two techniques,
where the GANs are used to ensure the generated images
belonging to the target domain, and dual learning can help
improve image qualities by minimizing reconstruction loss.
An implicit assumption of image-to-image translation
is that an image contains two kinds of features1 : domainindependent features, which are preserved during the translation (i.e., the edges of face, eyes, nose and mouse while
translating a man’ face to a woman’ face), and domainspecific features, which are changed during the translation (i.e., the color and style of the hair for face image
translation). Image-to-Image translation aims at transferring images from the source domain to the target domain
by preserving domain-independent features while replacing
domain-specific features.
While it is not difficult for existing image-to-image
translation methods to convert an image from a source domain to a target domain, it is not easy for them to control
or manipulate the style in fine granularity of the generated
image in the target domain. Consider the gender transform
problem studied in [9], which is to translate a man’s photo to
a woman’s. Can we translate Hillary’s photo to a man’ photo with the hair style and color of Trump? DiscoGAN [9]
can indeed output a woman’s photo given a man’s photo as
input, but cannot control the hair style or color of the output image. DualGAN [22, 25] cannot implement this kind
of fine-granularity control neither. To fulfill such a blank
in image translation, we propose the concept of conditional image-to-image translation, which can specify domainspecific features in the target domain, carried by another
input image from the target domain. An example of conditional image-to-image translation is shown in Figure 1, in
1 Note that the two kinds of features are relative concepts, and domainspecific features in one task might be domain-independent features in another task, depending on what domains one focuses on in the task.

5524

