ROAD: Reality Oriented Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation of Urban Scenes
Yuhua Chen1
1

Wen Li1

Luc Van Gool1,2
2

Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich

VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven

{yuhua.chen,liwen,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Exploiting synthetic data to learn deep models has attracted increasing attention in recent years. However, the
intrinsic domain difference between synthetic and real images usually causes a significant performance drop when
applying the learned model to real world scenarios. This is
mainly due to two reasons: 1) the model overfits to synthetic
images, making the convolutional filters incompetent to extract informative representation for real images; 2) there is
a distribution difference between synthetic and real data,
which is also known as the domain adaptation problem.
To this end, we propose a new reality oriented adaptation
approach for urban scene semantic segmentation by learning from synthetic data. First, we propose a target guided
distillation approach to learn the real image style, which
is achieved by training the segmentation model to imitate
a pretrained real style model using real images. Second,
we further take advantage of the intrinsic spatial structure
presented in urban scene images, and propose a spatialaware adaptation scheme to effectively align the distribution of two domains. These two modules can be readily integrated with existing state-of-the-art semantic segmentation
networks to improve their generalizability when adapting
from synthetic to real urban scenes. We evaluate the proposed method on Cityscapes dataset by adapting from GTAV
and SYNTHIA datasets, where the results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method.

One way that becomes recently prevalent is to collect
photo-realistic synthetic data from video games, where
pixel-level annotation can be automatically generated at
a much lower cost. For example, Richter etal.[32] constructed a large scale synthetic urban scene dataset for semantic segmentation from the GTAV game. While the cost
of acquiring training data and annotation is largely reduced,
synthetic data still suffers from a considerable domain difference from the real data, which usually leads to a significant performance drop when applying the segmentation
model to real world urban scenes [17, 49].
The main reasons are two-fold. First, from the perspective of representation, since the model is trained on synthetic images, the convolutional filters tend to overfit to synthetic style images, making them incompetent to extract informative features for real images. Second, from the distribution perspective, synthetic and real data suffers a considerable distribution mismatch, which makes the model biased to synthetic domain.
To overcome such problems, we propose Reality
Oriented ADaptation Networks(ROAD-Net) for semantic
segmentation of urban scenes by learning from synthetic
data. We address the above two issues respectively by a
target guided distillation module for real style orientation,
and a spatial-aware adaptation module for real distribution
orientation, which are described respectively as follows,
• real style orientation: To prevent the segmentation
model from overfitting to synthetic images, we propose to use the target real images to imitate a pretrained
real style model. This can be achieved using the model
distillation strategy by enforcing the output from segmentation model similar with the output of a pretrained
model. On one hand, this encourages convolutional
filters to fit to the real images through the distillation
task. On the other hand, it also enforces the segmentation network to preserve good discriminative for real
images by approaching the semantic output from the
pretrained model. We refer to it as target guided distillation.

1. Introduction
With the exciting vision of autonomous driving, semantic segmentation of urban scenes, as a key module, has
gained increasing attention from both academia and industry. However, collecting and labeling training data for semantic segmentation task is a laborious and expensive process, as it requires per-pixel annotation. This issue becomes even more severe with the surge of deep learning
techniques, which usually require a large amount of training data. Therefore, it becomes much desired to exploit low
cost ways to acquire data for semantic segmentation.

• real distribution orientation: To deal with the dis17892

