Attentive Generative Adversarial Network for Raindrop Removal
from A Single Image
Rui Qian1 , Robby T. Tan2,3∗, Wenhan Yang1 , Jiajun Su1 , and Jiaying Liu1†
1

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China
2

National University of Singapore, 3 Yale-NUS College

Abstract
Raindrops adhered to a glass window or camera lens can
severely hamper the visibility of a background scene and
degrade an image considerably. In this paper, we address
the problem by visually removing raindrops, and thus transforming a raindrop degraded image into a clean one. The
problem is intractable, since first the regions occluded by
raindrops are not given. Second, the information about the
background scene of the occluded regions is completely lost
for most part. To resolve the problem, we apply an attentive
generative network using adversarial training. Our main
idea is to inject visual attention into both the generative and
discriminative networks. During the training, our visual attention learns about raindrop regions and their surroundings. Hence, by injecting this information, the generative
network will pay more attention to the raindrop regions and
the surrounding structures, and the discriminative network
will be able to assess the local consistency of the restored
regions. This injection of visual attention to both generative and discriminative networks is the main contribution of
this paper. Our experiments show the effectiveness of our
approach, which outperforms the state of the art methods
quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Raindrops attached to a glass window, windscreen or
lens can hamper the visibility of a background scene and
degrade an image. Principally, the degradation occurs because raindrop regions contain different imageries from
those without raindrops. Unlike non-raindrop regions, raindrop regions are formed by rays of reflected light from a
∗ R.T.Tans work in this research is supported by the National Research
Foundation, Prime Ministers Office, Singapore under its International Research Centre in Singapore Funding Initiative.
† Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under contract No. 61772043 and CCFTencent Open Research Fund. We also gratefully acknowledge the support
of NVIDIA Corporation with the GPU for this research.

Figure 1. Demonstration of our raindrop removal method. Left:
input images degraded by raindrops. Right: our results, where
most raindrops are removed and structural details are restored.
Zooming-in the figure will provide a better look at the restoration
quality.

wider environment, due to the shape of raindrops, which is
similar to that of a fish-eye lens. Moreover, in most cases,
the focus of the camera is on the background scene, making
the appearance of raindrops blur.
In this paper, we address this visibility degradation problem. Given an image impaired by raindrops, our goal is to
remove the raindrops and produce a clean background as
shown in Fig. 1. Our method is fully automatic. We consider that it will benefit image processing and computer vision applications, particularly for those suffering from raindrops, dirt, or similar artifacts.
A few methods have been proposed to tackle the raindrop detection and removal problems. Methods such as
[17, 18, 12] are dedicated to detecting raindrops but not

2482

