Real-world Anomaly Detection in Surveillance Videos
Waqas Sultani1
1
Department of Computer Science
Information Technology University, Pakistan

Chen Chen2 , Mubarak Shah2
2
Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL,USA

waqas5163@gmail.com, chenchen870713@gmail.com, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Surveillance videos are able to capture a variety of realistic anomalies. In this paper, we propose to learn anomalies by exploiting both normal and anomalous videos. To
avoid annotating the anomalous segments or clips in training videos, which is very time consuming, we propose to
learn anomaly through the deep multiple instance ranking
framework by leveraging weakly labeled training videos,
i.e. the training labels (anomalous or normal) are at videolevel instead of clip-level. In our approach, we consider
normal and anomalous videos as bags and video segments
as instances in multiple instance learning (MIL), and automatically learn a deep anomaly ranking model that predicts
high anomaly scores for anomalous video segments. Furthermore, we introduce sparsity and temporal smoothness
constraints in the ranking loss function to better localize
anomaly during training.
We also introduce a new large-scale first of its kind
dataset of 128 hours of videos. It consists of 1900 long and
untrimmed real-world surveillance videos, with 13 realistic
anomalies such as fighting, road accident, burglary, robbery, etc. as well as normal activities. This dataset can be
used for two tasks. First, general anomaly detection considering all anomalies in one group and all normal activities in
another group. Second, for recognizing each of 13 anomalous activities. Our experimental results show that our MIL
method for anomaly detection achieves significant improvement on anomaly detection performance as compared to
the state-of-the-art approaches. We provide the results of
several recent deep learning baselines on anomalous activity recognition. The low recognition performance of these
baselines reveals that our dataset is very challenging and
opens more opportunities for future work. The dataset is
available at: http://crcv.ucf.edu/projects/real-world/

1. Introduction
Surveillance cameras are increasingly being used in public places e.g. streets, intersections, banks, shopping malls,

etc. to increase public safety. However, the monitoring capability of law enforcement agencies has not kept pace. The
result is that there is a glaring deficiency in the utilization of
surveillance cameras and an unworkable ratio of cameras to
human monitors. One critical task in video surveillance is
detecting anomalous events such as traffic accidents, crimes
or illegal activities. Generally, anomalous events rarely occur as compared to normal activities. Therefore, to alleviate the waste of labor and time, developing intelligent computer vision algorithms for automatic video anomaly detection is a pressing need. The goal of a practical anomaly
detection system is to timely signal an activity that deviates
normal patterns and identify the time window of the occurring anomaly. Therefore, anomaly detection can be considered as coarse level video understanding, which filters out
anomalies from normal patterns. Once an anomaly is detected, it can further be categorized into one of the specific
activities using classification techniques.
A small step towards addressing anomaly detection is to
develop algorithms to detect a specific anomalous event, for
example violence detector [30] and traffic accident detector
[23, 35]. However, it is obvious that such solutions cannot
be generalized to detect other anomalous events, therefore
they render a limited use in practice.
Real-world anomalous events are complicated and diverse. It is difficult to list all of the possible anomalous
events. Therefore, it is desirable that the anomaly detection algorithm does not rely on any prior information about
the events. In other words, anomaly detection should be
done with minimum supervision. Sparse-coding based approaches [28, 42] are considered as representative methods that achieve state-of-the-art anomaly detection results.
These methods assume that only a small initial portion of a
video contains normal events, and therefore the initial portion is used to build the normal event dictionary. Then, the
main idea for anomaly detection is that anomalous events
are not accurately reconstructable from the normal event
dictionary. However, since the environment captured by

6479

