A Bi-directional Message Passing Model for Salient Object Detection
Lu Zhang1 , Ju Dai1 , Huchuan Lu1 , You He2 , Gang Wang3
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Naval Aviation University, China
3
Alibaba AILabs, China
{luzhang dut, daijucug}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn,
heyou f@126.com, wg134231@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Recent progress on salient object detection is beneficial from Fully Convolutional Neural Network (FCN). The
saliency cues contained in multi-level convolutional features are complementary for detecting salient objects. How
to integrate multi-level features becomes an open problem
in saliency detection. In this paper, we propose a novel
bi-directional message passing model to integrate multilevel features for salient object detection. At first, we adopt
a Multi-scale Context-aware Feature Extraction Module
(MCFEM) for multi-level feature maps to capture rich context information. Then a bi-directional structure is designed to pass messages between multi-level features, and
a gate function is exploited to control the message passing
rate. We use the features after message passing, which simultaneously encode semantic information and spatial details, to predict saliency maps. Finally, the predicted results
are efficiently combined to generate the final saliency map.
Quantitative and qualitative experiments on five benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our proposed model performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods under different
evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection aims to localize the most conspicuous and eye-attracting regions in an image. It can
be taken as a pre-processing step in many computer vision tasks, such as scene classification [25], visual tracking [3, 21], person re-identification [40] and image retrieval [5]. Although numerous valuable models have been
proposed, it is still difficult to locate salient object accurately especially in some complicated scenarios.
In recent years, the Fully Convolutional Neural Network
(FCN) has shown impressive results in dense prediction
tasks, such as semantic segmentation [19], contour detec-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Visual examples of our method and RFCN [29]. From
left to right: (a) input image, (b) ground truth, (c) saliency map of
the proposed method, (d) saliency map of RFCN [29].

tion [31] and pose estimation [34]. Motivated by this, several attempts have been performed to utilize FCN in salient
object detection [18, 38, 28, 20, 37]. Although these models
could achieve promising results, there are still two problems. Firstly, most previous FCN-based saliency detection models [29, 27, 38, 12] stack single-scale convolutional and max pooling layers sequentially to generate deep
features. Due to the limited receptive fields, the learned
features might not contain rich context information to precisely detect the objects with various scales, shapes and locations (see the fourth column in Fig. 1). Secondly, early
works [29, 18, 15, 12] predict saliency maps by mainly using high-level features from deep convolutional layers. The
lack of low-level spatial details may make the saliency maps
fail to retain fine object boundaries. This motivates several efforts [37, 8, 14] to exploit multi-level convolutional
features for saliency detection. Hou et al. [8] propose to
add short connections between multiple side output layers
to combine features of different levels. However, the short
connections are only performed from deep side output layers to shallow ones and ignore the information transmission
in the opposite direction. Thus the deep side outputs still
lack the low-level details contained in shallow side output

1741

