Appearance-and-Relation Networks for Video Classification
Limin Wang1,2
Wei Li3
Wen Li2
Luc Van Gool2
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
3
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Google Research

Abstract
Spatiotemporal feature learning in videos is a fundamental problem in computer vision. This paper presents a
new architecture, termed as Appearance-and-Relation Network (ARTNet), to learn video representation in an end-toend manner. ARTNets are constructed by stacking multiple generic building blocks, called as SMART, whose goal
is to simultaneously model appearance and relation from
RGB input in a separate and explicit manner. Specifically,
SMART blocks decouple the spatiotemporal learning module into an appearance branch for spatial modeling and a
relation branch for temporal modeling. The appearance
branch is implemented based on the linear combination of
pixels or filter responses in each frame, while the relation
branch is designed based on the multiplicative interactions
between pixels or filter responses across multiple frames.
We perform experiments on three action recognition benchmarks: Kinetics, UCF101, and HMDB51, demonstrating
that SMART blocks obtain an evident improvement over 3D
convolutions for spatiotemporal feature learning. Under
the same training setting, ARTNets achieve superior performance on these three datasets to the existing state-of-the-art
methods. 1

1. Introduction
Deep learning has witnessed a series of remarkable successes in computer vision. In particular, Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) [25] have turned out to be effective for visual tasks in image domain, such as image classification [21, 13, 36, 39], object detection [12], and semantic
segmentation [27]. Deep models have been also introduced
into video domain for action recognition [2, 46, 50, 35, 49,
41, 19, 51], and obtain comparable or better recognition accuracy to those traditional methods with hand-crafted representations [23, 44, 47]. However, the progress of architecture design and representation learning in video domain
is much slower, partially due to its inherent complexity and
1 The code is at https://github.com/wanglimin/ARTNet.

higher dimension. Video could be viewed as the temporal evolution of a sequence of static images. It is generally
assumed that two visual cues are crucial for video classification and understanding: (1) static appearance in each
frame, and (2) temporal relation across multiple frames.
Therefore, an effective deep architecture should be able to
capture both information to achieve excellent classification
accuracy.
There are three kinds of successful architectures or
frameworks for video classification [2]: (1) two-stream
CNNs [35], (2) 3D CNNs [18, 41], and (3) 2D CNNs with
temporal models on top such as LSTM [5, 33], temporal
convolution [33], sparse sampling and aggregation [49], and
attention modeling [48, 28, 9]. Two-stream CNNs capture
appearance and motion information with different streams,
which turn out to be effective for video classification. Yet, it
is time-consuming to train two networks and calculate optical flow in advance. To overcome this limitation, 3D CNNs
employ 3D convolutions and 3D pooling operations to directly learn spatiotemporal features from stacked RGB volumes. However, the performance of 3D CNNs is still worse
than two-stream CNNs, and it is still unclear whether this
straightforward 3D extension over 2D convolution could
efficiently model static appearance and temporal relation.
2D CNNs with temporal models usually focus on capturing
coarser and long-term temporal structure, but lack capacity
of representing finer temporal relation in a local spatiotemporal window.
In this paper, we address the problem of capturing appearance and relation in video domain, by proposing a new
architecture unit termed as SMART block. Our SMART
block aims to Simultaneously Model Appearance and RelaTion from RGB input in a separate and explicit way with
a two-branch unit, in contrast to modeling them with twostream inputs [35] or jointly and implicitly with a 3D convolution [41]. As shown in Figure 1, our SMART block
is a multi-branch architecture, which is composed of appearance branch and relation branch, and fuses them with
a concatenation and reduction operation. The appearance
branch is based on the linear combination of pixels or filter
responses in each frame to model spatial structure, while the
11430

