LDMNet: Low Dimensional Manifold Regularized Neural Networks
Wei Zhu
Duke University

Qiang Qiu
Duke University

Jiaji Huang
Baidu Silicon Valley AI Lab

zhu@math.duke.edu

qiang.qiu@duke.edu

huangjiaji@baidu.com

Robert Calderbank
Duke University

Guillermo Sapiro
Duke University

Ingrid Daubechies
Duke University

robert.calderbank@duke.edu

guillermo.sapiro@duke.edu

ingrid@math.duke.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have proved very successful on
archetypal tasks for which large training sets are available,
but when the training data are scarce, their performance
suffers from overfitting. Many existing methods of reducing
overfitting are data-independent. Data-dependent regularizations are mostly motivated by the observation that data
of interest lie close to a manifold, which is typically hard to
parametrize explicitly. These methods usually only focus on
the geometry of the input data, and do not necessarily encourage the networks to produce geometrically meaningful
features. To resolve this, we propose the Low-DimensionalManifold-regularized neural Network (LDMNet), which incorporates a feature regularization method that focuses on
the geometry of both the input data and the output features.
In LDMNet, we regularize the network by encouraging the
combination of the input data and the output features to
sample a collection of low dimensional manifolds, which
are searched efficiently without explicit parametrization. To
achieve this, we directly use the manifold dimension as a
regularization term in a variational functional. The resulting Euler-Lagrange equation is a Laplace-Beltrami equation over a point cloud, which is solved by the point integral
method without increasing the computational complexity. In
the experiments, we show that LDMNet significantly outperforms widely-used regularizers. Moreover, LDMNet can
extract common features of an object imaged via different
modalities, which is very useful in real-world applications
such as cross-spectral face recognition.

1. Introduction
In this era of big data, deep neural networks (DNNs)
have achieved great success in machine learning research
and commercial applications. When large amounts of training data are available, the capacity of DNNs can easily be
increased by adding more units or layers to extract more
effective high-level features [9, 10, 26]. However, big net-

works with millions of parameters can easily overfit even
the largest of datasets. It is thus crucial to regularize DNNs
so that they can extract “meaningful” features not only from
the training data, but also from the test data.
Many widely-used network regularizations are dataindependent. Such techniques include weight decay, parameter sharing, DropOut [24], DropConnect [27], etc. Intuitively, weight decay alleviates overfitting by reducing the
magnitude of the weights and the features, and DropOut
and DropConnect can be viewed as computationally inexpensive ways to train an exponentially large ensemble of
DNNs. Their effectiveness as network regularizers can be
quantified by analyzing the Rademacher complexity, which
provides an upper bound for the generalization error [1, 27].
Most of the data-dependent regularizations are motivated
by the empirical observation that data of interest typically
lie close to a manifold, an assumption that has previously
assisted machine learning tasks such as nonlinear embedding [2], semi-supervised labeling [3], and multi-task classification [6]. In the context of DNN, data-dependent regularization techniques include the tangent distance algorithm
[20, 22], tangent prop algorithm [21], and manifold tangent
classifier [18]. Typically, these algorithms only focus on the
geometry of the input data, and do not encourage the network to produce geometrically meaningful features. Moreover, it is typically hard to explicity parametrize the underlying manifold, and some of the algorithms require human
input of the tangent planes or tangent vectors [9].
Motivated by the same manifold observation, we propose a new network regularization technique that focuses
on the geometry of both the input data and the output features, and build low-dimensional-manifold-regularized neural networks (LDMNet). This is inspired by a recent algorithm in image processing, the low dimensional manifold
model [16, 19, 30]. The idea of LDMNet is that the concatenation (xi , ξi ) of the input data xi and the output features
ξi should sample a collection of low dimensional manifolds.
This idea is loosely related to the Gaussian mixture model:
instead of assuming that the generating distribution of the

2743

