LayoutNet: Reconstructing the 3D Room Layout from a Single RGB Image
Chuhang Zou†
†

Alex Colburn‡

Qi Shan‡

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{czou4, dhoiem}@illinois.edu

Derek Hoiem†
‡

Zillow Group

{alexco, qis}@zillow.com

Abstract
We propose an algorithm to predict room layout from a
single image that generalizes across panoramas and perspective images, cuboid layouts and more general layouts
(e.g. “L”-shape room). Our method operates directly on the
panoramic image, rather than decomposing into perspective images as do recent works. Our network architecture is
similar to that of RoomNet [15], but we show improvements
due to aligning the image based on vanishing points, predicting multiple layout elements (corners, boundaries, size
and translation), and fitting a constrained Manhattan layout to the resulting predictions. Our method compares well
in speed and accuracy to other existing work on panoramas, achieves among the best accuracy for perspective images, and can handle both cuboid-shaped and more general
Manhattan layouts.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D layout of a room from one image is an
important goal, with applications such as robotics and virtual/augmented reality. The room layout specifies the positions, orientations, and heights of the walls, relative to the
camera center. The layout can be represented as a set of
projected corner positions or boundaries, or as a 3D mesh.
Existing works apply to special cases of the problem, such
as predicting cuboid-shaped layouts from perspective images or from panoramic images.
We present LayoutNet, a deep convolution neural network (CNN) that estimates the 3D layout of an indoor
scene from a single perspective or panoramic image (Figure. 1). Our method compares well in speed and accuracy on panoramas and is among the best on perspective images. Our method also generalizes to non-cuboid
Manhattan layouts, such as “L”-shaped rooms. Code is
available at: https://github.com/zouchuhang/
LayoutNet.
Our LayoutNet approach operates in three steps ( Figure. 2). First, our system analyzes the vanishing points

LayoutNet

Figure 1. Illustration. Our LayoutNet predicts a non-cuboid room
layout from a single panorama under equirectangular projection.

and aligns the image to be level with the floor (Sec. 3.1).
This alignment ensures that wall-wall boundaries are vertical lines and substantially reduces error according to our
experiments. In the second step, corner (layout junctions)
and boundary probability maps are predicted directly on the
image using a CNN with an encoder-decoder structure and
skip connections (Sec. 3.2). Corners and boundaries each
provide a complete representation of room layout. We find
that jointly predicting them in a single network leads to better estimation. Finally, the 3D layout parameters are optimized to fit the predicted corners and boundaries (Sec. 3.4).
The final 3D layout loss from our optimization process is
difficult to back-propagate through the network, but direct
regression of the 3D parameters during training serves as an
effective substitute, encouraging predictions that maximize
accuracy of the end result.
Our contributions are:
• We propose a more general RGB image to layout algorithm that is suitable for perspective and panoramic

2051

