Mining Point Cloud Local Structures by Kernel Correlation and Graph Pooling
Yiru Shen∗ †

Chen Feng∗ ‡

Yaoqing Yang§

Dong Tian‡

yirus@g.clemson.edu

cfeng@merl.com

yyaoqing@andrew.cmu.edu

tian@merl.com

†

Clemson University

‡

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)

§

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Unlike on images, semantic learning on 3D point clouds
using a deep network is challenging due to the naturally
unordered data structure. Among existing works, PointNet has achieved promising results by directly learning on
point sets. However, it does not take full advantage of a
point’s local neighborhood that contains fine-grained structural information which turns out to be helpful towards
better semantic learning. In this regard, we present two
new operations to improve PointNet with a more efficient
exploitation of local structures. The first one focuses on
local 3D geometric structures. In analogy to a convolution kernel for images, we define a point-set kernel as a
set of learnable 3D points that jointly respond to a set of
neighboring data points according to their geometric affinities measured by kernel correlation, adapted from a similar technique for point cloud registration. The second one
exploits local high-dimensional feature structures by recursive feature aggregation on a nearest-neighbor-graph computed from 3D positions. Experiments show that our network can efficiently capture local information and robustly
achieve better performances on major datasets. Our code
is available at http://www.merl.com/research/
license#KCNet

1. Introduction
As 3D data become ubiquitous with the rapid development of various 3D sensors, semantic understanding and
analysis of such kind of data using deep networks is gaining
attentions [3, 20, 29, 32, 41], due to its wide applications in
robotics, autonomous driving, reverse engineering, and civil
infrastructure monitoring. In particular, as one of the most
primitive 3D data format and often the raw 3D sensor output, 3D point clouds cannot be trivially consumed by deep
networks in the same way as 2D images by convolutional
networks. This is mainly caused by the irregular organization of points, a fundamental challenge inherent in this raw
∗ The authors contributed equally. This work is supported by MERL.

Figure 1: Visualization of learned kernel correlations.
To represent complex local geometric structures around a
point p, we propose kernel correlation as an affinity measure between two point sets: p’s neighboring points and
kernel points. This figure shows kernel point positions and
width as sphere centers and radius (top row), and the corresponding filter responses (other rows) of 5 kernels over 4
objects. Colors indicate affinities normalized in each object
(red: strongest, white: weakest). Note the various structures
(plane, edge, corner, concave and convex surfaces) captured
by different kernels. Best viewed in color.

data format: compared with a row-column indexed image, a
point cloud is a set of point coordinates (possibly with attributes like intensities and surface normals) without obvious
orderings between points, except for point clouds computed
from depth images.
Nevertheless, influenced by the success of convolutional networks for images, many works have focused on 3D
voxels, i.e., regular 3D grids converted from point clouds
prior to the learning process. Only then do the 3D convolutional networks learn to extract features from voxels
[2, 7, 23, 25, 30, 42]. However, to avoid the intractable computation time complexity and memory consumptions, such

4548

