Who Let The Dogs Out?
Modeling Dog Behavior From Visual Data
Kiana Ehsani1 , Hessam Bagherinezhad1 , Joseph Redmon1
Roozbeh Mottaghi2 , Ali Farhadi1,2
1
University of Washington, 2 Allen Institute for AI (AI2)

Abstract
We study the task of directly modelling a visually intelligent agent. Computer vision typically focuses on solving
various subtasks related to visual intelligence. We depart
from this standard approach to computer vision; instead we
directly model a visually intelligent agent. Our model takes
visual information as input and directly predicts the actions
of the agent. Toward this end we introduce DECADE, a
dataset of ego-centric videos from a dog’s perspective as
well as her corresponding movements. Using this data we
model how the dog acts and how the dog plans her movements. We show under a variety of metrics that given just
visual input we can successfully model this intelligent agent
in many situations. Moreover, the representation learned by
our model encodes distinct information compared to representations trained on image classification, and our learned
representation can generalize to other domains. In particular, we show strong results on the task of walkable surface
estimation and scene classification by using this dog modelling task as representation learning.

Acting like a dog
action?

t+3
t

t+2

Planning like a dog

t

sequence of actions?

t+N

Learning from a dog

1. Introduction
Computer vision research typically focuses on a few well
defined tasks including image classification, object recognition, object detection, image segmentation, etc. These tasks
have organically emerged and evolved over time as proxies
for the actual problem of visual intelligence. Visual intelligence spans a wide range of problems and is hard to formally define or evaluate. As a result, the proxy tasks have
served the community as the main point of focus and indicators of progress.
We value the undeniable impact of these proxy tasks in
computer vision research and advocate the continuation of
research on these fundamental problems. There is, however, a gap between the ideal outcome of these proxy tasks
and the expected functionality of visually intelligent systems. In this paper, we take a direct approach to the prob-

t+1

representation
learning
walkable surfaces

Figure 1. We address three problems: (1) Acting like a dog: where
the goal is to predict the future movements of the dog given a sequence of previously seen images. (2) Planning like a dog: where
the goal is to find a sequence of actions that move the dog between
the locations of the given pair of images. (3) Learning from a
dog: where we use the learned representation for a third task (e.g.,
walkable surface estimation).

lem of visual intelligence. Inspired by recent work that
explores the role of action and interaction in visual understanding [56, 3, 31], we define the problem of visual intelligence as understanding visual data to the extent that
an agent can take actions and perform tasks in the visual
world. Under this definition, we propose to learn to act like

4051

