Single-Image Depth Estimation Based on Fourier Domain Analysis
Jae-Han Lee, Minhyeok Heo, Kyung-Rae Kim, and Chang-Su Kim
Korea University
{jaehanlee, mhheo, krkim}@mcl.korea.ac.kr, changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a deep learning algorithm for single-image
depth estimation based on the Fourier frequency domain
analysis. First, we develop a convolutional neural network
structure and propose a new loss function, called depthbalanced Euclidean loss, to train the network reliably for
a wide range of depths. Then, we generate multiple depth
map candidates by cropping input images with various
cropping ratios. In general, a cropped image with a small
ratio yields depth details more faithfully, while that with a
large ratio provides the overall depth distribution more reliably. To take advantage of these complementary properties, we combine the multiple candidates in the frequency
domain. Experimental results demonstrate that proposed
algorithm provides the state-of-art performance. Furthermore, through the frequency domain analysis, we validate
the efficacy of the proposed algorithm in most frequency
bands.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is the process of predicting the depth
map of a scene using one or more images. The depth information serves as an important cue for understanding geometric relationship in the scene. For instance, an RGBD
image, which has color and depth channels, can be applied in a variety of tasks, such as 3D model reconstruction [13, 30, 33], scene recognition [27, 32, 33], human pose
estimation [37]. Depths can be estimated from stereo images [31] or motion sequences [2, 7, 17, 31, 40], which provide relatively rich information for understanding 3D structures. In contrast, it is more challenging and ambiguous to
estimate depths from a single image [1, 3, 5, 6, 15, 19–22,
24, 28, 38, 42, 43], which does not allow the correspondence
matching between stereo images or temporal frames.
Various geometric or image composition assumptions
have been made to overcome the ambiguities in singleimage depth estimation [9, 10, 13, 23, 36, 41]. For example,
3D reconstruction can be performed, assuming that a scene
is composed of flat planes [13], that an image is composed

in certain perspective [9], or that a scene has the floor-walls
geometry [4]. Also, focal blurs were exploited in [41], and
haze strengths inferred from the dark channel prior were
used in [9]. These techniques, however, can reconstruct
depths in specific cases only when the corresponding assumptions are valid.
Recently, several methods have been proposed to employ graph-based models [21, 23, 29, 30], such as Markov
random field (MRF) and conditional random field (CRF).
Moreover, with the fast development of deep learning technology [11, 12, 16], various attempts have been made to
use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for single-image
depth estimation [3, 5, 6, 19, 38].
In this work, we propose a CNN-based algorithm for
single-image depth estimation, which makes multiple predictions and combines the results in the Fourier frequency
domain. First, we develop a CNN based on the ResNet [11]
architecture. It includes additional paths for extracting intermediate features. Also, in order to train the network reliably for a wide range of depths, we propose the depthbalanced Euclidean (DBE) loss function. Then, we generate multiple depth map candidates by cropping an input
image with various cropping ratios. In general, a cropped
image with a small cropping ratio reconstructs local depth
details more faithfully, while that with a large ratio recovers
the overall depth distribution more reliably. To take advantages of these complementary properties, we combine the
multiple candidates in the Fourier frequency domain.
Extensive experimental results on the NYUv2 depth
dataset [33] demonstrate that the proposed algorithm yields
the state-of-the-art performance, outperforming the conventional algorithms significantly. Moreover, by analyzing estimated depth maps in the frequency domain, we validate
the efficacy of the components of the proposed algorithm in
a wide range of frequencies.
This paper has three main contributions:
• We design a ResNet-based depth estimation network.
• We propose the DBE loss to enable more reliable training of the network.
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to

330

