PointFusion: Deep Sensor Fusion for 3D Bounding Box Estimation
Danfei Xu∗
Stanford Unviersity

Dragomir Anguelov
Zoox Inc.

Ashesh Jain
Zoox Inc.

danfei@cs.stanford.edu

drago@zoox.com

ashesh@zoox.com

Abstract
We present PointFusion, a generic 3D object detection
method that leverages both image and 3D point cloud information. Unlike existing methods that either use multistage pipelines or hold sensor and dataset-specific assumptions, PointFusion is conceptually simple and applicationagnostic. The image data and the raw point cloud data are
independently processed by a CNN and a PointNet architecture, respectively. The resulting outputs are then combined by a novel fusion network, which predicts multiple
3D box hypotheses and their confidences, using the input
3D points as spatial anchors. We evaluate PointFusion on
two distinctive datasets: the KITTI dataset that features
driving scenes captured with a lidar-camera setup, and the
SUN-RGBD dataset that captures indoor environments with
RGB-D cameras. Our model is the first one that is able to
perform better or on-par with the state-of-the-art on these
diverse datasets without any dataset-specific model tuning.

1. Introduction
We focus on 3D object detection, which is a fundamental computer vision problem impacting most autonomous
robotics systems including self-driving cars and drones.
The goal of 3D object detection is to recover the 6 DoF
pose and the 3D bounding box dimensions for all objects
of interest in the scene. While recent advances in convolutional neural networks have enabled accurate 2D detection
in complex environments [25, 22, 19], the 3D object detection problem still remains an open challenge. Methods for
3D box regression from a single image, even including recent deep learning methods such as [21, 36], still have relatively low accuracy especially in depth estimates at longer
ranges. Hence, many current real-world systems either use
stereo or augment their sensor stack with lidar and radar.
The lidar-radar mixed-sensor setup is particularly popular
in self-driving cars and is typically handled by a multi∗ Work done as an intern at Zoox, Inc.

Figure 1. Sample 3D object detection results of our PointFusion
model on the KITTI dataset [10] (left) and the SUN-RGBD [30]
dataset (right). In this paper, we show that our simple and generic
sensor fusion method is able to handle datasets with distinctive
environments and sensor types and perform better or on-par with
state-of-the-art methods on the respective datasets.

stage pipeline, which preprocesses each sensor modality
separately and then performs a late fusion or decision-level
fusion step using an expert-designed tracking system such
as a Kalman filter [4, 7]. Such systems make simplifying
assumptions and make decisions in the absence of context
from other sensors. Inspired by the successes of deep learning for handling diverse raw sensory input, we propose an
early fusion model for 3D box estimation, which directly
learns to combine image and depth information optimally.
Various combinations of cameras and 3D sensors are widely
used in the field, and it is desirable to have a single algorithm that generalizes to as many different problem settings
as possible. Many real-world robotic systems are equipped
with multiple 3D sensors: for example, autonomous cars
often have multiple lidars and potentially also radars. Yet,
current algorithms often assume a single RGB-D camera [32, 16], which provides RGB-D images, or a single
lidar sensor [3, 18], which allows the creation of a local
front view image of the lidar depth and intensity readings.
Many existing algorithms also make strong domain-specific
assumptions. For example, MV3D [3] assumes that all objects can be segmented in a top-down 2D view of the point
cloud, which works for the common self-driving case but
does not generalize to indoor scenes where objects can be
placed on top of each other. Furthermore, the top-down
view approach tends to only work well for objects such as
1244

