Local Descriptors Optimized for Average Precision
Kun He
Boston Univesity

Yan Lu∗
Honda Research Institute USA

Stan Sclaroff
Boston University

hekun@bu.edu

sinoluyan@gmail.com

sclaroff@bu.edu

Abstract
Extraction of local feature descriptors is a vital stage in
the solution pipelines for numerous computer vision tasks.
Learning-based approaches improve performance in certain tasks, but still cannot replace handcrafted features in
general. In this paper, we improve the learning of local
feature descriptors by optimizing the performance of descriptor matching, which is a common stage that follows
descriptor extraction in local feature based pipelines, and
can be formulated as nearest neighbor retrieval. Specifically, we directly optimize a ranking-based retrieval performance metric, Average Precision, using deep neural networks. This general-purpose solution can also be viewed
as a listwise learning to rank approach, which is advantageous compared to recent local ranking approaches. On
standard benchmarks, descriptors learned with our formulation achieve state-of-the-art results in patch verification,
patch retrieval, and image matching.

1. Introduction
Extracting feature descriptors from local image patches
is a common stage in many computer vision tasks involving
alignment or matching. To replace handcrafted feature engineering, recently much attention has been paid to learning
local feature descriptors. Despite exciting progress, certain
levels of handcrafting are currently present in the design of
learning objectives for local feature descriptors, making it
difficult to have performance guarantees when the learned
descriptors are integrated into larger pipelines. Indeed, according to a recent study [28], traditional handcrafted features such as SIFT [21] can still outperform learned ones in
complicated tasks such as 3D reconstruction. In this paper,
we aim to improve the learning of local feature descriptors
by optimizing better objective functions.
Our thesis is that local feature descriptor learning is not a
standalone problem, but rather a component in the optimization of larger pipelines. Therefore, the learning objectives
∗ Now with Nvidia.

should be designed in accordance with other pipeline components. Upon inspection of common local feature matching pipelines, we find that feature matching can be exactly
formulated as nearest neighbor retrieval. Thus, we propose
a novel listwise learning to rank formulation for learning
local feature descriptors, based on the direct optimization
of a ranking-based retrieval performance metric: Average
Precision. Our formulation uses deep neural networks, and
works for both binary and real-valued descriptors. Compared to recent approaches, our method optimizes a commonly adopted evaluation metric, and eliminates complex
optimization heuristics. Descriptors learned with our formulation achieve state-of-the-art results in benchmarks including UBC Phototour [37], HPatches [2], RomePatches
[26], and the Oxford dataset [23].
An important feature of our proposed formulation is that
it is general-purpose, as it optimizes the performance of the
task-independent nearest neighbor matching stage, rather
than a task-specific pipeline. Nevertheless, to better tailor the learned descriptors for feature matching, we also
augment our formulation with task-specific improvements.
First, we make use of the Spatial Transformer module [12]
to effectively handle geometric noise and improve the robustness of matching, without requesting extra supervision.
Also, for the challenging HPatches dataset, we design a
clustering-based technique to mine additional patch-level
supervision, which improves the performance of learned descriptors in the image matching task.
In summary, we propose a general-purpose learning to
rank formulation that optimizes local feature descriptors for
nearest neighbor matching. Our learned descriptors achieve
state-of-the-art performance, and are further enhanced by
task-specific improvements. We believe that our contribution can serve as a stepping stone for the direct optimization
of larger computer vision pipelines.

2. Related Work
Learning Local Features
Parallel with the long history of handcrafted computer
vision pipelines (the most prominent example being SIFT
[21]), numerous researchers have attempted to replace
1596

