Large-scale Distance Metric Learning with Uncertainty
Qi Qian

Jiasheng Tang
Hao Li
Shenghuo Zhu
Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA, 98004, USA

Rong Jin

{qi.qian, jiasheng.tjs, lihao.lh, shenghuo.zhu, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
xk

Distance metric learning (DML) has been studied extensively in the past decades for its superior performance
with distance-based algorithms. Most of the existing methods propose to learn a distance metric with pairwise or
triplet constraints. However, the number of constraints is
quadratic or even cubic in the number of the original examples, which makes it challenging for DML to handle the
large-scale data set. Besides, the real-world data may contain various uncertainty, especially for the image data. The
uncertainty can mislead the learning procedure and cause
the performance degradation. By investigating the image
data, we find that the original data can be observed from
a small set of clean latent examples with different distortions. In this work, we propose the margin preserving metric
learning framework to learn the distance metric and latent
examples simultaneously. By leveraging the ideal properties of latent examples, the training efficiency can be improved significantly while the learned metric also becomes
robust to the uncertainty in the original data. Furthermore,
we can show that the metric is learned from latent examples
only, but it can preserve the large margin property even for
the original data. The empirical study on the benchmark
image data sets demonstrates the efficacy and efficiency of
the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Distance metric learning (DML) aims to learn a distance
metric where examples from the same class are well separated from examples of different classes. It is an essential
task for distance-based algorithms, such as k-means clustering [18], k-nearest neighbor classification [17] and information retrieval [2]. Given a distance metric M , the squared
Mahalanobis distance between examples xi and xj can be
computed as
2
DM
(xi , xj ) = (xi − xj )⊤ M (xi − xj )

Most of existing DML methods propose to learn the metric by minimizing the number of violations in the set of

xk
xi

xi

xj
xj

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method. Let round and
square points denote the target data and impostors, respectively.
Let triangle points denote the corresponding latent examples. Data
points with the same color are from the same class. It demonstrates
that the metric learned with latent examples not only separates the
dissimilar latent data with a large margin but also preserves the
large margin for the original data.

pairwise or triplet constraints. Given a set of pairwise constraints, DML tries to learn a metric such that the distances
between examples from the same class are sufficiently small
(e.g., smaller than a predefined threshold) while those between different ones are large enough [3, 18]. Different
from pairwise constraints, each triplet constraint consists of
three examples (xi , xj , xk ), where xi and xj have the same
label and xk is from a different class. An ideal metric can
push away xk from xi and xj by a large margin [17]. Learning with triplet constraints optimizes the local positions of
examples and is more flexible for real-world applications,
where defining the appropriate thresholds is hard for pairwise constraints. In this work, we will focus on DML with
triplet constraints.
Optimizing the metric with a set of triplet constraints is
challenging since the number of triplet constraints can be
up to O(n3 ), where n is the number of the original training examples. It makes DML computationally intractable
for the large-scale problems. Many strategies have been developed to deal with this challenge and most of them fall
into two categories, learning by stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) and learning with the active set. With the strategy
of SGD, DML methods can sample just one constraint or
a mini-batch of constraints at each iteration to observe an
unbiased estimation of the full gradient and avoid comput-

8542

