Blind Predicting Similar Quality Map for Image Quality Assessment
Da Pan, Ping Shi, Ming Hou, Zefeng Ying, Sizhe Fu, Yuan Zhang
Communication University of China
No.1 Dingfuzhuang East Street Chaoyang District, Beijing, China
{pdmeng, shiping, houming, yingzf, fusizhe, yzhang}@cuc.edu.cn

Abstract
A key problem in blind image quality assessment (BIQA)
is how to effectively model the properties of human visual
system in a data-driven manner. In this paper, we propose
a simple and efficient BIQA model based on a novel framework which consists of a fully convolutional neural network
(FCNN) and a pooling network to solve this problem. In
principle, FCNN is capable of predicting a pixel-by-pixel
similar quality map only from a distorted image by using
the intermediate similarity maps derived from conventional
full-reference image quality assessment methods. The predicted pixel-by-pixel quality maps have good consistency
with the distortion correlations between the reference and
distorted images. Finally, a deep pooling network regresses the quality map into a score. Experiments have demonstrated that our predictions outperform many state-of-theart BIQA methods.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Examples of predicted quality maps: (a) is a distorted
image; (b) is a similarity map from FSIM; (c) is a patch-based
quality map from BIECON [9]; (d) is a pixel-based quality map
predicted from our proposed model.

1. Introduction
Objective image quality assessment (IQA) is a fundamental problem in computer vision and plays an important role in monitoring image quality degradations, optimizing image processing systems and improving video encoding algorithms. Therefore, it is of great significance
to build an accurate IQA model. In the literature, some
full reference image quality assessment (FR-IQA) methods [19, 20, 23, 27, 30, 32, 33] which attempt to build a model
simulating human visual system (HVS) can achieve good
performance. For example, FSIM [33] predicts a single
quality score from a generative similarity map (as shown
in Fig. 1(b)). According to our analysis, two reasons bring
FR-IQA methods into success. One reason is that it can access to reference image content and take the reference information by comparison. Meanwhile, this way of comparison
is similar with the behavior of human vision and makes it
easy to judge the image quality by FR-IQA methods [12].
The other reason is that hand-crafted features carefully designed by FR-IQA are closely related to some HVS meth-

ods properties. The difference of features on corresponding positions between reference and distorted images can
well measure the distortion degree. On the other hand, some
NR-IQA methods [16–18, 31] which rely on natural scene
statistics do not obtain the same satisfying performance. As
a result, the accuracies of most FR-IQA methods are better
than those of NR-IQA when the performance is objectively
evaluated.
Based on these analysis, it is difficult for NR-IQA methods to build a model to imitate the behavior of HVS under the case of lacking reference information. Recently, researchers have started to harness the power of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) to learn discriminative features for
various distortions types [1–3, 8]. We name these methods Deep-IQA. Most previous Deep-IQA methods consider
CNN as a complicated regression function or a feature extractor, but are unaware of the importance of generating intermediate quality maps which represent the perceptual impact of image quality degradations. This training process of

6373

