On the Duality Between Retinex and Image Dehazing
Adrian Galdran

Aitor Alvarez-Gila

INESC TEC Porto, Portugal

Tecnalia, Spain
Computer Vision Center, Spain

adrian.galdran@inesctec.pt

aitor.alvarez@tecnalia.com

Alessandro Bria

Javier Vazquez-Corral, Marcelo Bertalmı́o

Dpt. of Electrical and Information Engineering
University of Cassino and L.M., Italy

Dpt. of Information and Communication Technologies
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain

a.bria@unicas.it

{javier.vazquez, marcelo.bertalmio}@upf.es

Abstract
Image dehazing deals with the removal of undesired loss
of visibility in outdoor images due to the presence of fog.
Retinex is a color vision model mimicking the ability of
the Human Visual System to robustly discount varying illuminations when observing a scene under different spectral
lighting conditions. Retinex has been widely explored in
the computer vision literature for image enhancement and
other related tasks. While these two problems are apparently unrelated, the goal of this work is to show that they
can be connected by a simple linear relationship. Specifically, most Retinex-based algorithms have the characteristic feature of always increasing image brightness, which
turns them into ideal candidates for effective image dehazing by directly applying Retinex to a hazy image whose intensities have been inverted. In this paper, we give theoretical proof that Retinex on inverted intensities is a solution
to the image dehazing problem. Comprehensive qualitative
and quantitative results indicate that several classical and
modern implementations of Retinex can be transformed into
competing image dehazing algorithms performing on pair
with more complex fog removal methods, and can overcome
some of the main challenges associated with this problem.

1. Introduction
Outdoor images are often degraded by a loss of visibility produced by small particles lying in the piece of atmosphere in between the imaged scene and the observer. This
physical phenomenon is known as haze, fog, or mist, and
it causes the radiance captured by the camera to be attenuated along its path. Haze removal, or image dehazing, is an
image processing task concerned with the mitigation of this
effect, thereby increasing quality of outdoors images, with

the goal of improving performance of further computer vision algorithms, or simply enhancing image visualization.
In turn, Retinex [24, 26] was originally defined as a
color vision model of human perception. It aims to explain the human ability to perceive color as stable regardless of changes in global illumination. Retinex is based on
the observation that color sensation is not related to the radiance values that reach the eye, but to the integrated reflectance. The integrated reflectance is defined as the ratio
at each waveband between the value of the object and the
value of a white object under the same illuminant. Retinex
was promptly adapted by researchers in color photography due to its effectiveness for the enhancement of images
[31]. Since then, variations of the Retinex model have been
applied for many different image processing tasks, from
non-uniform (local) color constancy [9], to shadow removal
[11], gamut mapping [30], or contrast enhancement [47]. In
this paper, we consider Retinex as an image enhancement
technique, in accordance with these last methods.
Retinex has been related to image dehazing in the past,
either explicitly or implicitly. In [50], multi-scale Retinex
was applied to increase contrast in the luminance channel.
The result was then median-filtered and used as an estimate of scene’s depth. In [38], single-scale Retinex was
employed after a wavelet transform to enhance the chromatic aspect of the result, whereas in [8] the Stress (SpatioTemporal Retinex-inspired Envelope with Stochastic Sampling) framework was applied for image dehazing. Stress
is a general image enhancement technique, and the authors
adapt the behavior of the algorithm to achieve image dehazing through a heuristic adjustment of its parameters.
In contrast with previous works, in this paper we do not
intend to adapt Retinex-like ideas to the essentially different problem of image dehazing. Instead, our main contribution is a formal proof of the following direct relationship

8212

