End-to-End Dense Video Captioning with Masked Transformer
Luowei Zhou∗
University of Michigan

Yingbo Zhou∗
Salesforce Research

Jason J. Corso
University of Michigan

luozhou@umich.edu

yingbo.zhou@salesforce.com

jjcorso@eecs.umich.edu

Richard Socher
Salesforce Research

Caiming Xiong†
Salesforce Research

richard@socher.org

cxiong@salesforce.com

Abstract
Dense video captioning aims to generate text descriptions for all events in an untrimmed video. This involves
both detecting and describing events. Therefore, all previous methods on dense video captioning tackle this problem
by building two models, i.e. an event proposal and a captioning model, for these two sub-problems. The models are
either trained separately or in alternation. This prevents direct influence of the language description to the event proposal, which is important for generating accurate descriptions. To address this problem, we propose an end-to-end
transformer model for dense video captioning. The encoder
encodes the video into appropriate representations. The
proposal decoder decodes from the encoding with different
anchors to form video event proposals. The captioning decoder employs a masking network to restrict its attention to
the proposal event over the encoding feature. This masking network converts the event proposal to a differentiable
mask, which ensures the consistency between the proposal
and captioning during training. In addition, our model employs a self-attention mechanism, which enables the use of
efficient non-recurrent structure during encoding and leads
to performance improvements. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this end-to-end model on ActivityNet Captions
and YouCookII datasets, where we achieved 10.12 and 6.58
METEOR score, respectively.

1. Introduction
Video has become an important source for humans to
learn and acquire knowledge (e.g. video lectures, making
sandwiches [20], changing tires [1]). Video content consumes high cognitive bandwidth, and thus is slow for humans to digest. Although the visual signal itself can some∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

2
wj+1

Softmax

{< s1 , e1 , p1 >, < s2 , e2 , p2 >, · · · }

Proposal
Decoder

Linear
Temporal Convolutional Networks

X

Video
Encoder
Stack

Feed
Forward

Feed
Forward

Self-Attention Layer

x2
ӗ

Feed
Forward

CNN

CNN

Masking

Caption
Decoder

CNN

Feed
Forward
Multi-head
Attention
Self-Attention
Layer

Emb

position
encoding

2x
ӗ

position
encoding

wj2
(shifted right)

t

Figure 1. Dense video captioning is to localize (temporal) events
from a video, which are then described with natural language sentences. We leverage temporal convolutional networks and selfattention mechanisms for precise event proposal generation and
captioning.

times disambiguate certain semantics, one way to make
video content more easily and rapidly understood by humans is to compress it in a way that retains the semantics. This is particularly important given the massive
amount of video being produced everyday. Video summarization [41] is one way of doing this, but it loses the
language components of the video, which are particularly
important in instructional videos. Dense video captioning [19]—describing events in the video with descriptive
natural language—is another way of achieving this compression while retaining the language components.
Dense video captioning can be decomposed into two
parts: event detection and event description. Existing methods tackle these two sub-problems using event proposal and
captioning modules, and exploit two ways to combine them
for dense video captioning. One way is to train the two
18739

