Image Correction via Deep Reciprocating HDR Transformation
Xin Yang2,1⋆ , Ke Xu1,2⋆ , Yibing Song3† , Qiang Zhang2 , Xiaopeng Wei2 , Rynson W.H. Lau1
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Dalian University of Technology 3 Tencent AI Lab
https://ybsong00.github.io/cvpr18_imgcorrect/index

(a) Input

(b) CAPE [17]

(c) DJF [22]

(d) L0S [46]

(e) WVM [8]
(f) SMF [50]
(g) DRHT
(h) Ground Truth
Figure 1: Image correction results on an underexposed input. Existing LDR methods have the limitation in recovering the
missing details, as shown in (b)-(f). In comparison, we recover the missing LDR details in the HDR domain and preserve
them through tone mapping, producing a more favorable result as shown in (g).

Abstract
Image correction aims to adjust an input image into a
visually pleasing one. Existing approaches are proposed
mainly from the perspective of image pixel manipulation.
They are not effective to recover the details in the under/over exposed regions. In this paper, we revisit the image
formation procedure and notice that the missing details in
these regions exist in the corresponding high dynamic range
(HDR) data. These details are well perceived by the human eyes but diminished in the low dynamic range (LDR)
domain because of the tone mapping process. Therefore,
we formulate the image correction task as an HDR transformation process and propose a novel approach called
Deep Reciprocating HDR Transformation (DRHT). Given
an input LDR image, we first reconstruct the missing details in the HDR domain. We then perform tone mapping
on the predicted HDR data to generate the output LDR image with the recovered details. To this end, we propose a
united framework consisting of two CNNs for HDR reconstruction and tone mapping. They are integrated end-to-end
for joint training and prediction. Experiments on the standard benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed method
performs favorably against state-of-the-art image correction methods.

1. Introduction
The image correction problem has been studied for
decades. It dates back to the production of Charge-Coupled
Devices (CCDs), which convert optical perception to digital signals. Due to the semiconductors used in the CCDs,
there is an unknown nonlinearity existed between the scene
radiance and the pixel values in the image. This nonlinearity is usually modeled by gamma correction, which has
resulted in a series of image correction methods. These
methods tend to focus on image pixel balance via different approaches including histogram equalization [28],
edge preserving filtering [11, 1], and CNN encoder-decoder
[41]. Typically, they function as a preprocessing step for
many machine vision tasks, such as optical flow estimation [3, 15], image decolorization [37, 36], image deblurring [30, 29], face stylization [39, 35] and tracking [38].
Despite the demonstrated success, existing methods have
the limitation in correcting images with under/over exposure. An example is shown in Figure 1, where the state-ofthe-art image correction methods fail to recover the missing
details in the underexposed regions. This is because the
pixel values around these regions are close to 0, and the details are diminished within them. Although different image
pixel operators have been proposed for image correction,
⋆ Joint first authors. † Yibing Song is the corresponding author. This
work was conducted at City University of Hong Kong, led by Rynson Lau.

1798

