GraphBit: Bitwise Interaction Mining via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Yueqi Duan1,2,3 , Ziwei Wang1 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗ , Xudong Lin1 , Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
duanyq14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zw-wa14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn;
linxd14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a GraphBit method to learn
deep binary descriptors in a directed acyclic graph unsupervisedly, representing bitwise interactions as edges between the nodes of bits. Conventional binary representation
learning methods enforce each element to be binarized into zero or one. However, there are elements lying in the
boundary which suffer from doubtful binarization as “ambiguous bits”. Ambiguous bits fail to collect effective information for confident binarization, which are unreliable and
sensitive to noise. We argue that there are implicit inner
relationships between bits in binary descriptors, where the
related bits can provide extra instruction as prior knowledge for ambiguity elimination. Specifically, we design a
deep reinforcement learning model to learn the structure of
the graph for bitwise interaction mining, reducing the uncertainty of binary codes by maximizing the mutual information with inputs and related bits, so that the ambiguous
bits receive additional instruction from the graph for confident binarization. Due to the reliability of the proposed
binary codes with bitwise interaction, we obtain an average
improvement of 9.64%, 8.84% and 3.22% on the CIFAR-10,
Brown and HPatches datasets respectively compared with
the state-of-the-art unsupervised binary descriptors.

1. Introduction
Extracting effective descriptors is one of the most active
issues in computer vision, which is widely applicable in numerous applications, such as face recognition [31, 42, 33],
image classification [17, 27], object recognition [15, 30]
and many others. Strong discriminative power and low
computational cost are two essential properties for an effective descriptor. On one hand, it is crucial for a descriptor
to be distinctive for image description and robust to vari* Corresponding author

(a) Comparison of the reliability

(b) Mean reliability of each bit on the CIFAR-10 dataset

Figure 1. Comparison of the reliability of DeepBit [27] and GraphBit. In Figure 1 (a), the position and color of the dots demonstrate
the reliability of binary codes, and the arrows represent the directed bitwise interaction. Figure 1 (b) shows the mean reliability of
each bit on CIFAR-10 [23] under the binary length of 16. We
model the learned binary codes in binomial distributions and define the reliability of each bit as the confidence level of binarization
according to (2). We observe that GraphBit (init) learns more confident binary codes than DeepBit, and GraphBit further improves
the reliability with bitwise interactions. (Best viewed in color.)

ous transformations. On the other hand, highly efficient descriptors present low memory cost and high computational
speed, which are suitable for the scenarios of mobile devices with limited computational capabilities and real-time
requirements. In recent years, a number of deep binary descriptors have been proposed due to their strong discriminative power and low computational cost [27, 12, 29, 20, 37].
18270

