Social GAN: Socially Acceptable Trajectories
with Generative Adversarial Networks
Agrim Gupta1 Justin Johnson1 Li Fei-Fei1 Silvio Savarese1 Alexandre Alahi1,2
Stanford University1
École Polytechnique Fédérate de Lausanne2

Abstract
Understanding human motion behavior is critical for autonomous moving platforms (like self-driving cars and social robots) if they are to navigate human-centric environments. This is challenging because human motion is inherently multimodal: given a history of human motion paths,
there are many socially plausible ways that people could
move in the future. We tackle this problem by combining
tools from sequence prediction and generative adversarial networks: a recurrent sequence-to-sequence model observes motion histories and predicts future behavior, using
a novel pooling mechanism to aggregate information across
people. We predict socially plausible futures by training adversarially against a recurrent discriminator, and encourage diverse predictions with a novel variety loss. Through
experiments on several datasets we demonstrate that our
approach outperforms prior work in terms of accuracy, variety, collision avoidance, and computational complexity.

1. Introduction
Predicting the motion behavior of pedestrians is essential for autonomous moving platforms like self-driving cars
or social robots that will share the same ecosystem as humans. Humans can effectively negotiate complex social interactions, and these machines ought to be able to do the
same. One concrete and important task to this end is the
following: given observed motion trajectories of pedestrians (coordinates for the past e.g. 3.2 seconds), predict all
possible future trajectories (Figure 1).
Forecasting the behavior of humans is challenging due to
the inherent properties of human motion in crowded scenes:
1. Interpersonal. Each person’s motion depends on the
people around them. Humans have the innate ability
to read the behavior of others when navigating crowds.
Jointly modeling these dependencies is a challenge.
2. Socially Acceptable. Some trajectories are physically
possible but socially unacceptable. Pedestrians are gov-

Figure 1: Illustration of a scenario where two pedestrians
want to avoid each other. There are many possible ways that
they can avoid a potential collision. We present a method
that given the same observed past, predicts multiple socially
acceptable outputs in crowded scenes.
erned by social norms like yielding right-of-way or respecting personal space. Formalizing them is not trivial.
3. Multimodal. Given a partial history, there is no single
correct future prediction. Multiple trajectories are plausible and socially-acceptable.
Pioneering work in trajectory prediction has tackled some
of the above challenges. The interpersonal aspect has been
exhaustively addressed by traditional methods based on
hand-crafted features [2, 17, 41, 46]. Social acceptability has been recently revisited with data-driven techniques
based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [1, 28, 12, 4].
Finally, the multimodal aspect of the problem has been studied in the context of route choices given a static scene (e.g.,
which streets to take at an intersection [28, 24]). Robicquet
et al. [38] have shown that pedestrians have multiple navigation styles in crowded scenes given a mild or aggressive
style of navigation. Therefore, the forecasting task entails
outputting different possible outcomes.
While existing methods have made great progress in addressing specific challenges, they suffer from two limitations. First, they model a local neighborhood around each
person when making the prediction. Hence, they do not
have the capacity to model interactions between all people
in a scene in a computationally efficient fashion. Second,
they tend to learn the “average behavior” because of the
12255

