Diversity Regularized Spatiotemporal Attention
for Video-based Person Re-identification
Slawomir Bak2∗

Peter Carr2∗

Xiaogang Wang1

1

2

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{sli,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

{sbak,pcarr}@argo.ai

Abstract

1. Introduction
Person re-identification matches images of pedestrians in
one camera with images of pedestrians from another, nonoverlapping camera. This task has drawn increasing attention in recent years due to its importance in applications,
such as surveillance [42], activity analysis [32] and tracking
[47]. It remains a challenging problem because of complex
variations in camera viewpoints, human poses, lighting, occlusions, and background clutter.
In this paper, we investigate the problem of video-based
∗ Work done while employed at Disney Research Pittsburgh.

1

2

3

N

‘face’
Spatial Attention

Video-based person re-identification matches video clips
of people across non-overlapping cameras. Most existing
methods tackle this problem by encoding each video frame
in its entirety and computing an aggregate representation
across all frames. In practice, people are often partially
occluded, which can corrupt the extracted features. Instead, we propose a new spatiotemporal attention model
that automatically discovers a diverse set of distinctive body
parts. This allows useful information to be extracted from
all frames without succumbing to occlusions and misalignments. The network learns multiple spatial attention models
and employs a diversity regularization term to ensure multiple models do not discover the same body part. Features
extracted from local image regions are organized by spatial
attention model and are combined using temporal attention.
As a result, the network learns latent representations of the
face, torso and other body parts using the best available
image patches from the entire video sequence. Extensive
evaluations on three datasets show that our framework outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches by large margins
on multiple metrics.

Argo AI

‘torso’

‘bag’

Spatiotemporal Features

Shuang Li1∗

Temporal Attention
Figure 1. Spatiotemporal Attention. In challenging video
re-identification scenarios, a person is rarely fully visible in all
frames. However, frames in which only part of the person is visible often contain useful information. For example, the face is
clearly visible in the frames 1 and 2, the torso in frame 2, and the
handbag in frames 2, 3 and N . Instead of averaging full frame
features across time, we propose a new spatiotemporal approach
which learns to detect a set of K diverse salient image regions
within each frame (superimposed heatmaps). An aggregate representation of each body part is then produced by combining the
extracted per-frame regions across time (weights shown as white
text). Our spatiotemporal approach creates a compact encoding of
the video that exploits useful partial information in each frame by
leveraging multiple spatial attention models, and combining their
outputs using multiple temporal attention models.

person re-identification, which is a generalization of the
standard image-based re-identification task. Instead of

369

