FaceID-GAN: Learning a Symmetry Three-Player GAN
for Identity-Preserving Face Synthesis
Yujun Shen1 , Ping Luo1,3 , Junjie Yan2 , Xiaogang Wang1 , Xiaoou Tang1
1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{sy116, pluo, xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, yanjunjie@sensetime.com, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

‫ܠ‬௥

Abstract
Face synthesis has achieved advanced development by
using generative adversarial networks (GANs). Existing
methods typically formulate GAN as a two-player game,
where a discriminator distinguishes face images from the
real and synthesized domains, while a generator reduces
its discriminativeness by synthesizing a face of photorealistic quality. Their competition converges when the
discriminator is unable to differentiate these two domains.
Unlike two-player GANs, this work generates identitypreserving faces by proposing FaceID-GAN, which treats a
classifier of face identity as the third player, competing with
the generator by distinguishing the identities of the real and
synthesized faces (see Fig.1). A stationary point is reached
when the generator produces faces that have high quality
as well as preserve identity. Instead of simply modeling the
identity classifier as an additional discriminator, FaceIDGAN is formulated by satisfying information symmetry,
which ensures that the real and synthesized images are
projected into the same feature space. In other words, the
identity classifier is used to extract identity features from
both input (real) and output (synthesized) face images of
the generator, substantially alleviating training difficulty
of GAN. Extensive experiments show that FaceID-GAN is
able to generate faces of arbitrary viewpoint while preserve
identity, outperforming recent advanced approaches.

(a)

ࡳ
‫ܢ‬

‫ܠ‬௦

‫ܠ‬௥

࡯

ࡰ

(1) 2-player game

κ௜ௗ
‫ݎ‬/‫ݏ‬

࡯

ࡳ
‫ܢ‬

‫ܠ‬௥

‫ܠ‬௦

‫ܠ‬௥

࡯

ࡰ

(2) FaceID-GAN

௦
κ௥௜ௗ /κ௜ௗ

‫ݎ‬/‫ݏ‬

(b)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a.1) shows that an original GAN (dashed box) is
extended by an identity classifier C to predict identity label ℓid .
It is formulated as a two-player game, where C does not compete
with the generator G. G uses a real image xr as input and outputs
a synthesized image xs . z represents random noise. D is a
discriminator to differentiate real and synthesized domains. (a.2)
shows FaceID-GAN, which is a three-player GAN by treating C
as the third player to distinguish identities of two domains, ℓrid
and ℓsid . C collaborates together with D to compete with G,
making G produce identity-preserving and high-quality images
to confuse both C and D. FaceID-GAN is designed by using a
criterion of information symmetry, where C is employed to learn
idenity features for both domains. (b) visualizes some examples of
FaceID-GAN, showing its capacity to generate faces of arbitrary
viewpoint and expression, while preserving identity.

Image generation has received much attention in recent
years [7, 10]. Among them, synthesizing a face image of
a different viewpoint but preserving its identity becomes an
important task, owing to its wide applications in industry,
such as video surveillance and face analysis.
Recently, this task has been significantly advanced by
generative adversarial networks (GANs). For example,

as shown in Fig.1 (a.1), previous methods [33, 28] are
typically built upon the original GAN [9], which is formulated as a two-player game, including a discriminator
and a generator, denoted as D and G respectively. In the
conventional GAN, G employs a real image xr as input
and outputs a synthesized image xs , while D adopts these
two images as inputs and outputs whether they are real or

821

