Representing and Learning High Dimensional Data with the Optimal Transport
Map from a Probabilistic Viewpoint
Serim Park
Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213

Matthew Thorpe
Department of Applied Mathematics
and Theoretical Physics
The University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB3 0WA

serimp@andrew.cmu.edu

m.thorpe@maths.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a generative model in the space
of diffeomorphic deformation maps. More precisely, we utilize the Kantarovich-Wasserstein metric and accompanying
geometry to represent an image as a deformation from templates. Moreover, we incorporate a probabilistic viewpoint
by assuming that each image is locally generated from a reference image. We capture the local structure by modelling
the tangent planes at reference images.
Once basis vectors for each tangent plane are learned
via probabilistic PCA, we can sample a local coordinate,
that can be inverted back to image space exactly. With experiments using 4 different datasets, we show that the generative tangent plane model in the optimal transport (OT)
manifold can be learned with small numbers of images and
can be used to create infinitely many ‘unseen’ images. In
addition, the Bayesian classification accompanied with the
probabilist modeling of the tangent planes shows improved
accuracy over that done in the image space. Combining the
results of our experiments supports our claim that certain
datasets can be better represented with the KantarovichWasserstein metric. We envision that the proposed method
could be a practical solution to learning and representing
data that is generated with templates in situatons where
only limited numbers of data points are available.

1. Introduction
Optimal Transport based techniques for signal and data
analysis have received increased attention recently [10].
Given their abilities to provide accurate generative models
for signal intensities and other data distributions, they have
been used in a variety of applications including contentbased retrieval, cancer detection, image super-resolution,
and statistical machine learning, to name a few, and shown

to produce state of the art results in several applications.
Manifolds arise naturally as the appropriate representations for images. For example, when representing face images, the linear average of two faces often does not resemble a face. One more reasonable representation, and the one
we adopt in this work, is to use diffeomorphic deformation
maps to capture the nonlinear characteristics innate in image data. Here, geodesics are given by ‘optimal rearrangements’ of one image into another, a notion made precise in
the optimal transport framework.
In previous works, Fletcher et al. [5] suggested a principal component analysis for Lie Groups and computed the
approximate principal geodesics by minimizing the sum of
squared geodesic distances to the data. Ziezold et al. formulated PCA for a Riemannian manifold in [7] based on
geodesics of the intrinsic mean. Boissard et al. [2] defined
principal geodesic components with respect to the Wasserstein metric assuming that each input measure has been generated from a single template density. Wang et al. [26] proposed to find an approximate principal geodesic in the tangent plane of the Wasserstein-Kantorovich space for a single template. Cuturi et al. [18] proposed a new algorithm to
compute approximate geodesics for the Wasserstein space
by regularizing with entropy.
In addition, diffeomorphic maps have proven to be useful in modeling shape space [23, 1], in reconstructing images from under-sampled data [11], learning the geometrical transformations between the images [20, 17], visualizing the smooth deformations between the images [23, 27],
and differentiating different classes of shapes [25, 21].
Here, along the line of previous attempts to learn and
represent data in the diffeomorphic space, we propose to
utilize the geometric characteristic of diffeomorphic space
based on the Kantorovich-Wasserstein metric. We utilize
the geometric transforms learned between the images to
create even more images that can be utilized for various
17864

