MAttNet: Modular Attention Network for Referring Expression Comprehension
Licheng Yu1 , Zhe Lin2 , Xiaohui Shen2 , Jimei Yang2 , Xin Lu2 ,
Mohit Bansal1 , Tamara L. Berg1
1

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

2

Adobe Research

{licheng, tlberg, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu, {zlin, xshen, jimyang, xinl}@adobe.com

Abstract
In this paper, we address referring expression comprehension: localizing an image region described by a natural language expression. While most recent work treats expressions as a single unit, we propose to decompose them
into three modular components related to subject appearance, location, and relationship to other objects. This allows us to flexibly adapt to expressions containing different types of information in an end-to-end framework. In
our model, which we call the Modular Attention Network
(MAttNet), two types of attention are utilized: languagebased attention that learns the module weights as well as
the word/phrase attention that each module should focus
on; and visual attention that allows the subject and relationship modules to focus on relevant image components.
Module weights combine scores from all three modules dynamically to output an overall score. Experiments show that
MAttNet outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods by
a large margin on both bounding-box-level and pixel-level
comprehension tasks. Demo1 and code2 are provided.

1. Introduction
Referring expressions are natural language utterances
that indicate particular objects within a scene, e.g., “the
woman in the red sweater” or “the man on the right”. For
robots or other intelligent agents communicating with people in the world, the ability to accurately comprehend such
expressions in real-world scenarios will be a necessary component for natural interactions.
Referring expression comprehension is typically formulated as selecting the best region from a set of proposals/objects O = {oi }N
i=1 in image I, given an input expression r. Most recent work on referring expressions
uses CNN-LSTM based frameworks to model P (r|o) [18,
10, 31, 19, 17] or uses a joint vision-language embedding
1 Demo: vision2.cs.unc.edu/refer/comprehension
2 Code: https://github.com/lichengunc/MAttNet

Module Weights
[0.49,'0.31,'0.20]
Expression=“man in red
holding controller on the right”

Language Attention Network

man in red

on the right

holding controller

Subject Module

Location Module

Relationship Module

["# ,%# ,"& ,%& ]

scoresubj
⨂

scoreloc
⨂

scorerel

⨂

⨁

scoreoverall

Figure 1: Modular Attention Network (MAttNet). Given an
expression, we attentionally parse it into three phrase embeddings, which are input to three visual modules that process the described visual region in different ways and compute individual matching scores. An overall score is then
computed as a weighted combination of the module scores.

framework to model P (r, o) [21, 25, 26]. During testing, the proposal/object with highest likelihood/probability
is selected as the predicted region. However, most of these
work uses a simple concatenation of all features (target object feature, location feature and context feature) as input
and a single LSTM to encode/decode the whole expression,
ignoring the variance among different types of referring expressions. Depending on what is distinctive about a target
object, different kinds of information might be mentioned
in its referring expression. For example, if the target object is a red ball among 10 black balls then the referring
expression may simply say “the red ball”. If that same red
ball is placed among 3 other red balls then location-based
information may become more important, e.g., “red ball on
the right”. Or, if there were 100 red balls in the scene then
the ball’s relationship to other objects might be the most
11307

