Time-resolved Light Transport Decomposition for Thermal Photometric Stereo
Kenichiro Tanaka
Nobuhiro Ikeya
Tsuyoshi Takatani
Hiroyuki Kubo
Takuya Funatomi
Yasuhiro Mukaigawa
Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST), Japan
{ktanaka, ikeya.nobuhiro.ii6, takatani.tsuyoshi.to2, hkubo, funatomi, mukaigawa}@is.naist.jp

Abstract
We present a novel time-resolved light transport decomposition method using thermal imaging. Because the speed
of heat propagation is much slower than the speed of light
propagation, transient transport of far infrared light can be
observed at a video frame rate. A key observation is that
the thermal image looks similar to the visible light image in
an appropriately controlled environment. This implies that
conventional computer vision techniques can be straightforwardly applied to the thermal image. We show that the diffuse component in the thermal image can be separated and,
therefore, the surface normals of objects can be estimated
by the Lambertian photometric stereo. The effectiveness of
our method is evaluated by conducting real-world experiments, and its applicability to black body, transparent, and
translucent objects is shown.

1. Introduction
Light transport decomposition has attracted broad interest in the computer vision and computer graphics fields.
This is because many computer vision techniques implicitly or explicitly assume only diffuse reflection, which simplifies observation models. An image in the real world is,
however, composed of many optical components, such as
specular reflection, inter-reflection, and subsurface scattering. Light transport decomposition plays an important role
to bridge the gap between the real world and the models.
Prior works have decomposed light transport using
color [41], polarization [47], and active illumination [29].
The time-resolved approach has emerged because the each
optical components has different transient properties on the
tens of pico seconds order [52]. There are multiple timeresolved approaches, for example, with the use of a femtopulsed laser, interferometer [6], time-of-flight camera modifications [10, 20], and single-photon sensor [36]. Inspired
by the temporal decomposition of light transport, we develop a novel time-resolved decomposition technique for

(a) A ball.

(b) Color image.

(c) Thermal image.

Figure 1: A ball captured by a conventional color camera
and a thermal camera. (a) The target object. (b) Reflection image using a conventional camera. (c) Thermal image
of the same object. When the object is carefully illuminated, shading of both images is the same, which implies
conventional computer vision techniques can be applied to
the thermal images.

far infrared light transport. A key observation is that the
speed of heat propagation is extremely slow compared with
the speed of light propagation. Using thermal imaging, the
time-resolved decomposition is feasible at a video frame
rate.
To date, thermal imaging has been treated as being different from visible light imaging: The thermal image represents the temperature of the object, while the visible light
image reflects the visual information. We show, however,
similar images can be obtained when the observation environment is appropriately controlled, because thermal imaging makes up a part of far infrared light imaging. Figure 1
shows an image captured by a color camera and a thermal
image, where a ball is illuminated by a point light source.
Both the color image and the thermal image exhibit the
same shading. This observation implies that computer vision techniques can also be applied for thermal images.
In this paper, we show that far infrared light transport
can be regarded as a composition of multiple optical and
thermal effects similar to the visible light transport. We define ambient, specular, diffuse, and global components in
the thermal observation, and show the transient property of
each component. Based on this model, a time-resolved de14804

