A Prior-Less Method for Multi-Face Tracking in Unconstrained Videos
Chung-Ching Lin
IBM Research AI

Ying Hung
Rutgers University

cclin@us.ibm.com

yhung@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a prior-less method for tracking
and clustering an unknown number of human faces and
maintaining their individual identities in unconstrained
videos. The key challenge is to accurately track faces
with partial occlusion and drastic appearance changes
in multiple shots resulting from significant variations of
makeup, facial expression, head pose and illumination.
To address this challenge, we propose a new multi-face
tracking and re-identification algorithm, which provides
high accuracy in face association in the entire video
with automatic cluster number generation, and is robust
to outliers.
We develop a co-occurrence model of
multiple body parts to seamlessly create face tracklets,
and recursively link tracklets to construct a graph for
extracting clusters. A Gaussian Process model is introduced
to compensate the deep feature insufficiency, and is further
used to refine the linking results. The advantages of the
proposed algorithm are demonstrated using a variety of
challenging music videos and newly introduced body-worn
camera videos. The proposed method obtains significant
improvements over the state of the art [51], while relying
less on handling video-specific prior information to achieve
high performance.

1. Introduction
The task of Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) or Multiple
Target Tracking (MTT) is to recover the trajectories of a
varying number of individual targets while the status of
targets is estimated at different time steps. Multi-face
tracking is one of the important domains enabling highlevel video content analysis and understanding, e.g., crowd
analysis, semantic analysis, and event detection.
In this paper, our goal is to track an unknown number of
human faces and maintain their identities in unconstrained
videos (e.g., movies, TV series, music videos [51], bodyworn camera videos). Our method does not assume any
extra prior knowledge about the videos or require manual
efforts (e.g., input underlying number of clusters in videos).
Despite having different methods proposed to address this

Figure 1: An example of multi-face tracking in unconstrained
videos. The Bruno Mars music video shows the task is challenging
due to partial occlusion and significant variations of lighting
condition, camera angle, expression, and head pose across shots.

topic, this problem remains challenging due to the inherent
unconstrained settings in videos. The videos might contain
multiple shots captured by one or multiple moving cameras,
irregular camera motion and object movement, arbitrary
camera setting and object appearance, and people may
move in-and-out camera field of view multiple times. The
appearance of faces change drastically owing to significant
variations of lighting condition, camera angle, expression,
and head pose. Commonly, partial occlusions are caused by
accessories and other body parts, such as glasses and hair,
as well as hand gestures.
This is a difficult task and has a different focus from
tracking in constrained videos (e.g., surveillance videos
captured by steady or slowly-moving cameras), where the
main challenge is to deal with different viewpoints, lighting
conditions, and crowded pedestrian crossings. Many
methods have been proposed [1, 3, 30, 41, 47, 49, 54]. In
those papers, three popular datasets, MOT Challenge [29],
PETS [16] and KITTI [17], are usually used to evaluate the
performance of MOT methods. The videos, however, do
not include multiple shot changes and appearance changes.
These MOT methods attempt to solve different challenges
and cannot be easily applied to unconstrained videos with
large camera movement or multiple abrupt shot changes.
Due to the fast-growing popularity of unconstrained
videos, especially on the Web, solutions to this problem
are in high demand and have attracted great interest from
researchers. The recently proposed methods [22, 23] enable
users to track persons in unconstrained videos. These
methods focus on the tracking accuracy within each shot,
1538

