Deep Unsupervised Saliency Detection: A Multiple Noisy Labeling Perspective
Jing Zhang∗1,2 , Tong Zhang∗2,3 , Yuchao Dai†1 , Mehrtash Harandi2,3 , and Richard Hartley2
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
3
DATA61,CSIRO, Canberra, Australia

2

Abstract
The success of current deep saliency detection methods heavily depends on the availability of large-scale supervision in the form of per-pixel labeling. Such supervision, while labor-intensive and not always possible, tends
to hinder the generalization ability of the learned models. By contrast, traditional handcrafted features based unsupervised saliency detection methods, even though have
been surpassed by the deep supervised methods, are generally dataset-independent and could be applied in the wild.
This raises a natural question that “Is it possible to learn
saliency maps without using labeled data while improving
the generalization ability?”. To this end, we present a novel
perspective to unsupervised 1 saliency detection through
learning from multiple noisy labeling generated by “weak”
and “noisy” unsupervised handcrafted saliency methods.
Our end-to-end deep learning framework for unsupervised
saliency detection consists of a latent saliency prediction
module and a noise modeling module that work collaboratively and are optimized jointly. Explicit noise modeling
enables us to deal with noisy saliency maps in a probabilistic way. Extensive experimental results on various benchmarking datasets show that our model not only outperforms
all the unsupervised saliency methods with a large margin
but also achieves comparable performance with the recent
state-of-the-art supervised deep saliency methods.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection aims at identifying the visually interesting objects in images that are consistent with human perception, which is intrinsic to various vision tasks such as
∗ These authors contributed equally in this work.
† Y. Dai (daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.
1 There could be multiple definitions for unsupervised learning, in this
paper, we refer unsupervised learning as learning without task-specific human annotations, e.g. dense saliency maps in our task.

Figure 1. Unsupervised saliency learning from weak “noisy”
saliency maps. Given an input image xi and its corresponding
unsupervised saliency maps yij , our framework learns the latent
saliency map ȳi by jointly optimizing the saliency prediction module and the noise modeling module. Compared with SBF [35]
which also learns from unsupervised saliency but with different
strategy, our model achieves better performance.

context-aware image editing [36], image caption generation
[31]. Depending on whether human annotations have been
used, saliency detection methods can be roughly divided as:
unsupervised methods and supervised methods. The former
ones compute saliency directly based on various priors (e.g.,
center prior [9], global contrast prior [6], background connectivity prior [43] and etc.), which are summarized and described with human knowledge. The later ones learn direct
mapping from color images to saliency maps by exploiting
the availability of large-scale human annotated database.
Building upon the powerful learning capacity of convolutional neural network (CNN), deep supervised saliency
detection methods [42, 11, 40] achieve state-of-the-art performances, outperforming the unsupervised methods by a
wide margin. The success of these deep saliency methods
strongly depend on the availability of large-scale training
dataset with pixel-level human annotations, which is not
only labor-intensive but also could hinder the generalization ability of the learned network models. By contrast, the
unsupervised saliency methods, even though have been outperformed by the deep supervised methods, are generally
dataset-independent and could be applied in the wild.

9029

