Ring loss: Convex Feature Normalization for Face Recognition
Yutong Zheng, Dipan K. Pal and Marios Savvides
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University
{yutongzh, dipanp, marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
1

We motivate and present Ring loss, a simple and elegant
feature normalization approach for deep networks designed
to augment standard loss functions such as Softmax. We
argue that deep feature normalization is an important aspect of supervised classification problems where we require
the model to represent each class in a multi-class problem
equally well. The direct approach to feature normalization through the hard normalization operation results in a
non-convex formulation. Instead, Ring loss applies soft normalization, where it gradually learns to constrain the norm
to the scaled unit circle while preserving convexity leading
to more robust features. We apply Ring loss to large-scale
face recognition problems and present results on LFW, the
challenging protocols of IJB-A Janus, Janus CS3 (a superset of IJB-A Janus), Celebrity Frontal-Profile (CFP) and
MegaFace with 1 million distractors. Ring loss outperforms
strong baselines, matches state-of-the-art performance on
IJB-A Janus and outperforms all other results on the challenging Janus CS3 thereby achieving state-of-the-art. We
also outperform strong baselines in handling extremely low
resolution face matching.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has demonstrated impressive performance
on a variety of tasks. Arguably the most important task, that
of supervised classification, has led to many advancements.
Notably, the use of deeper structures [21, 23, 7] and more
powerful loss functions [6, 19, 26, 24, 15] have resulted
in far more robust feature representations. There has also
been more attention on obtaining better-behaved gradients
through normalization of batches or weights [9, 1, 18].
One of the most important practical applications of deep
networks with supervised classification is face recognition.
Robust face recognition poses a huge challenge in the form of
very large number of classes with relatively few samples per
class for training with significant nuisance transformations.
A good understanding of the challenges in this task results

4

8

9
5

7

R

3
6
0

2

(a) Features trained using Softmax (b) Features trained using Ring loss
Figure 1: Sample MNIST features trained using (a) Softmax and (b) Ring
loss on top of Softmax. Ring loss uses a convex norm constraint to gradually
enforce normalization of features to a learned norm value R. This results in
features of equal length while mitigating classification margin imbalance
between classes. Softmax achieves 98.97 % accuracy on MNIST, whereas
Ring loss achieves 99.34 % demonstrating the superior performance of the
network learned normalized features.

in a better understanding of the core problems in supervised
classification, and in general representation learning. However, despite the impressive attention on face recognition
tasks over the past few years, there are still many gaps towards such an understanding. Notably, the need and practice
of feature normalization. Normalization of features has recently been discovered to provide significant improvement in
performance which implicitly results in a cosine embedding
[17, 25]. However, direct normalization in deep networks
explored in these works results in a non-convex formulation
resulting in local minima generated by the loss function itself. It is important to preserve convexity in loss functions
for more effective minimization of the loss given that the
network optimization itself is non-convex. In a separate
thrust of work, cosine similarity has also been very recently
explored for supervised classification [16, 4]. Nonetheless, a
concrete justification and principled motivation for the need
for normalizing the features itself is also lacking.
Contributions. In this work, we propose Ring loss, a
simple and elegant approach to normalize all sample features through a convex augmentation of the primary loss
function (such as Softmax). The value of the target norm is
also learnt during training. Thus, the only hyperparameter
in Ring loss is the loss weight w.r.t to the primary loss func15089

