Environment Upgrade Reinforcement Learning for Non-differentiable
Multi-stage Pipelines

1

Shuqin Xie1 , Zitian Chen2‡, Chao Xu1 , Cewu Lu1∗ †
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 2 Fudan University, China

{qweasdshu, xuchao.19962007, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn, ztchen15@fudan.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Combining different building blocks of computer vision to perform more sophisticated tasks is an appealing
idea, especially with the impressive advancement achieved
in building blocks algorithms such as object detection
[13, 12, 39, 27, 25, 20, 38], semantic segmentation[9, 24, 5,
14, 34, 35] and pose estimation [36, 43, 44, 2, 32, 8]. Some
recent works [11, 33] attempt to utilize these improvements, making huge progress over previous methods[37,
17]. For example, Fang et al.[11] propose a framework
for multi-person pose estimation. They first adopt a human detector[27] to detect human instances then apply sin∗ Cewu Lu is the corresponding author
† Cewu Lu is a member of SJTU-SenseTime lab and a member of AI
research institute at SJTU
‡ This work was done when Zitian Chen was an intern at MVIG lab of
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Object
Detection

Recent advances in multi-stage algorithms have shown
great promise, but two important problems still remain.
First of all, at inference time, information can’t feed back
from downstream to upstream. Second, at training time,
end-to-end training is not possible if the overall pipeline involves non-differentiable functions, and so different stages
can’t be jointly optimized. In this paper, we propose a novel
environment upgrade reinforcement learning framework to
solve the feedback and joint optimization problems. Our
framework re-links the downstream stage to the upstream
stage by a reinforcement learning agent. While training the
agent to improve final performance by refining the upstream
stage’s output, we also upgrade the downstream stage (environment) according to the agent’s policy. In this way, agent
policy and environment are jointly optimized. We propose
a training algorithm for this framework to address the different training demands of agent and environment. Experiments on instance segmentation and human pose estimation
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

Pose
Estimation

Abstract

(a) Error case of pose estimation
Input

Stage 1

Ω

Stage 2

Output

Final output

Agent
(b) Our multi-stage feedback pipeline

Figure 1: (a) Error case of two-stage pose estimation. If
the object detection generates a wrong bounding box, the
pose estimation algorithm will fail too. (b) An illustration of
our multi-stage feedback pipeline. Ω is the output of Stage
1. An agent observes the output of Stage 2 and choose an
action to refine Ω.
gle person pose estimation algorithm [31] to each human
instance, achieving state-of-the-art performance on multiple datasets.
However, two important problems exist in these multistage algorithms. First of all, information can’t feed back
from downstream (second stage) to upstream (first stage).
Therefore, the overall performance heavily relies on the accurate output of the first stage. An inaccurate output from
the first stage will result in the failure of the second stage,
and there is no way to correct this error. For instance,
in [11], if the human regions are wrong, the pose estimation will fail too. See Figure 1a. Nevertheless, the second
stage’s output can provide useful information to guide the
first stage’s output.
Second, not all multi-stage frameworks can be trained
in an end-to-end manner. The connection among different
stages often involves non-differentiable functions, such as
cropping or distortion. In this situation, different stages
can only be trained separately and fine-tuned to fit each
other. This training setting fails to jointly optimize different
stages, which is obviously less optimal. Also, we demon13810

