CartoonGAN: Generative Adversarial Networks for Photo Cartoonization
Yang Chen
Tsinghua University, China

Yu-Kun Lai
Cardiff University, UK

Yong-Jin Liu∗
Tsinghua University, China

chenyang15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yukun.Lai@cs.cf.ac.uk

liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a solution to transforming photos of real-world scenes into cartoon style images, which is
valuable and challenging in computer vision and computer
graphics. Our solution belongs to learning based methods,
which have recently become popular to stylize images in
artistic forms such as painting. However, existing methods do not produce satisfactory results for cartoonization,
due to the fact that (1) cartoon styles have unique characteristics with high level simplification and abstraction, and
(2) cartoon images tend to have clear edges, smooth color
shading and relatively simple textures, which exhibit significant challenges for texture-descriptor-based loss functions
used in existing methods. In this paper, we propose CartoonGAN, a generative adversarial network (GAN) framework for cartoon stylization. Our method takes unpaired
photos and cartoon images for training, which is easy to
use. Two novel losses suitable for cartoonization are proposed: (1) a semantic content loss, which is formulated as
a sparse regularization in the high-level feature maps of
the VGG network to cope with substantial style variation
between photos and cartoons, and (2) an edge-promoting
adversarial loss for preserving clear edges. We further introduce an initialization phase, to improve the convergence
of the network to the target manifold. Our method is also
much more efficient to train than existing methods. Experimental results show that our method is able to generate
high-quality cartoon images from real-world photos (i.e.,
following specific artists’ styles and with clear edges and
smooth shading) and outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Cartoons are an artistic form widely used in our daily
life. In addition to artistic interests, their applications range
from publication in printed media to storytelling for children’s education. Like other forms of artworks, many famous cartoon images were created based on real-world
scenes. Figure 1 shows a real-world scene whose cor∗ Corresponding author

(a) Original scene

(b) Our result

Figure 1. An example of cartoon stylization. (a) A real-world
scene whose corresponding cartoon image appears in the animated
film “Your Name”. (b) Our result that transforms the photo (a) to
the cartoon style. Note that our training data does not contain any
picture in “Your Name”.

responding cartoon image appeared in the animated film
“Your Name”. However, manually recreating real-world
scenes in cartoon styles is very laborious and involves
substantial artistic skills. To obtain high-quality cartoons,
artists have to draw every single line and shade each color
region of target scenes. Meanwhile, existing image editing
software/algorithms with standard features cannot produce
satisfactory results for cartoonization. Therefore, specially
designed techniques that can automatically transform realworld photos to high-quality cartoon style images are very
helpful and for artists, tremendous amount of time can be
saved so that they can focus on more creative work. Such
tools also provide a useful addition to photo editing software such as Instagram and Photoshop.
Stylizing images in an artistic manner has been widely
studied in the domain of non-photorealistic rendering [25].
Traditional approaches develop dedicated algorithms for
specific styles. However, substantial efforts are required
to produce fine-grained styles that mimic individual artists.
Recently, learning-based style transfer methods (e.g. [6]),
in which an image can be stylized based on provided examples, have drawn considerable attention. In particular,
the power of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [38]
formulated in a cyclic manner is explored to achieve highquality style transfer, with the distinct feature that the model
is trained using unpaired photos and stylized images.
Although significant success has been achieved with

9465

