Recognizing Human Actions as the Evolution of Pose Estimation Maps
Mengyuan Liu1 Junsong Yuan2,∗
1
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
2
Department of CSE, SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo NY 14260
liumengyuan@ntu.edu.sg jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Most video-based action recognition approaches choose
to extract features from the whole video to recognize actions. The cluttered background and non-action motions limit
the performances of these methods, since they lack the explicit modeling of human body movements. With recent advances of human pose estimation, this work presents a novel
method to recognize human action as the evolution of pose
estimation maps. Instead of relying on the inaccurate human poses estimated from videos, we observe that pose estimation maps, the byproduct of pose estimation, preserve
richer cues of human body to benefit action recognition.
Specifically, the evolution of pose estimation maps can be
decomposed as an evolution of heatmaps, e.g., probabilistic maps, and an evolution of estimated 2D human poses,
which denote the changes of body shape and body pose, respectively. Considering the sparse property of heatmap, we
develop spatial rank pooling to aggregate the evolution of
heatmaps as a body shape evolution image. As body shape
evolution image does not differentiate body parts, we design
body guided sampling to aggregate the evolution of poses
as a body pose evolution image. The complementary properties between both types of images are explored by deep
convolutional neural networks to predict action label. Experiments on NTU RGB+D, UTD-MHAD and PennAction
datasets verify the effectiveness of our method, which outperforms most state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation and Objective
Human action recognition from videos has been researched for decades, since this task enjoys various applications in intelligent surveillance, human-robot interaction
and content-based video retrieval. The intrinsic property
of existing methods [22, 43, 37, 24, 1] is to learn mapping
∗ Corresponding author

Ground Truth

Prediction
Ground Truth

Prediction
(a) Video

(b) Inaccurate Pose

(c) Heatmap
(Averaged Pose Estimation Map)

Figure 1: An illustration of the complementary property between
poses and heatmaps (averaged pose estimation maps), which are
both estimated from video frames. (a) An action “baseball pitch”
from PennAction dataset [54] is simpliﬁed as two frames. The red
circle and red star denote the hand and foot, respectively. (b) With
inaccurate pose estimation, the estimated poses cannot accurately
annotate human body parts. For example, we show the pose estimation map of the hand, where the multiple peaks lead to false
prediction. (c) Although heatmaps cannot differentiate body parts,
they provide richer information to reﬂect human body shape.

functions which transform videos to action labels. Since
they do not directly distinguish human body from videos,
these methods are easily affected by clutters and non-action
motions from backgrounds.
To address this limitation, an alternative solution is to
detect human [39] and estimate the body pose in each
frame. This approach works well in the ﬁeld of human action recognition from depth videos, e.g., Microsoft Kinect [55, 27]. By detecting 3D pose from each depth frame
with an accurate body pose estimation method [36], human
movements in depth videos can be simpliﬁed as 3D pose
sequences [52]. Recent deep learning models, e.g., CNN
[17, 20], RNN [9] and LSTM [26, 25], have achieved high
performances on the extracted 3D poses, which outperform
methods [32, 50] that rely on raw depth video sequences.
The success of 3D human pose inspires us to estimate
2D human poses from videos for action recognition. However, despite the signiﬁcant advances of 2D pose estima-

1159

