Deep Reinforcement Learning of Region Proposal Networks for Object Detection
Aleksis Pirinen1 and Cristian Sminchisescu1,2
1
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
{aleksis.pirinen, cristian.sminchisescu}@math.lth.se

Abstract
We propose drl-RPN, a deep reinforcement learningbased visual recognition model consisting of a sequential
region proposal network (RPN) and an object detector. In
contrast to typical RPNs, where candidate object regions
(RoIs) are selected greedily via class-agnostic NMS, drlRPN optimizes an objective closer to the final detection
task. This is achieved by replacing the greedy RoI selection process with a sequential attention mechanism which is
trained via deep reinforcement learning (RL). Our model is
capable of accumulating class-specific evidence over time,
potentially affecting subsequent proposals and classification scores, and we show that such context integration significantly boosts detection accuracy. Moreover, drl-RPN
automatically decides when to stop the search process and
has the benefit of being able to jointly learn the parameters
of the policy and the detector, both represented as deep networks. Our model can further learn to search over a wide
range of exploration-accuracy trade-offs making it possible to specify or adapt the exploration extent at test time.
The resulting search trajectories are image- and categorydependent, yet rely only on a single policy over all object categories. Results on the MS COCO and PASCAL
VOC challenges show that our approach outperforms established, typical state-of-the-art object detection pipelines.

1. Introduction
Visual object detection focuses on localizing each instance within a pre-defined set of object categories in an
image, most commonly by estimating bounding boxes with
associated confidence values. Accuracy on this task has increased dramatically over the last years [11, 14, 42], reaping the benefits of increasingly deep and expressive feature extractors [21, 28, 44, 47]. Several contemporary stateof-the-art detectors [11, 15, 42] follow a two-step process.
First bottom-up region proposals are obtained, either from
an internal region proposal network (RPN) [42], trained

alongside the detection network, or from an external one
[2, 6, 39, 48, 52]. In the second step proposals are classified
and their localization accuracy may be fine-tuned.
There has recently been an increased interest in active,
sequential search methods [5, 9, 17, 19, 22, 23, 27, 30, 33,
35, 37, 50]. This class of approaches, to which our model
belongs, seek to only inspect parts of each image sequentially. In this work we aim to make active recognition models more flexible as characterized by i) a finely-tuned active
search process where decisions of where to look next and
when to stop searching are image- and category-dependent;
ii) context information is aggregated as search proceeds and
is used in decision making and to boost detection accuracy;
iii) the detector and search policy parameters are tightly
linked into a single deep RL-based optimization problem
where they are estimated jointly; iv) the search process can
be adapted to a variety of exploration-accuracy trade-offs
during inference; and v) learning to search is only weakly
supervised, as we indicate the model what success means
without telling it exactly how to achieve it – there is no apprenticeship learning or trajectory demonstration.
Methodologically we propose drl-RPN, a sequential region proposal network combining an RL-based top-down
search strategy, implemented as a convolutional gated recurrent unit, and a two-stage bottom-up object detector. Notably, our model is used for class-agnostic proposal generation but leverages class-specific information from earlier
time-steps when proposing subsequent regions (RoIs). This
context aggregation is also used to increase detection accuracy. Our model offers the flexibility of jointly training
the policy and detector, both represented as deep networks,
which we perform in alternation in the framework of deep
RL. We emphasize that drl-RPN can be used, in principle,
in conjunction with any exhaustive two-stage state-of-theart object detector operating on a set of object proposals,
such as Faster R-CNN (Fr R-CNN) [42] or R-FCN [11].

2. Related Work
Among the first to use deep feature extractors for object
detection was [43], whereas [14] combined the power of

6945

