Spline Error Weighting for Robust Visual-Inertial Fusion
Hannes Ovrén and Per-Erik Forssén
Linköping University
Linköping, Sweden
{hannes.ovren,per-erik.forssen}@liu.se

Abstract
In this paper we derive and test a probability-based
weighting that can balance residuals of different types in
spline fitting. In contrast to previous formulations, the proposed spline error weighting scheme also incorporates a
prediction of the approximation error of the spline fit. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of the prediction in a synthetic
experiment, and apply it to visual-inertial fusion on rolling
shutter cameras. This results in a method that can estimate 3D structure with metric scale on generic first-person
videos. We also propose a quality measure for spline fitting,
that can be used to automatically select the knot spacing.
Experiments verify that the obtained trajectory quality corresponds well with the requested quality. Finally, by linearly scaling the weights, we show that the proposed spline
error weighting minimizes the estimation errors on real sequences, in terms of scale and end-point errors.

1. Introduction
In this paper we derive and test a probability-based
weighting that can balance residuals of different types in
spline fitting. We apply the weighting scheme to inertialaided structure from motion (SfM) on rolling shutter cameras, and test it on first-person video from handheld and
body-mounted cameras. In such videos, parts of the sequences are often difficult to use due to excessive motion
blur, or due to temporary absence of scene structure.
It is well known that inertial measurement units (IMUs)
are a useful complement to visual input. Vision provides
bias-free bearings-only measurements with high accuracy,
while the IMU provides high-frequency linear acceleration,
and angular velocity measurements albeit with an unknown
bias [4]. Vision is thus useful to handle the IMU bias, while
the IMU can handle dropouts of visual tracking during rapid
motion, or absence of scene structure. In addition, the IMU
makes metric scale observable, also for monocular video.
Visual-inertial fusion using splines has traditionally balanced the sensor modalities using inverse noise covariance

Figure 1. Rendered model estimated on the Handheld 1 dataset.
Top: model rendered using Meshlab. Bottom: Sample frames
from dataset.

weighting [17, 21]. As we will show, this neglects the spline
approximation error, and results in an inconsistent balancing of residuals from different modalities. In this paper,
we propose spline error weighting (SEW), a method that
incorporates the spline approximation error in the residual
weighting. SEW makes visual-inertial fusion robust on real
sequences, acquired with rolling shutter cameras. Figure 1
shows an example of 3D structure and continuous camera
trajectory estimated on such a sequence.

1.1. Related work
Visual-inertial fusion on rolling shutter cameras has classically been done using Extended Kalman-filters (EKF).
Hanning et al. [12] use an EKF to track cell-phone orientation for the purpose of video stabilization. Li et al. [16]
extend this to full device motion tracking, and Jia et al. [14]
add tracking of changes in relative pose between the sensors
and changes in linear camera intrinsics.
Another line of work initiated in [9] is to define a
continuous-time estimation problem that is solved in batch,
by modelling the trajectory using temporal basis functions.
1321

