Salience Guided Depth Calibration for Perceptually Optimized Compressive
Light Field 3D Display
Shizheng Wang1 , Wenjuan Liao1 , Phil Surman2 , Zhigang Tu2 , Yuanjin Zheng2 , and Junsong Yuan3
1

Institute of Microelectronics of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of EEE, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
CSE department, University at Buffalo, USA
shizheng.wang@foxmail.com, jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Multi-layer light field displays are a type of computational three-dimensional (3D) display which has recently
gained increasing interest for its holographic-like effect
and natural compatibility with 2D displays. However, the
major shortcoming, depth limitation, still cannot be overcome in the traditional light field modeling and reconstruction based on multi-layer liquid crystal displays (LCDs).
Considering this disadvantage, our paper incorporates a
salience guided depth optimization over a limited display
range to calibrate the displayed depth and present the maximum area of salience region for multi-layer light field display. Different from previously reported cascaded light field
displays that use the fixed initialization plane as the depth
center of display content, our method automatically calibrates the depth initialization based on the salience results
derived from the proposed contrast enhanced salience detection method. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed
method provides a promising advantage in visual perception for the compressive light field displays from both software simulation and prototype demonstration.

1. Introduction
Technologies based on 3D have been increasingly applied in commercial products. However, these technologies,
based on binocular parallax using lenticular sheets or parallax barriers suffer from discrepancy between visual accommodation and convergence; this can cause visual confusion
and fatigue as the eyes focus on the screen but converge
at the apparent distance of the image. To solve this problem, volumetric displays [51, 48] and holographic displays
[32] have been developed. A huge amount of data would be
involved to provide a true 3D image with both correct fo-

Figure 1. Different depth initialization for the same target light
field, here the configuration A is used by [47, 18], configuration B
is from [13] and configuration C is [28].

cus and parallax cues and this prevents these technologies
from being widely accepted for daily usage. In addition to
these pure optical or physics-based techniques, a computational 3D display technology known as compressive light
field display has also been investigated [15, 47, 14] for solving the problem. They not only take the advantages of various emerging display technologies such as multi-layer displays and high-speed temporal modulation, but also make
use of promising computer vision and pattern recognition
algorithms such as sparse reconstruction and compressive
factorization, which effectively compress the display data
from multi-view images to multi-layer images. Moreover,
the compressive light field 3D display is compatible with
2D displays since parallax barriers and lenticular sheets are
not used in this display method.
However, this kind of computational multi-layer display, including our three-layer light field 3D display, shares
the same limitation; the maximum depth range of multilayer display theoretically has an upper bound and cannot
be more than twice the distance between the outer layers
[23]. Considering the unsatisfactory depth range limitation of multi-layer liquid crystal displays (LCDs), and the
bigger depth range in the light field capture, some depth

2031

