4DFAB: A Large Scale 4D Database for Facial Expression Analysis and Biometric
Applications
Shiyang Cheng1
1

Irene Kotsia2

Imperial College London

Maja Pantic1
2

Stefanos Zafeiriou1

Middlesex University London

1 {shiyang.cheng11, m.pantic, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

2 I.Kotsia@mdx.ac.uk

Abstract
The progress we are currently witnessing in many computer vision applications, including automatic face analysis, would not be made possible without tremendous efforts
in collecting and annotating large scale visual databases.
To this end, we propose 4DFAB, a new large scale database
of dynamic high-resolution 3D faces (over 1,800,000 3D
meshes). 4DFAB contains recordings of 180 subjects captured in four different sessions spanning over a five-year
period. It contains 4D videos of subjects displaying both
spontaneous and posed facial behaviours. The database
can be used for both face and facial expression recognition,
as well as behavioural biometrics. It can also be used to
learn very powerful blendshapes for parametrising facial
behaviour. In this paper, we conduct several experiments
and demonstrate the usefulness of the database for various
applications. The database will be made publicly available
for research purposes.

(a) Frontal (right) and rear (left) view of recording setup.

(b) Exemplar data from a single capture.

Figure 1: Overview of capturing system.

1. Introduction
In the past decade we have witnessed the rapid development of 3D sensors with which we can capture the facial surface (aka 3D faces). Immediately it was evident
that a new stream of research could be opened and researchers started collecting databases of 3D face for many
face analysis tasks, such as face recognition (FR) and facial expression recognition (FER).
BU-3DFE database [45], which includes articulated facial expressions from 100 adults, is probably the earliest and most popular database of expressive 3D faces.
From then on, many static databases for 3D expression
analysis [40, 33, 28, 26, 51, 41] were released and contributed largely to the development of fully automatic 3D
FER systems. Similarly, half a decade ago, the releases
of several 4D facial expression databases, BU-4DFE [44],
D3DFACS [22], and Hi4D-ADSIP [32], expanded this line
of research to the 4D domain. Nonetheless, the above

emotion corpuses focused on only posed behaviours,
which hinders the use of 3D/4D FER system in real world
scenarios. Henceforth, three databases, B3D(AC) [25],
BP4D-Spontaneous [49] and BP4D+ [50], that captured
dynamic 3D spontaneous behaviours were proposed.
B3D(AC) dataset [25] is the first 4D audio-visual database,
though its size (14 people) is small. Zhang et al. proposed BP4D-Spontaneous [49] database, which, not only
tripled the subject number, but also introduced some
well-designed tasks (e.g. interviews, physical activities)
to elicit spontaneous emotions. BP4D+ [50] extended
previous works by incorporating different modalities (i.e.
thermal imaging, physiological signals) as well as more
subjects. One common merit of BP4D-Spontaneous and
BP4D+ is that they both provide expert FACS labels [24]
which are very useful in emotion analysis. There are also
some low resolution databases captured using the Kinect
15117

