Rotation-sensitive Regression for Oriented Scene Text Detection
Minghui Liao1 , Zhen Zhu1 , Baoguang Shi1 , Gui-song Xia2 , Xiang Bai1∗
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Wuhan University
{mhliao, zzhu}@hust.edu.cn, shibaoguang@gmail.com, guisong.xia@whu.edu.cn, xbai@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
0.42

0.87

Text in natural images is of arbitrary orientations, requiring detection in terms of oriented bounding boxes. Normally, a multi-oriented text detector often involves two key
tasks: 1) text presence detection, which is a classification
problem disregarding text orientation; 2) oriented bounding box regression, which concerns about text orientation.
Previous methods rely on shared features for both tasks,
resulting in degraded performance due to the incompatibility of the two tasks. To address this issue, we propose
to perform classification and regression on features of different characteristics, extracted by two network branches
of different designs. Concretely, the regression branch extracts rotation-sensitive features by actively rotating the
convolutional filters, while the classification branch extracts rotation-invariant features by pooling the rotationsensitive features. The proposed method named Rotationsensitive Regression Detector (RRD) achieves state-of-theart performance on several oriented scene text benchmark
datasets, including ICDAR 2015, MSRA-TD500, RCTW-17,
and COCO-Text. Furthermore, RRD achieves a significant
improvement on a ship collection dataset, demonstrating its
generality on oriented object detection.

1. Introduction
Reading text in the wild is an active research field in
computer vision, driven by many real-world applications
such as license plate recognition [33], guide board recognition [37], and photo OCR [3]. A scene text reading system generally begins with localizing text regions on which
the recognition is then performed. Consequently, one of the
main bottleneck of such a system lies in the quality of text
detection.
Despite the great success of recent general object detection algorithms [9, 8, 36, 34, 28, 35], scene text detection
remains challenging mainly due to arbitrary orientations,
∗ Corresponding author.

(a) Input image

(b) Shared feature

(c) Result
0.87

(d) Reg. feature

(e) Cls. feature

(f) Result

Figure 1: Visualization of feature maps and results of baseline and RRD. Red numbers are the classification scores.
(b): the shared feature map for both regression and classification; (c): the result of shared feature; (d) and (e): the regression feature map and classification feature map of RRD;
(f): the result of RRD.
small sizes, and significantly varied aspect ratios of text in
natural images. In fact, general object detection methods
usually focus on detecting objects in terms of horizontal
bounding boxes, which are accurate enough for most objects such as person, vehicles, etc. Yet, horizontal bounding
box is not appropriate for representing long and thin objects
in arbitrary orientations (see Fig. 1a). Text in natural images is a typical example of multi-oriented long and thin
object, which is better covered by oriented bounding boxes.
Directly applying general object detection methods to scene
text detection would generally lead to poor performance.
Some recent scene text detectors [26, 29] successfully
adopt general object detection methods to scene text detection with some dedicated designs, yielding a great improvement in scene text detection. Generally, recent object detection consists of predicting object category (i.e.,
classification) and regressing bounding box for accurate localization. Both tasks rely on shared features which are
rotation-invariant attributing to the use of pooling layers

5909

0.42

