A Fast Resection-Intersection Method for the Known Rotation Problem
Qianggong Zhang
q.zhang.au@gmail.com

Tat-Jun Chin
tat-jun.chin@adelaide.edu.au

Huu Minh Le
huu.le@adelaide.edu.au

The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia

Abstract
The known rotation problem refers to a special case
of structure-from-motion where the absolute orientations
of the cameras are known. When formulated as a minimax (ℓ∞ ) problem on reprojection errors, the problem is
an instance of pseudo-convex programming. Though theoretically tractable, solving the known rotation problem on
large-scale data (1,000’s of views, 10,000’s scene points)
using existing methods can be very time-consuming. In this
paper, we devise a fast algorithm for the known rotation
problem. Our approach alternates between pose estimation
and triangulation (i.e., resection-intersection) to break the
problem into multiple simpler instances of pseudo-convex
programming. The key to the vastly superior performance
of our method lies in using a novel minimum enclosing
ball (MEB) technique for the calculation of updating steps,
which obviates the need for convex optimisation routines
and greatly reduces memory footprint. We demonstrate
the practicality of our method on large-scale problem instances which easily overwhelm current state-of-the-art algorithms1 .

1. Introduction
Given a number of scene points that were viewed in a
number of images, the goal of structure-from-motion (SfM)
is to estimate the 3D coordinates of the scene points based
on their measured 2D coordinates in the images. The implicit geometric constraints underpinning the imaging scenario also requires the pose of the cameras (each defined
by a rotation and translation) that captured the images to be
recovered jointly with the 3D scene points.
Many current SfM pipelines employ bundle adjustment
(BA) [35] as a core routine. BA refers to the task of jointly
refining the scene points and camera poses, and it is usually
formulated as a non-linear least squares problem. Most BA
implementations are based on the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm, which enables convergence up to local optimality.
In practice, it is vital for the target variables to be initialised
1 See the supplementary material for demo program.

well to avoid convergence to bad local optima.
An alternative SfM pipeline [14, 31, 36, 18, 23, 16, 13]
that has begun to receive attention is as follows: first,
estimate rotations by a rotation averaging method, then,
keeping the rotations fixed, estimate the scene points and
translations; the latter problem is called the known rotation problem (KRot). The strength of this approach is twofold: first, multiple-rotation averaging can often be solved
much more easily (in certain cases, up to global optimality [27, 29, 12]); second, when formulated as a minimax
(ℓ∞ ) problem, KRot becomes an instance of pseudo-convex
programming, which is also amenable to exact global solutions [20].
In this paper, we focus on KRot. Although the problem
is tractable, as we will demonstrate later, most existing algorithms [19, 21, 30, 28, 4] are not practical on large-scale
inputs involving 1,000’s of views and 10,000’s scene points,
in contrast to modern BA packages, e.g., [33, 22], which
have been applied successfully on such sizes. The inefficiency of the previous KRot algorithms stems from their
dependence on convex optimisation to drive the iterative updates (see Sec. 2.2 for details). Although convex solvers are
theoretically efficient, in practice, they incur much computational and memory overheads. Arguably this has also hindered the usability of the alternative SfM pipeline.
Contributions We propose a fast algorithm for KRot.
The overall structure of our method interleaves the calculation of scene points and translations [25]—akin to the
resection-intersection approach for BA [35].
The primary feature of our algorithm that enables its superior performance over previous techniques lies in a novel
method for solving each pseudo-convex sub-problem. Instead of relying on convex routines to compute the update,
our method calculates descent directions in closed-form
based on a novel minimum enclosing ball (MEB) technique.
This leads to a fast and self-contained algorithm (does not
require external convex solvers). The resection-intersection
structure also makes it inherently parallelisable. As we will
show in Sec. 4, our algorithm can scale up to input sizes that
are beyond the reach of existing methods.
13012

