SINT++: Robust Visual Tracking via Adversarial Positive Instance Generation
Xiao Wang, Chenglong Li, Bin Luo, Jin Tang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China 230601
{wangxiaocvpr, lcl1314}@foxmail.com, {luobin, tj}@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing visual trackers are easily disturbed by occlusion, blur and large deformation. We think the performance
of existing visual trackers may be limited due to the following issues: i) Adopting the dense sampling strategy to generate positive examples will make them less diverse; ii) The
training data with different challenging factors are limited,
even through collecting large training dataset. Collecting
even larger training dataset is the most intuitive paradigm,
but it may still can not cover all situations and the positive
samples are still monotonous. In this paper, we propose to
generate hard positive samples via adversarial learning for
visual tracking. Specifically speaking, we assume the target objects all lie on a manifold, hence, we introduce the
positive samples generation network (PSGN) to sampling
massive diverse training data through traversing over the
constructed target object manifold. The generated diverse
target object images can enrich the training dataset and enhance the robustness of visual trackers. To make the tracker
more robust to occlusion, we adopt the hard positive transformation network (HPTN) which can generate hard samples for tracking algorithm to recognize. We train this network with deep reinforcement learning to automatically occlude the target object with a negative patch. Based on the
generated hard positive samples, we train a Siamese network for visual tracking and our experiments validate the
effectiveness of the introduced algorithm. The project page
of this paper can be found from the website 1 .

1. Introduction
Visual tracking aims at covering the give target object
using an adaptive bounding box (BBox) and moves the
BBox along with target. It requires the tracker can robustly
model invarances to illumination, deformation, occlusions
and scale variation, et al. The most intuitive paradigm to
handle these invariances is to collect large-scale training
videos which contain video frames under different chal1 https://sites.google.com/view/
cvpr2018sintplusplus/

Figure 1. Due to only one target object provided in visual tracking
and most existing trackers adopt the dense positive sampling strategy, which cause the positive training data lack of diversity. Moreover, we argue that occlusions and deformations follow a long-tail
distribution, in another word, some occlusions and deformations
are rare in training data. In this paper, we introduce two strategies
to improve aforementioned situations via the generation of hard
positive samples.

lenging factors. They hope these videos could capture all
possible variations of target object and the algorithm can
then effectively model invariance to them. These data indeed learning invariances to some extent, and this maybe
the main reasons why CNNs have been so successful in the
visual tracking.
However, according to our observation, the target object
of visual tracking could be anything, even occlusions and
deformations are all following a long-tail distribution. In
other word, some occlusions and deformations are so rare
that they may still not occur in large-scale datasets, similar claims can be found in [43]. Hence, the learning of
invariance to such rare/uncommon occlusions and deformations needs to be tackled urgently. Collecting even larger
datasets is a possible scheme, but it is not likely to scale due
14864

