Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks
Jie Hu1∗

Li Shen2∗

Gang Sun1

hujie@momenta.ai

lishen@robots.ox.ac.uk

sungang@momenta.ai

1

Momenta

2

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks are built upon the convolution operation, which extracts informative features by
fusing spatial and channel-wise information together within
local receptive fields. In order to boost the representational power of a network, several recent approaches have
shown the benefit of enhancing spatial encoding. In this
work, we focus on the channel relationship and propose
a novel architectural unit, which we term the “Squeezeand-Excitation” (SE) block, that adaptively recalibrates
channel-wise feature responses by explicitly modelling interdependencies between channels. We demonstrate that by
stacking these blocks together, we can construct SENet architectures that generalise extremely well across challenging datasets. Crucially, we find that SE blocks produce
significant performance improvements for existing state-ofthe-art deep architectures at minimal additional computational cost. SENets formed the foundation of our ILSVRC
2017 classification submission which won first place and
significantly reduced the top-5 error to 2.251%, achieving a ∼25% relative improvement over the winning entry of 2016. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/hujie-frank/SENet.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have proven to
be effective models for tackling a variety of visual tasks
[21, 27, 33, 45]. For each convolutional layer, a set of
filters are learned to express local spatial connectivity patterns along input channels. In other words, convolutional
filters are expected to be informative combinations by fusing spatial and channel-wise information together within local receptive fields. By stacking a series of convolutional
layers interleaved with non-linearities and downsampling,
CNNs are capable of capturing hierarchical patterns with
global receptive fields as powerful image descriptions. Recent work has demonstrated that the performance of networks can be improved by explicitly embedding learning
∗ Equal contribution.

mechanisms that help capture spatial correlations without
requiring additional supervision. One such approach was
popularised by the Inception architectures [16, 43], which
showed that the network can achieve competitive accuracy
by embedding multi-scale processes in its modules. More
recent work has sought to better model spatial dependence
[1, 31] and incorporate spatial attention [19].
In this paper, we investigate a different aspect of architectural design - the channel relationship, by introducing a
new architectural unit, which we term the “Squeeze-andExcitation” (SE) block. Our goal is to improve the representational power of a network by explicitly modelling
the interdependencies between the channels of its convolutional features. To achieve this, we propose a mechanism
that allows the network to perform feature recalibration,
through which it can learn to use global information to selectively emphasise informative features and suppress less
useful ones.
The basic structure of the SE building block is illustrated
in Fig. 1. ′ For′ any′ given transformation Ftr : X → U,
X ∈ RH ×W ×C , U ∈ RH×W ×C , (e.g. a convolution
or a set of convolutions), we can construct a corresponding SE block to perform feature recalibration as follows.
The features U are first passed through a squeeze operation, which aggregates the feature maps across spatial dimensions H × W to produce a channel descriptor. This
descriptor embeds the global distribution of channel-wise
feature responses, enabling information from the global receptive field of the network to be leveraged by its lower layers. This is followed by an excitation operation, in which
sample-specific activations, learned for each channel by a
self-gating mechanism based on channel dependence, govern the excitation of each channel. The feature maps U
are then reweighted to generate the output of the SE block
which can then be fed directly into subsequent layers.
An SE network can be generated by simply stacking a
collection of SE building blocks. SE blocks can also be
used as a drop-in replacement for the original block at any
depth in the architecture. However, while the template for
the building block is generic, as we show in Sec. 6.4, the
role it performs at different depths adapts to the needs of the
network. In the early layers, it learns to excite informative

7132

