Generative Adversarial Learning Towards Fast Weakly Supervised Detection
Yunhan Shen1 Rongrong Ji1∗ Shengchuan Zhang1 Wangmeng Zuo2 , Yan Wang3
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
3
Microsoft, Redmond, USA
yhshen@stu.xmu.edu.cn

rrji@xmu.edu.cn

zsc 2007@163.com

wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

wanyan@microsoft.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised object detection has attracted extensive research efforts in recent years. Without the need of
annotating bounding boxes, the existing methods usually
follow a two/multi-stage pipeline with an online compulsive stage to extract object proposals, which is an order of
magnitude slower than fast fully supervised object detectors such as SSD [31] and YOLO [34]. In this paper, we
speedup online weakly supervised object detectors by orders of magnitude by proposing a novel generative adversarial learning paradigm. In the proposed paradigm, the
generator is a one-stage object detector to generate bounding boxes from images. To guide the learning of object-level
generator, a surrogator is introduced to mine high-quality
bounding boxes for training. We further adapt a structural
similarity loss in combination with an adversarial loss into
the training objective, which solves the challenge that the
bounding boxes produced by the surrogator may not well
capture their ground truth. Our one-stage detector outperforms all existing schemes in terms of detection accuracy,
running at 118 frames per second, which is up to 438×
faster than the state-of-the-art weakly supervised detectors
[8, 30, 15, 27, 45]. The code will be available publicly soon.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised object detection (WSD) has attracted
extensive attention in the recent years [8, 28, 45, 10, 49, 27].
A significant advantage of WSD lies in removing the necessity of labor-intensive annotation of object bounding
boxes. Instead, it exploits image-level annotations that are
widely available from the Internet. To take advantage of
such image-level weak supervision, most previous methods
[49, 8, 45] use a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) pipeline.
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Comparison between the classic weakly supervised detectors and our method. The typical frameworks
employ a Multiple-Instance Learning paradigm, and are
two/multi-stage detectors during training and testing. Our
method adopts a Generative Adversarial Learning paradigm
to train a generator G, a discriminator D and a surrogator
F with only image-level supervision. During online inference, the generator G makes a one-stage detection without
proposals object directly from images, which is very fast.
In this pipeline, object proposals in an image are treated
as instances to form a bag, whose labels are assigned from
the corresponding image-level annotations. The objective
is then to estimate the probability of the instances containing a given object. The above pipeline has two key drawbacks: Firstly, instances are considered independent when
obtaining foreground proposals. The correlation among instances is typically ignored and the optimization might converge to an undesirable local minimum [2]. Secondly, the
existing methods follow a two/multi-stage process in detection, making the corresponding inference inefficient. Particularly, it requires to first extract object proposals [46, 55, 3],
and thus cannot be applied to real-time applications. In addition, the image is typically augmented with five scales and
horizontal flips [8, 28] in both training and testing, which
further increases the online computation complexity significantly, sometimes to an order of magnitude.

5764

