Robust Facial Landmark Detection
via a Fully-Convolutional Local-Global Context Network
Daniel Merget

Matthias Rock
Technical University of Munich

Gerhard Rigoll

daniel.merget@tum.de

matthias.rock@tum.de

mmk@ei.tum.de

Abstract
While fully-convolutional neural networks are very
strong at modeling local features, they fail to aggregate
global context due to their constrained receptive field. Modern methods typically address the lack of global context
by introducing cascades, pooling, or by fitting a statistical model. In this work, we propose a new approach that
introduces global context into a fully-convolutional neural
network directly. The key concept is an implicit kernel convolution within the network. The kernel convolution blurs
the output of a local-context subnet, which is then refined
by a global-context subnet using dilated convolutions. The
kernel convolution is crucial for the convergence of the network because it smoothens the gradients and reduces overfitting. In a postprocessing step, a simple PCA-based 2D
shape model is fitted to the network output in order to filter
outliers. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach, outperforming several state-of-the-art methods in facial landmark detection.

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection is a well-studied topic in the
field of computer vision with many applications such as face
analysis, face recognition, or face modeling; see [22] for
a review. The high variability of shapes, poses, lighting
conditions, and possible occlusions makes it a particulary
challenging task even today. In contrast to face recognition,
where modern approaches using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are beyond human-level performance [33],
computers are still below par at facial landmark detection [8].
Classical CNN-based architectures start off with a number of convolutional layers that are aggregated by fullyconnected layers at the end. Recently, the trend has
shifted towards using fully-convolutional networks, dispensing with full connections. Fully-convolutional networks did not only prove successful in facial landmark de-

tection [40], but also in other applications such as image
classification [26, 32] or object detection [25]. This is because fully-convolutional architectures come with several
advantages that are especially useful for heatmap regression
tasks in general and facial landmark detection in particular:
1. They are independent of image resolution
2. They do not depend on proper regions of interest such
as bounding boxes from a face detector
3. They can handle both empty and multiple outputs per
input (e.g., multiple faces)
4. They can handle cropped or occluded images to a reasonable extent, degrading gracefully
5. They require fewer trainable parameters and consequently have a lower memory footprint
Fully-convolutional networks also come with a huge
drawback: They have a limited receptive field and thus lack
global context [21]. In other words, global context must be
introduced by other measures that do not share the disadvantages of fully-connected architectures [24].
Our method builds on the idea that global context can
be integrated in a fully-convolutional network by rigorously
extending the effective receptive field of the network. This
extension is achieved by a channel-wise convolution with a
two-dimensional kernel, or simply kernel convolution, followed by a global-context subnet based on dilated convolutions. We will refer to the extended local context as global
context, but learned patterns are still purely relative rather
than absolute. For example, there is no bias on the face
location within the image due to the fully-convolutional design.
The major contributions of this work are the following:
• We incorporate a kernel convolution directly within a
neural network.
• We exploit the kernel convolution in order to robustly
increase the receptive field (i.e., context) of the network using dilated convolutions.

781

