Scale-Transferrable Object Detection
Peng Zhou1 Bingbing Ni∗,1 Cong Geng1 Jianguo Hu2 Yi Xu1
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmission,
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
Minivision
1
{zhoupengcv,nibingbing,gengcong,xuyi}@sjtu.edu.cn, 2 hujianguo@minivision.cn

Abstract

predict

predict
predict

Scale problem lies in the heart of object detection. In this
work, we develop a novel Scale-Transferrable Detection
Network (STDN) for detecting multi-scale objects in images. In contrast to previous methods that simply combine
object predictions from multiple feature maps from different network depths, the proposed network is equipped with
embedded super-resolution layers (named as scale-transfer
layer/module in this work) to explicitly explore the interscale consistency nature across multiple detection scales.
Scale-transfer module naturally fits the base network with
little computational cost. This module is further integrated
with a dense convolutional network (DenseNet) to yield a
one-stage object detector. We evaluate our proposed architecture on PASCAL VOC 2007 and MS COCO benchmark
tasks and STDN obtains significant improvements over the
comparable state-of-the-art detection models.

1. Introduction
Scale problem lies in the heart of object detection. In
order to detect objects of different scales, a basic strategy
is to use image pyramids [1] to obtain features at different scales. However, this will greatly increase memory and
computational complexity, which will reduce the real-time
performance of object detectors.
In recent years, convolutional neural networks(CNN)
[18] have achieved great success in computer vision tasks,
such as image classification [17], semantic segmentation
[23], and object detection [10]. The hand-engineered features are replaced with features computed by convolutional
neural networks, which greatly improves the performance
of object detectors. Faster R-CNN [25] uses convolutional
feature maps computed by one layer to predict candidate region proposals with different scales and aspect ratios (Fig∗ Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.

predict
predict

(a) Single feature map

(b) Feature pyramid network

predict
predict

predict
predict

predict
predict

predict

(c) Pyramidal feature hierarchy

predict

(d) Scale-transfer module

Figure 1. (a) Using only single scale features for prediction. (b) Integrating information from high-level and low-level feature maps.
(c) Producing predictions from feature maps of different scales.
(d) Our Scale-Transfer Module. It can be embedded directly into
a DenseNet to obtain feature maps at different scales.

ure 1(a)). Because the receptive field of each layer in CNN
is fixed, there exists inconsistency between the fixed receptive field and the objects at different scales in natural images. This may compromise object detection performance.
SSD [22] and MS-CNN [3] use feature maps from different layers within CNN to predict objects at different scales
(See Figure 1(c)). Shallow feature maps have small receptive fields that are used to detect small objects, and deep
feature maps have large receptive fields that are used to
detect large objects. Nevertheless, shallow features have
less semantic information, which may impair the performance of small object detection. FPN [20], ZIP [19] and
DSSD [7] integrate semantic information on feature maps
at all scales. As shown in Figure 1(b), a top-down architecture combines high-level semantic feature maps with lowlevel feature maps to yield more semantic feature maps at
all scales. However, in order to improve detection performance, feature pyramids must be carefully constructed, and

528

