Seeing Voices and Hearing Faces: Cross-modal biometric matching
Arsha Nagrani
Samuel Albanie
Andrew Zisserman
VGG, Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{arsha, albanie, az}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a seemingly impossible task: given only an
audio clip of someone speaking, decide which of two face
images is the speaker. In this paper we study this, and a
number of related cross-modal tasks, aimed at answering
the question: how much can we infer from the voice about
the face and vice versa?
We study this task “in the wild”, employing the datasets
that are now publicly available for face recognition from
static images (VGGFace) and speaker identification from
audio (VoxCeleb). These provide training and testing scenarios for both static and dynamic testing of cross-modal
matching. We make the following contributions: (i) we introduce CNN architectures for both binary and multi-way
cross-modal face and audio matching; (ii) we compare dynamic testing (where video information is available, but the
audio is not from the same video) with static testing (where
only a single still image is available); and (iii) we use human testing as a baseline to calibrate the difficulty of the
task. We show that a CNN can indeed be trained to solve
this task in both the static and dynamic scenarios, and is
even well above chance on 10-way classification of the face
given the voice. The CNN matches human performance on
easy examples (e.g. different gender across faces) but exceeds human performance on more challenging examples
(e.g. faces with the same gender, age and nationality)1 .

1. Introduction
Can you recognise someone’s face if you have only heard
their voice? Or recognise their voice if you have only seen
their face? As humans, we may ‘see voices’ or ‘hear faces’
by forming mental pictures of what a person looks like after
only hearing their voice, or vice versa. This phenomenon
has been investigated in a number of studies on human perception and neurology [19, 44], where participants completed a sequential two-alternative forced choice matching
task. They were asked to listen to a human voice (Voice X),
1 Data, models and appendices can be found at http://www.
robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/CMBiometrics

✔

✖

Face A

Face B

✖

✔

Voice A

Voice B

V-F
Voice X

F-V
Face X

Figure 1: We introduce the task of cross-modal biometric
matching, and consider two specific formulations of the problem:
(Top) V-F: given an audio clip of a voice and two or more face
images/videos, select the face image/video that corresponds to the
voice. (Bottom) F-V: given an image or video of a face, determine
the corresponding voice.

and then pick the face corresponding to the same identity,
between two still/dynamic face images. It is also a familiar trope in Hollywood films that someone can be recognised after only hearing their voice – for example in the
film “Die Hard”, where the Bruce Willis character (John
Mclane) emerges from the building towards the end of the
film and is instantly able to recognise the cop (Sgt. Al Powell) who he has only spoken to by radio throughout the film,
but never seen. This task of cross-modal (face and voice)
recognition, or ‘cross-modal biometric matching’, is the objective of this paper. As illustrated in figure 1, there are
two related tasks: first, given an image or video of a face,
determine which of two or more voices it corresponds to;
second, and conversely, given an audio clip of a voice, determine which of two or more face images or videos it corresponds to. Note, the voice and face video are not acquired
simultaneously, so methods of active speaker detection that
may rely on synchronisation of the audio and lip motion,
e.g. [11] cannot be employed here.
That this task might be possible at all is due to the existence of factors that are common to both modalities; in particular, specific latent properties (like age, gender, ethnic-

8427

