Global versus Localized Generative Adversarial Nets
Guo-Jun Qi, Liheng Zhang, Hao Hu, Marzieh Edraki
guojun.qi@ucf.edu, {lihengzhang1993,hao hu,m.edraki}@knights.ucf.edu

Jingdong Wang, and Xian-Sheng Hua
welleast@outlook.com, xiansheng.hxs@alibaba-inc.com

Laboratory for MAchine Perception and LEarning (MAPLE)
maple.cs.ucf.edu
University of Central Florida and Alibaba Group

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel localized Generative
Adversarial Net (GAN) to learn on the manifold of real data. Compared with the classic GAN that globally parameterizes a manifold, the Localized GAN (LGAN) uses local
coordinate charts to parameterize distinct local geometry
of how data points can transform at different locations on
the manifold. Specifically, around each point there exists
a local generator that can produce data following diverse
patterns of transformations on the manifold. The locality
nature of LGAN enables local generators to adapt to and
directly access the local geometry without need to invert
the generator in a global GAN. Furthermore, it can prevent
the manifold from being locally collapsed to a dimensionally deficient tangent subspace by imposing an orthonormality prior between tangents. This provides a geometric approach to alleviating mode collapse at least locally on the
manifold by imposing independence between data transformations in different tangent directions. We will also demonstrate the LGAN can be applied to train a robust classifier that prefers locally consistent classification decisions on
the manifold, and the resultant regularizer is closely related
with the Laplace-Beltrami operator. Our experiments show
that the proposed LGANs can not only produce diverse image transformations, but also deliver superior classification
performances.

1. Introduction
The classic Generative Adversarial Net (GAN) [7] seeks to generate samples with indistinguishable distributions
from real data. For this purpose, it learns a generator G(z)
as a function that maps from input random noises z drawn
from a distribution PZ to output data G(z). A discriminator
is learned to distinguish between real and generated sam-

ples. The generator and discriminator are jointly trained in
an adversarial fashion so that the generator fools the discriminator by improving the quality of generated data.
All the samples produced by the learned generator form
a manifold M = {G(z)|z ∼ PZ }, with the input variables
z as its global coordinates. However, a global coordinate
system could be too restrictive to capture various forms of
local transformations on the manifold. For example, a nonrigid object like human body and a rigid object like a car
admit different forms of variations on their shapes and appearances, resulting in distinct geometric structures unfit into a single coordinate chart of image transformations.
Indeed, existence of a global coordinate system is a too
strong assumption for many manifolds. For example, there
does not exist a global coordinate chart covering an entire
hyper-sphere embedded in a high dimensional space as it is
even not topologically similar (i.e., homeomorphic) to an
Euclidean space. This prohibits the existence of a global isomorphism between a single coordinate space and the
hyper-sphere, making it impossible to study the underlying geometry in a global coordinate system. For this reason, mathematicians instead use an atlas of local coordinate
charts located at different points on a manifold to study the
underlying geometry [28].
Even when a global coordinate chart exists, a global
GAN could still suffer two serious challenges. First, a point
x on manifold cannot be directly mapped back to its global
coordinates z, i.e., finding z such as G(z) = x for a given
x. But many applications need the coordinates of a given
point x to access its local geometry such as tangents and
curvatures. Thus, for a global GAN, one has to solve the inverse G−1 of a generator network (e.g., via an autoencoder
such as VAE [9], ALI [6] and BiGAN [5]) to access the coordinates of a point x and then its local geometry of data
transformations along the manifold.
The other problem is the manifold generated by a glob11517

