Knowledge Aided Consistency for Weakly Supervised Phrase Grounding
Kan Chen
Jiyang Gao
Ram Nevatia
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Systems, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
{kanchen|jiyangga|nevatia}@usc.edu

Abstract

Visual

Visual
Model

Given a natural language query, a phrase grounding system aims to localize mentioned objects in an image. In
weakly supervised scenario, mapping between image regions (i.e., proposals) and language is not available in
the training set. Previous methods address this deficiency
by training a grounding system via learning to reconstruct language information contained in input queries from
predicted proposals. However, the optimization is solely
guided by the reconstruction loss from the language modality, and ignores rich visual information contained in proposals and useful cues from external knowledge. In this
paper, we explore the consistency contained in both visual
and language modalities, and leverage complementary external knowledge to facilitate weakly supervised grounding.
We propose a novel Knowledge Aided Consistency Network
(KAC Net) which is optimized by reconstructing input query
and proposal’s information. To leverage complementary
knowledge contained in the visual features, we introduce
a Knowledge Based Pooling (KBP) gate to focus on queryrelated proposals. Experiments show that KAC Net provides
a significant improvement on two popular datasets.

1. Introduction
Given an image and a natural language query, phrase
grounding aims to localize objects mentioned by the query.
It is a fundamental building block for many high-level
computer vision tasks such as image retrieval [3], image
QA [6, 11, 12] and video QA [13, 14]. Traditionally, training a good phrase grounding system requires large amounts
of manual annotations indicating the mapping between input queries and mentioned objects in images; these are timeconsuming to acquire and suffer from potential human errors. This motivates us to address the problem of training a
grounding system by weakly supervised training data where
objects of interest are mentioned in language queries but are
not delineated in images.
Phrase grounding is difficult as both visual and language

Model

Annotations

Language

Language
Consistency

Language
(a)

Reconstruct

Language

(b)

Visual
Consistency

0.7
0.4

Candidate Proposals
Prob.
0.78

Prob.
0.54

Prob.
0.12

Phrase Grounding Model
Input Query
A man playing football

Location Prediction

0.2

Language
Consistency

…

Knowledge
Query Reconstruction
A man playing soccer

(c)

Figure 1. (a) supervised grounding systems, (b) state-of-the-art
weakly supervised grounding systems guided by language consistency, (c) KAC Net applies both visual and language consistency
and leverages complementary knowledge from the visual feature
extractor to facilitate weakly supervised grounding.

modalities are ambiguous and we need to reason about both
to find their correspondences. To address this problem, typically a proposal generation system is applied to the input
image to produce a set of candidate regions (i.e., proposals).
Phrase grounding task is then treated as a retrieval problem
to search the most query-related proposals. Based on this,
attention mechanisms [4, 5, 34, 37] are learned to adaptively
attend to mentioned objects for input queries.
Training a phrase grounding system with weakly supervised data brings additional challenge as no direct mappings
between the two modalities are provided. Consider Fig. 1(c)
where we encode the query as an embedding vector and extract visual features for a set of object proposals from the
image. To find correct mappings between the query and the
proposals, [34] proposes to associate the query with successive proposals; once a proposal is selected, a phrase is reconstructed from it and evaluated for language consistency
with the input query. [37] adopts continuous attention maps
and explores to reconstruct the structure of input query as
well as its context.
We introduce two new concepts to overcome challenges
of weakly supervised training. First is that pre-trained, fixed
14042

