Learning for Disparity Estimation through Feature Constancy
Zhengfa Liang∗ Yiliu Feng∗ Yulan Guo Hengzhu Liu
Linbo Qiao Li Zhou Jianfeng Zhang

Wei Chen

National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
{liangzhengfa10, fengyiliu11, yulan.guo, hengzhuliu, chenwei,
qiao.linbo, zhouli06, jianfengzhang}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Stereo matching algorithms usually consist of four steps,
including matching cost calculation, matching cost aggregation, disparity calculation, and disparity refinement. Existing CNN-based methods only adopt CNN to solve parts of
the four steps, or use different networks to deal with different steps, making them difficult to obtain the overall optimal
solution. In this paper, we propose a network architecture to
incorporate all steps of stereo matching. The network consists of three parts. The first part calculates the multi-scale
shared features. The second part performs matching cost
calculation, matching cost aggregation and disparity calculation to estimate the initial disparity using shared features. The initial disparity and the shared features are used
to calculate the feature constancy that measures correctness of the correspondence between two input images. The
initial disparity and the feature constancy are then fed into
a sub-network to refine the initial disparity. The proposed
method has been evaluated on the Scene Flow and KITTI
datasets. It achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
the KITTI 2012 and KITTI 2015 benchmarks while maintaining a very fast running time. Source code is available at
http://github.com/leonzfa/iResNet.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching aims to estimate correspondences of
all pixels between two rectified images [1, 23, 6]. It is a
core problem for many stereo vision tasks and has numerous applications in areas such as autonomous vehicles [29],
robotics navigation [25], and augmented reality [33].
Stereo matching has been intensively investigated for
several decades, with a popular four-step pipeline being developed. This pipeline includes matching cost calculation,
matching cost aggregation, disparity calculation and dis∗ Equal contribution.

parity refinement [23]. The four-step pipeline dominants
existing stereo matching algorithms [24, 22, 9, 21], while
each of its steps is important to the overall stereo matching
performance. Due to the powerful representative capability of deep convolution neural network (CNN) for various
vision tasks [14, 31, 15], CNN has been employed to improve stereo matching performance and outperforms traditional methods significantly [28, 32, 12, 17, 16].
Zbontar and LeCun [32] first introduced CNN to calculate the matching cost to measure the similarity of two
pixels of two images. This method achieved the best performance on the KITTI 2012 [3], KITTI 2015 [18] and
Middlebury [23, 24, 22, 9, 21] stereo datasets at that time.
They argued that it is unreliable to consider only the difference of photometry in pixels or hand-crafted image features
for matching cost. In contrast, CNN can learn more robust
and discriminative features from images, and produces improved stereo matching cost. Following the work [32], several methods were proposed to improve the computational
efficiency [16] or matching accuracy [28]. However, these
methods still suffer from few limitations. First, to calculate the matching cost at all potential disparities, multiple
forward passes have to be conducted by the network, resulting in high computational burden. Second, the pixels
in occluded regions (i.e., only visible in one of the two images) cannot be used to perform training. It is therefore
difficult to obtain a reliable disparity estimation in these regions. Third, several heuristic post-processing steps are required to refine the disparity. The performance and the generalization ability of these methods are therefore limited, as
a number of parameters have to be chosen empirically.
Alternatively, the matching cost calculation, matching
cost aggregation and disparity calculation steps can be
seamlessly integrated into a CNN to directly estimate the
disparity from stereo images [17, 12]. Traditionally, the
matching cost aggregation and disparity calculation steps
are solved by minimizing an energy function defined upon
matching costs. For example, the Semi-Global Matching
12811

