Supervision-by-Registration: An Unsupervised Approach to Improve the
Precision of Facial Landmark Detectors
∗

Xuanyi Dong1 , Shoou-I Yu2 , Xinshuo Weng2 , Shih-En Wei2 , Yi Yang1 , Yaser Sheikh2
xuanyi.dong@student.uts.edu.au; yi.yang@uts.edu.au
{shoou-i.yu,xinshuo.weng,shih-en.wei,yaser.sheikh}@fb.com
1

CAI, University of Technology Sydney, 2 Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh

Abstract
In this paper, we present supervision-by-registration, an
unsupervised approach to improve the precision of facial
landmark detectors on both images and video. Our key
observation is that the detections of the same landmark in
adjacent frames should be coherent with registration, i.e.,
optical flow. Interestingly, coherency of optical flow is a
source of supervision that does not require manual labeling, and can be leveraged during detector training. For
example, we can enforce in the training loss function that
a detected landmark at framet−1 followed by optical flow
tracking from framet−1 to framet should coincide with the
location of the detection at framet . Essentially, supervisionby-registration augments the training loss function with a
registration loss, thus training the detector to have output
that is not only close to the annotations in labeled images,
but also consistent with registration on large amounts of
unlabeled videos. End-to-end training with the registration loss is made possible by a differentiable Lucas-Kanade
operation, which computes optical flow registration in the
forward pass, and back-propagates gradients that encourage temporal coherency in the detector. The output of our
method is a more precise image-based facial landmark detector, which can be applied to single images or video. With
supervision-by-registration, we demonstrate (1) improvements in facial landmark detection on both images (300W,
ALFW) and video (300VW, Youtube-Celebrities), and (2)
significant reduction of jittering in video detections.

1. Introduction
Precise facial landmark detection lays the foundation
for high quality performance of many computer vision and
computer graphics tasks, such as face recognition [15], face
animation [2] and face reenactment [32]. Many face recognition methods rely on locations of detected facial land∗ Work done during an internship at Facebook Oculus

Figure 1. Annotations are imprecise. We show annotations of
nine annotators on two images of the mouth. Each color indicates
a different landmark. Note the inconsistencies of annotations even
on the more discriminative landmarks such as the corner of the
mouth. This could be harmful to both the training and evaluation
of detectors, thus motivating the use of supervisory signals which
does not rely on human annotations.

marks to spatially align faces, and imprecise landmarks
could lead to bad alignment and degrade face recognition
performance. In face animation and reenactment methods, 2D landmarks are used as anchors to deform 3D face
meshes toward realistic facial performances, so temporal
jittering of 2D facial landmark detections in video will be
propagated to the 3D face mesh and could generate perceptually jarring results.
Precise facial landmark detection is still an unsolved
problem. While significant work has been done on imagebased facial landmark detection [19, 28, 37], these detectors
tend to be accurate but not precise, i.e., the detector’s bias is
small but variance is large. The main causes could be: (1)
insufficient training samples and (2) imprecise annotations,
as human annotations inherently have limits on precision
and consistency as shown in Figure 1. As a result, jittering is observed when we apply the detector independently
to each video frame, and the detected landmark does not
adhere well to an anatomically defined point (e.g., mouth
corner) on the face across time. Other methods that focus
on video facial landmark detection [13, 22, 23] utilize both
detections and tracking to combat jittering and increase precision, but these methods require per-frame annotations in
video, which are (1) tedious to annotate due to the sheer
volume of video frames and (2) difficult to annotate consistently across frames, even for temporally adjacent frames.

360

