NISP: Pruning Networks using Neuron Importance Score Propagation
Ruichi Yu1 Ang Li3∗ Chun-Fu Chen2 Jui-Hsin Lai5† Vlad I. Morariu4∗
Xintong Han1 Mingfei Gao1 Ching-Yung Lin6 † Larry S. Davis1
2
1
University of Maryland, College Park
IBM T. J. Watson Research
3
4
5
6
DeepMind
Adobe Research
JD.com
Graphen.ai
{richyu, xintong, mgao, lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu, anglili@google.com
chenrich@us.ibm.com, larry.lai@jd.com, morariu@adobe.com, cylin@graphen.ai

Abstract

1. Introduction
CNNs require a large number of parameters and high
computational cost in both training and testing phases. Recent studies have investigated the significant redundancy
in deep networks [6] and reduced the number of neurons
and filters [3, 13, 22, 26] by pruning the unimportant ones.
∗ This work was done while the author was at the University of Maryland.
† This work was done while the author was at IBM.

Pre$trained Network

FRL

…
Fine tuning

To reduce the significant redundancy in deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), most existing methods
prune neurons by only considering the statistics of an individual layer or two consecutive layers (e.g., prune one layer
to minimize the reconstruction error of the next layer), ignoring the effect of error propagation in deep networks. In
contrast, we argue that for a pruned network to retain its
predictive power, it is essential to prune neurons in the entire neuron network jointly based on a unified goal: minimizing the reconstruction error of important responses in
the “final response layer” (FRL), which is the second-tolast layer before classification. Specifically, we apply feature ranking techniques to measure the importance of each
neuron in the FRL, formulate network pruning as a binary
integer optimization problem, and derive a closed-form solution to it for pruning neurons in earlier layers. Based on
our theoretical analysis, we propose the Neuron Importance
Score Propagation (NISP) algorithm to propagate the importance scores of final responses to every neuron in the
network. The CNN is pruned by removing neurons with least
importance, and it is then fine-tuned to recover its predictive
power. NISP is evaluated on several datasets with multiple
CNN models and demonstrated to achieve significant acceleration and compression with negligible accuracy loss.

Images

Feature
Selection

…

Neuron
Importance

NISP
Top$ranked Neurons/Filters

…

Pre$defined
Pruning ratios

Pruned Network

Figure 1. We measure the importance of neurons in the final response layer (FRL), and derive Neuron Importance Score Propagation (NISP) to propagate the importance to the entire network.
Given a pre-defined pruning ratio per layer, we prune the neurons/filters with lower importance score. We finally fine-tune the
pruned model to recover its predictive accuracy.

However, most current approaches that prune neurons and
filters consider only the statistics of one layer (e.g., prune
neurons with small magnitude of weights [22, 13]), or two
consecutive layers [26] to determine the “importance” of
a neuron. These methods prune the “least important” neurons layer-by-layer either independently [13] or greedily
[22, 26], without considering all neurons in different layers
jointly.
One problem with such methods is that neurons deemed
unimportant in an early layer can, in fact, contribute significantly to responses of important neurons in later layers. Our
experiments (see Sec.4.4) reveal that greedy layer-by-layer
pruning leads to significant reconstruction error propagation, especially in deep networks, which indicates the need
for a global measurement of neuron importance across different layers of a CNN.
To address this problem, we argue that it is essential
for a pruned model to retain the most important responses

9194

