Adversarial Data Programming: Using GANs to Relax the Bottleneck of Curated
Labeled Data
Arghya Pal, Vineeth N Balasubramanian
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, INDIA
{cs15resch11001,vineethnb}@iith.ac.in

Abstract
Paucity of large curated hand-labeled training data
forms a major bottleneck in the deployment of machine
learning models in computer vision and other fields. Recent work (Data Programming) has shown how distant supervision signals in the form of labeling functions can be
used to obtain labels for given data in near-constant time.
In this work, we present Adversarial Data Programming
(ADP), which presents an adversarial methodology to generate data as well as a curated aggregated label, given a
set of weak labeling functions. We validated our method on
the MNIST, Fashion MNIST, CIFAR 10 and SVHN datasets,
and it outperformed many state-of-the-art models. We conducted extensive experiments to study its usefulness, as well
as showed how the proposed ADP framework can be used
for transfer learning as well as multi-task learning, where
data from two domains are generated simultaneously using
the framework along with the label information. Our future work will involve understanding the theoretical implications of this new framework from a game-theoretic perspective, as well as explore the performance of the method
on more complex datasets.

1. Introduction
Curated labeled data is a key building block of modern
machine learning algorithms, and a driving force for deep
neural network models. The large parameter space of deep
models requires very large labeled datasets to build effective models that work in practice. However, this inherited
dependency on large curated labeled data has become the
major bottleneck of progress in the use of machine learning and deep learning in computer vision and other domains
[41]. Creation of large scale hand-annotated datasets in every domain is a challenging task due to the requirement for
extensive domain expertise, long hours of human labor and
time - which collectively make the overall process expen-

sive and time-consuming. Even when data annotation is
carried out using crowdsourcing (e.g. Amazon Mechanical Turk), additional effort is required to measure the correctness (or goodness) of the obtained labels. We seek to
address this problem in this work. In particular, we focus
on automatically learning the parameters of a given joint
image-label probability distribution (as provided in training
image-label pairs) with a view to automatically create labeled datasets.
To achieve this objective, we exploit the use of distant
supervision signals to generate labeled data. These distant
supervision signals are provided to our framework as a set
of weak labeling functions which represent domain knowledge or heuristics obtained from experts or crowd annotators. Writing a set of labeling functions (as we found in
our experiments) is fairly easy and quick, and can then be
used in our framework to generate data as well as associated
labels. More interestingly, such labeling functions are often easily generalizable, thus allowing our framework to be
extended to transfer learning and multi-task learning (discussed in Section 5). Figure 1 shows a few examples of our
results to illustrate the overall idea.
In practice, labeling functions can be associated with two
kinds of dependencies: (i) relative accuracies, which measure the correctness of the labeling functions w.r.t. the true
class label; and (ii) inter-function dependencies that capture the relationships between the labeling functions with
respect to the predicted class label. In this work, we have
proposed a novel adversarial framework using Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) that learns these dependencies along with the data distribution using a minmax game.
Our GAN learns to generate a joint data-label distribution
using a generator block, a discriminator block and a Labeling Functions Block (LFB), which contains another discriminator that helps in learning the two kinds of dependencies mentioned above. The overall architecture of the
proposed ADP architecture is presented in Figure 2a.
Our broad idea of learning relative accuracies and interfunction dependencies of labeling functions is inspired by
11556

