Boosting Adversarial Attacks with Momentum
Yinpeng Dong1 , Fangzhou Liao1 , Tianyu Pang1 , Hang Su1 , Jun Zhu1∗, Xiaolin Hu1 , Jianguo Li2
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua Lab of Brain and Intelligence
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, BNRist Lab
1
Tsinghua University, 100084 China
2
Intel Labs China
{dyp17, liaofz13, pty17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {suhangss, dcszj, xlhu}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, jianguo.li@intel.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples, which poses security concerns on these algorithms
due to the potentially severe consequences. Adversarial attacks serve as an important surrogate to evaluate the robustness of deep learning models before they are deployed.
However, most of existing adversarial attacks can only fool
a black-box model with a low success rate. To address
this issue, we propose a broad class of momentum-based
iterative algorithms to boost adversarial attacks. By integrating the momentum term into the iterative process for
attacks, our methods can stabilize update directions and
escape from poor local maxima during the iterations, resulting in more transferable adversarial examples. To further improve the success rates for black-box attacks, we apply momentum iterative algorithms to an ensemble of models, and show that the adversarially trained models with a
strong defense ability are also vulnerable to our black-box
attacks. We hope that the proposed methods will serve as
a benchmark for evaluating the robustness of various deep
models and defense methods. With this method, we won the
first places in NIPS 2017 Non-targeted Adversarial Attack
and Targeted Adversarial Attack competitions.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are challenged by their
vulnerability to adversarial examples [23, 5], which are
crafted by adding small, human-imperceptible noises to
legitimate examples, but make a model output attackerdesired inaccurate predictions. It has garnered an increasing
attention to generating adversarial examples since it helps
to identify the vulnerability of the models before they are
launched. Besides, adversarial samples also facilitate various DNN algorithms to assess the robustness by providing
∗ Corresponding author.

Alps: 94.39%

Dog: 99.99%

Puffer: 97.99%

Crab: 100.00%

Figure 1. We show two adversarial examples generated by the proposed momentum iterative fast gradient sign method (MI-FGSM)
for the Inception v3 [22] model. Left column: the original images.
Middle column: the adversarial noises by applying MI-FGSM for
10 iterations. Right column: the generated adversarial images.
We also show the predicted labels and probabilities of these images given by the Inception v3.

more varied training data [5, 10].
With the knowledge of the structure and parameters
of a given model, many methods can successfully generate adversarial examples in the white-box manner, including optimization-based methods such as box-constrained LBFGS [23], one-step gradient-based methods such as fast
gradient sign [5] and iterative variants of gradient-based
methods [9]. In general, a more severe issue of adversarial
examples is their good transferability [23, 12, 14], i.e., the
adversarial examples crafted for one model remain adversarial for others, thus making black-box attacks practical in
real-world applications and posing real security issues. The
phenomenon of transferability is due to the fact that different machine learning models learn similar decision boundaries around a data point, making the adversarial examples
crafted for one model also effective for others.

9185

