Non-local Neural Networks
Xiaolong Wang1,2∗
Ross Girshick2
1
Carnegie Mellon University

Abhinav Gupta1
Kaiming He2
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Both convolutional and recurrent operations are building
blocks that process one local neighborhood at a time. In
this paper, we present non-local operations as a generic
family of building blocks for capturing long-range dependencies. Inspired by the classical non-local means method
[4] in computer vision, our non-local operation computes
the response at a position as a weighted sum of the features
at all positions. This building block can be plugged into
many computer vision architectures. On the task of video
classification, even without any bells and whistles, our nonlocal models can compete or outperform current competition
winners on both Kinetics and Charades datasets. In static
image recognition, our non-local models improve object detection/segmentation and pose estimation on the COCO suite
of tasks. Code will be made available.

1. Introduction
Capturing long-range dependencies is of central importance in deep neural networks. For sequential data (e.g.,
in speech, language), recurrent operations [38, 23] are the
dominant solution to long-range dependency modeling. For
image data, long-distance dependencies are modeled by the
large receptive fields formed by deep stacks of convolutional
operations [14, 30].
Convolutional and recurrent operations both process a
local neighborhood, either in space or time; thus long-range
dependencies can only be captured when these operations
are applied repeatedly, propagating signals progressively
through the data. Repeating local operations has several
limitations. First, it is computationally inefficient. Second,
it causes optimization difficulties that need to be carefully
addressed [23, 21]. Finally, these challenges make multihop dependency modeling, e.g., when messages need to be
delivered back and forth between distant positions, difficult.
In this paper, we present non-local operations as an efficient, simple, and generic component for capturing longrange dependencies with deep neural networks. Our proposed non-local operation is a generalization of the classical
non-local mean operation [4] in computer vision. Intuitively,
a non-local operation computes the response at a position
∗ Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.

xi
xj
Figure 1. A spacetime non-local operation in our network trained
for video classification in Kinetics. A position xi ’s response is
computed by the weighted average of the features of all positions
xj (only the highest weighted ones are shown here). In this example
computed by our model, note how it relates the ball in the first frame
to the ball in the last two frames. More examples are in Figure 3.

as a weighted sum of the features at all positions in the input feature maps (Figure 1). The set of positions can be in
space, time, or spacetime, implying that our operations are
applicable for image, sequence, and video problems.
There are several advantages of using non-local operations: (a) In contrast to the progressive behavior of recurrent
and convolutional operations, non-local operations capture
long-range dependencies directly by computing interactions
between any two positions, regardless of their positional distance; (b) As we show in experiments, non-local operations
are efficient and achieve their best results even with only
a few layers (e.g., 5); (c) Finally, our non-local operations
maintain the variable input sizes and can be easily combined
with other operations (e.g., convolutions as we will use).
We showcase the effectiveness of non-local operations in
the application of video classification. In videos, long-range
interactions occur between distant pixels in space as well as
time. A single non-local block, which is our basic unit, can
directly capture these spacetime dependencies in a feedforward fashion. With a few non-local blocks, our architecures
called non-local neural networks are more accurate for video
classification than 2D and 3D convolutional networks [48]
(including the inflated variant [7]). In addition, non-local
neural networks are more computationally economical than
their 3D convolutional counterparts. Comprehensive ablation studies are presented on the Kinetics [27] and Charades
[44] datasets. Using RGB only and without any bells and
whistles (e.g., optical flow, multi-scale testing), our method
achieves results on par with or better than the latest competitions winners on both datasets.
17794

