Reflection Removal for Large-Scale 3D Point Clouds
Jae-Seong Yun and Jae-Young Sim
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, Korea
jsyun@unist.ac.kr and jysim@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Large-scale 3D point clouds (LS3DPCs) captured by terrestrial LiDAR scanners often exhibit reflection artifacts by
glasses, which degrade the performance of related computer vision techniques. In this paper, we propose an efficient reflection removal algorithm for LS3DPCs. We first
partition the unit sphere into local surface patches which
are then classified into the ordinary patches and the glass
patches according to the number of echo pulses from emitted laser pulses. Then we estimate the glass region of dominant reflection artifacts by measuring the reliability. We
also detect and remove the virtual points using the conditions of the reflection symmetry and the geometric similarity. We test the performance of the proposed algorithm on
LS3DPCs capturing real-world outdoor scenes, and show
that the proposed algorithm estimates valid glass regions
faithfully and removes the virtual points caused by reflection artifacts successfully.

(a)

(c)

1. Introduction
We often take glass images, for example, taking photos
of goods through show windows and taking photos of buildings with glass curtain walls. In such cases, resulting glass
images include transmitted scenes captured through the
glass as well as undesired scenes reflected on the glass, such
as sky, buildings and trees as shown in Figure 1(a). Reflection removal has been studied which automatically decomposes glass images into transmission scenes and reflected
scenes. A single glass image based technique exploits the
characteristics of reflection images such as gradient sparsity [18], relative smoothness [20], ghosting cue [25] and
Laplacian fidelity [3]. Reflection removal techniques based
on multiple glass images employ polarization [17, 24] or
flash [1] to extract different characteristics from multiple
images. Moreover, multiple glass images taken from different capturing positions are also used for reflection removal,
where the gradient sparsity [19], motion fields [27] and lowrank matrix representation are investigated [13].

(b)

Figure 1: Reflection by glass. (a) Reflection artifact on 2D
image. (b) The principle of reflection in a LiDAR laser
scanner. The black building and tree are real-world objects,
while the gray building denotes a virtual object generated
by reflection. (c) A LS3DPC model where the virtual points
are shown in red and the glass plane is shown in yellow, respectively.

With the advent of high-performance Light Detection
And Ranging (LiDAR) scanners, lots of effort has been
made to develop efficient techniques for processing 3D
point clouds. A real-time LiDAR scanner and stereo cameras were used to generate a test dataset [12] for the applications of autonomous vehicles, which is used to study object
detection [8, 7] and road detection [6, 7]. Moreover, highresolution terrestrial LiDAR scanners provide Large-Scale
3D Point Clouds (LS3DPCs) capturing 360◦ environment

4597

