HSA-RNN: Hierarchical Structure-Adaptive RNN for Video Summarization
Bin Zhao1 , Xuelong Li2 , Xiaoqiang Lu2
1
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, P. R. China
2
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Xi’an, Shaanxi, P. R. China
binzhao111@gmail.com, xuelong li@opt.ac.cn, luxiaoqiang@opt.ac.cn

Abstract

Prediction

1

0
1

LSTM

2
3
4
5

Shot-level Probability

6

...

LSTM

7

8

LSTM

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

LSTM

...

LSTM

Sliding

Nowadays, video data are increasing explosively due to
the popularity of video capture equipments, such as smart
phones and surveillance cameras. Videos have become the
most common visual data, which causes an urgent demand
for automatic tools to deal with the huge amount of video
data efficiently. In particular, video summarization is one of
the tools rising to this challenge [32, 37].
Video summarization provides us an efficient way to
browse and understand a lengthy video by shortening it into
a compact version, i.e., highlighting the essence and removing redundancy [31]. Practically, video summarization can
condense the video at three levels, that is, shots [27], frames

Layer 2

LSTM

...

1. Introduction

Layer 1

LSTM

...

Although video summarization has achieved great success in recent years, few approaches have realized the influence of video structure on the summarization results. As
we know, the video data follow a hierarchical structure, i.e.,
a video is composed of shots, and a shot is composed of
several frames. Generally, shots provide the activity-level
information for people to understand the video content.
While few existing summarization approaches pay attention
to the shot segmentation procedure. They generate shots by
some trivial strategies, such as fixed length segmentation,
which may destroy the underlying hierarchical structure of
video data and further reduce the quality of generated summaries. To address this problem, we propose a structureadaptive video summarization approach that integrates shot
segmentation and video summarization into a Hierarchical
Structure-Adaptive RNN, denoted as HSA-RNN. We evaluate the proposed approach on four popular datasets, i.e.,
SumMe, TVsum, CoSum and VTW. The experimental results have demonstrated the effectiveness of HSA-RNN in the
video summarization task.

Input frames

LSTM

Figure 1. The diagram of the proposed HSA-RNN, where Layer 1
and Layer 2 are designed to exploit the video structure and generate the video summary, respectively. Specifically, the blue and red
boxes represent the bidirectional LSTM unit in each layer. The
dashed boxes indicate the locations of detected shot boundaries.
The bidirectional LSTM in Layer 1 operates in a sliding manner,
and the stride at each step is equal to the length of previous detected shot.

[9] and objects [18]. In this paper, we focus on the first one
that summarizes the video with several key shots, because
it can better preserve the dynamic information and spatiotemporal consistence of the video content [1, 12].
There has been a steady development in shot-based video
summarization. Existing approaches summarize the video
following a two-stage architecture, i.e., shot segmentation
and key shot selection [12, 27, 38, 23]. In particular, most
approaches focus on designing various models for the key

7405

