Stacked Latent Attention for Multimodal Reasoning
Haoqi Fan
Facebook Research
1 Hacker Way

Jiatong Zhou
Facebook Research
1 Hacker Way

haoqifan@fb.com

jiatong@fb.com

Abstract
Attention has shown to be a pivotal development in deep
learning and has been used for a multitude of multimodal
learning tasks such as visual question answering and image captioning. In this work, we pinpoint the potential
limitations to the design of a traditional attention model.
We identify that 1) current attention mechanisms discard
the latent information from intermediate reasoning, losing
the positional information already captured by the attention
heatmaps and 2) stacked attention, a common way to improve spatial reasoning, may have suboptimal performance
because of the vanishing gradient problem. We introduce
a novel attention architecture to address these problems,
in which all spatial configuration information contained in
the intermediate reasoning process is retained in a pathway
of convolutional layers. We show that this new attention
leads to substantial improvements in multiple multimodal
reasoning tasks, including achieving single model performance without using external knowledge comparable to the
state-of-the-art on the VQA dataset, as well as clear gains
for the image captioning task.

1. Introduction
Attention has, in recent years, demonstrated to be a simple and effective mechanism for a neural network to “focus” on salient features of the input. Given an input state,
attention allows the model to dynamically learn weights to
indicate the importance of different parts of the input feature. It has been particularly successful for tasks requiring
combined reasoning on multiple modalities such as visual
question answering [15], image captioning [22], image-text
matching [16], visual grounding [4] and others.
However, current attention mechanisms have several potential limitations which will impact performance. In order to learn which parts of the input to focus on, the attention mechanism reasons about the spatial information of
the input, and “summarizes” the input state by computing a
weighted sum to produce an embedding. Current attention

models discard the latent spatial knowledge produced by the
intermediate reasoning step, and only use the embedding
output, representing the focus of the attention. This can potentially inhibit the model’s spatial reasoning ability as by
discarding the intermediate reasoning step, the model loses
information pertaining to the position of the focal point. In
order to improve the spatial reasoning ability of attention,
there has also been research in the literature on multi-step
reasoning. A common technique to do this is to stack attention layers, shown in the literature to improve performance
by providing the model with a second chance to reason on
the spatial dimension. This technique has seen varying degrees of success [15][16][10], and in this work, we show
that one of the limitations for such models is that they are
prone to the vanishing gradient problem, rendering the entire network ineffective.
To mitigate the above issues, in this paper we propose a
stacked latent attention model, which can effectively capture the spatial knowledge computed in the attention mechanism and propagate this information through the network.
Doing this also helps with stacking as the positional reasoning is provided to latter layers in the stack allowing for
corrections to mistakes made in previous layers. Furthermore, the model is designed to mitigate the gradient vanishing problem with a pathway for the gradients to flow without being diluted by a softmax. This model is composed
of attention units which possess the same input and output
format as a traditional attention mechanism and can be used
as a direct replacement in any task utilizing attention.
Building on top of this, we reinforce the technique of
using attention for multimodal fusion, and propose a twin
stream stacked latent attention model which is able to capture positional information from both textual and visual
modalities. We provide a deep examination of this new
model in the context of the VQA task, showing that we are
able to achieve single model performance comparable to the
state of the art without using any external knowledge. Additionally, we also explore the performance improvements
of the stacked latent attention model over traditional attention models on another well developed multimodal learning
11072

