Zigzag Learning for Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Xiaopeng Zhang1 Jiashi Feng1 Hongkai Xiong2 Qi Tian3
1

National University of Singapore 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 University of Texas at San Antonio
{elezxi,elefjia}@nus.edu.sg xionghongkai@sjtu.edu.cn qitian@cs.utsa.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses weakly supervised object detection
with only image-level supervision at training stage. Previous approaches train detection models with entire images
all at once, making the models prone to being trapped in
sub-optimums due to the introduced false positive examples.
Unlike them, we propose a zigzag learning strategy to simultaneously discover reliable object instances and prevent
the model from overfitting initial seeds. Towards this goal,
we first develop a criterion named mean Energy Accumulation Scores (mEAS) to automatically measure and rank localization difficulty of an image containing the target object,
and accordingly learn the detector progressively by feeding
examples with increasing difficulty. In this way, the model can be well prepared by training on easy examples for
learning from more difficult ones and thus gain a stronger
detection ability more efficiently. Furthermore, we introduce a novel masking regularization strategy over the high
level convolutional feature maps to avoid overfitting initial
samples. These two modules formulate a zigzag learning
process, where progressive learning endeavors to discover reliable object instances, and masking regularization increases the difficulty of finding object instances properly.
We achieve 47.6% mAP on PASCAL VOC 2007, surpassing
the state-of-the-arts by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Current state-of-the-art object detection performance has
been achieved with a fully supervised paradigm. However, it requires a large quantity of high-quality object-level
annotations (i.e., object bounding boxes) at training stages
[1], [2], [3], which are very costly to collect. Fortunately, the prevalence of image tags allows search engines to
quickly provide a set of images related to the target category [4], [5], making image-level annotations much easier to
acquire. Hence it is more appealing to learn detection models from such weakly labeled images. In this paper, we focus on object detection under a weakly supervised paradig-

(a) Car: 0.79

Easy

(b) Dog: 0.44

(c) Horse: 0.29

Object Difﬁculty Scores

(d) Sheep: 0.02

Hard

Figure 1. Object difficulty scores predicted by our proposed
mEAS. Higher scores indicate the object is easier to localize. This
paper proposes a zigzag learning based detector to progressively
learn from object instances in the order according to mEAS, with
a novel masking regularization to avoid overfitting initial samples.

m, where only image-level labels indicating the presence of
an object are available during training.
The main challenge in weakly supervised object detection is how to disentangle object instances from the complex backgrounds. Most previous methods model the missing object locations as latent variables, and optimize them
via different heuristic methods [6], [7], [8]. Among them,
a typical solution is alternating between model re-training
and object re-localization, which shares a similar spirit with
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) [9], [10], [11]. Nevertheless, such optimization is non-convex and easy to get stuck
in local minimums if the latent variables are not properly
initialized. Then mining object instances with only imagelevel labels becomes a classical chicken-and-egg problem:
without an accurate detection model, object instances cannot be discovered, while an accurate detection model cannot
be learned without appropriate object examples.
To solve this problem, this paper proposes a zigzag learning strategy for weakly supervised object detection, which
aims at mining reliable object instances for model training,
and meanwhile avoiding getting trapped in local minimums. As our first contribution, different from previous works which perform model training and object re-localization
over the entire images all at once [10], [11], [12], we progressively feed the images into the learning model in an
easy-to-difficult order [13]. To this end, we propose an effective criterion named mean Energy Accumulated Scores

4262

