Multi-Task Adversarial Network for Disentangled Feature Learning
Yang Liu1 Zhaowen Wang2 Hailin Jin2 Ian Wassell1
1
University of Cambridge 2 Adobe Research
1

{yl504,ijw24}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We address the problem of image feature learning for the
applications where multiple factors exist in the image generation process and only some factors are of our interest.
We present a novel multi-task adversarial network based on
an encoder-discriminator-generator architecture. The encoder extracts a disentangled feature representation for the
factors of interest. The discriminators classify each of the
factors as individual tasks. The encoder and the discriminators are trained cooperatively on factors of interest, but in
an adversarial way on factors of distraction. The generator
provides further regularization on the learned feature by reconstructing images with shared factors as the input image.
We design a new optimization scheme to stabilize the adversarial optimization process when multiple distributions
need to be aligned. The experiments on face recognition
and font recognition tasks show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms of both recognizing the factors of interest and generalization to images
with unseen variations.

1. Introduction
Image feature representation learning has been one of
the central problems in Computer Vision. One of the most
significant developments in the recent years in image feature learning is the resurgence of convolutional neural networks combined with large-scale datasets [14]. In this paper, we are interested in extending convolutional neural network based feature learning to the problems where multiple
underlying factors determine the image generation process
but only some factors are of our interest.
For many practical applications, the image generation
process can be well approximated by a small number of factors. For instance, images of printed text are determined by
factors such as font and glyph and images of human faces
are determined by factors such as identity, pose, and illumination. We further assume there exists a primary factor for
a given application. For instance, in the case of text images,

2

{zhawang,hljin}@adobe.com

if the application is font recognition, then font is the primary factor. But if the application is character recognition,
then glyph is the primary factor. Multi-task learning [3] is
the traditional approach to leverage the additional factors
that are present in the image generation process. It learns
a shared representation to predict all the factors. By doing
so, we obtain features that can potentially outperform those
learned from individual factors. However, if we are only
interested in the performance of the primary factor, such as
the identity for face images, can we do better than conventional multi-task learning?
Another major challenge in feature learning is generalization. We want the features learned from training data
to perform well on test data that have never been seen in
training. In the case of factored image generation processes,
one particularly interesting generalization is to unseen variations of non-primary factors. For instance, if our problem
is font recognition, we are interested in a feature representation that is robust to glyphs that have never been seen in
training. Generalization is usually accomplished by seeing
as many data variations as possible in training. However,
in the case of images with factors, this would mean that we
need to potentially see images with all the combinations of
all the factors. We end up with an explosion of images (exponential with respect to the number of factors in the worse
case). The interesting question is whether it is necessary to
train on all the combinations of all the factors in order to
generalize if there is a primary factor.
In this paper, we propose a novel feature learning algorithm for factored image generation processes that answers
the previous two questions. Without loss of generality, we
assume that the image generation process contains two uncorrelated factors and we are only interested in recognizing
one of two. We refer to the factor of interest as the content factor and the other as the style factor. The key idea of
the paper is that instead of learning from both factors in a
cooperative way (traditional multi-task learning where both
tasks help each other), we formulate the problem as learning from two adversarial tasks. To be more precise, given
an input image with a content label and a style label, one
task is to learn a content classifier and a shared image fea13743

