Super-Resolving Very Low-Resolution Face Images with
Supplementary Attributes∗
Xin Yu

Basura Fernando
Richard Hartley
Australian National University

Fatih Porikli

{xin.yu,basura.fernando,Richard.Hartley,fatih.porikli}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Given a tiny face image, existing face hallucination
methods aim at super-resolving its high-resolution (HR)
counterpart by learning a mapping from an exemplar
dataset. Since a low-resolution (LR) input patch may correspond to many HR candidate patches, this ambiguity may
lead to distorted HR facial details and wrong attributes such
as gender reversal. An LR input contains low-frequency facial components of its HR version while its residual face image, defined as the difference between the HR ground-truth
and interpolated LR images, contains the missing highfrequency facial details. We demonstrate that supplementing residual images or feature maps with additional facial
attribute information can significantly reduce the ambiguity
in face super-resolution. To explore this idea, we develop an
attribute-embedded upsampling network, which consists of
an upsampling network and a discriminative network. The
upsampling network is composed of an autoencoder with
skip-connections, which incorporates facial attribute vectors into the residual features of LR inputs at the bottleneck of the autoencoder and deconvolutional layers used
for upsampling. The discriminative network is designed to
examine whether super-resolved faces contain the desired
attributes or not and then its loss is used for updating the
upsampling network. In this manner, we can super-resolve
tiny (16×16 pixels) unaligned face images with a large upscaling factor of 8× while reducing the uncertainty of oneto-many mappings remarkably. By conducting extensive
evaluations on a large-scale dataset, we demonstrate that
our method achieves superior face hallucination results and
outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Face images provide important information for human
visual perception as well as computer analysis [6, 33]. De∗ This work was supported under the Australian Research Council‘s
Discovery Projects funding scheme (project DP150104645)

(a) LR

(b) HR

(c) NN

(d) VDSR [11]

(e) VDSR† [11]

(f) [35]

(g) [29]

(h) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison with the state-of-the-art CNN based face
hallucination methods. (a) 16 × 16 LR input image. (b) 128 × 128
HR original image (not used in training). (c) The corresponding HR image of the nearest neighbor of the given LR image
in the dataset after compensating for misalignments. (d) Result
of VDSR [11], which is a CNN based generic super-resolution
method. (e) Result of VDSR† [11] retrained with LR and HR face
image pairs. (f) Result of [35]. (g) Result of [29]. (h) Our result.

pending on the imaging conditions, the resolution of a face
area may be unfavorably low, raising a critical issue that
would directly impede our understanding. Motivated by
this challenge, recovering frontalized high-resolution (HR)
face images from their low-resolution (LR) counterparts,
also known as face hallucination, has received increasing
attention recently [27, 29, 35, 4]. Existing face hallucination methods only utilize image domain priors for superresolution. Even though they are trained on large-scale
datasets, ill-posed nature of the problem, which induces
inherent ambiguities such as one-to-many correspondence
between a given LR face and its possible HR counterparts,
would still lead to drastically flawed outputs. For instance,
as shown in Fig. 1, the hallucinated details generated by the
state-of-the-art face super-resolution methods [35, 29] are
semantically and perceptually inconsistent with the groundtruth HR image, and inaccuracies range from unnatural blur
to attribute mismatches including the wrong facial hair and
mixed gender features just to count a few.
1908

