Attentional ShapeContextNet for Point Cloud Recognition
Saining Xie∗

Sainan Liu∗
Zeyu Chen
Zhuowen Tu
University of California, San Diego

{s9xie, sal131, zec003, ztu}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We tackle the problem of point cloud recognition. Unlike previous approaches where a point cloud is either converted into a volume/image or represented independently in
a permutation-invariant set, we develop a new representation by adopting the concept of shape context as the building block in our network design. The resulting model, called
ShapeContextNet, consists of a hierarchy with modules not
relying on a fixed grid while still enjoying properties similar
to those in convolutional neural networks — being able to
capture and propagate the object part information. In addition, we find inspiration from self-attention based models
to include a simple yet effective contextual modeling mechanism — making the contextual region selection, the feature
aggregation, and the feature transformation process fully
automatic. ShapeContextNet is an end-to-end model that
can be applied to the general point cloud classification and
segmentation problems. We observe competitive results on
a number of benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) [20, 19, 29, 31,
14] and their recent improvements [32, 16, 39, 43] have
greatly advanced the state-of-the-arts for a wide range of
applications in computer vision. Areas like classification,
detection [11, 26], and segmentation [22, 13] for 2D images have witnessed the greatest advancement. Extending 2D-based convolution to 3D-based convolution for 3D
computer vision applications such as 3D medical imaging
[23, 10], though still effective, is arguably less explosive
than the 2D cases. This observation becomes more evident when applying 3D convolution to videos [33, 4, 34, 40]
where 2D frames are stacked together to form a 3D matrix.
Innate priors induced from careful study and understanding
of the task at hand are often necessary.
The development of large datasets of 2D static images
like ImageNet [9] is one of the key factors in the recent
∗ Equal contributions.

Figure 1. A motivating example to illustrate how the basic building block of our proposed algorithm, the shape context kernel, is
applied to a 3D point cloud to capture the contexual shape information.

development of deep learning technologies. Similarly, the
emergence of 3D shape based datasets such as ShapeNet
[5] has attracted a great deal of attention and stimulated advancement in 3D shape classification and recognition. In areas outside of computer vision, the 3D shape classification
and recognition problem has been extensively studied in
computer graphics [7, 12, 28] and robotics [27, 36]. Unlike
2D images where pixels are well-positioned in a strict grid
framework, shapes encoded by 3D point clouds [38, 42]
consist of individual points that are scattered in the 3D space
where neither is there a strict grid structure nor is there an
intensity value associated with each point.
To combat the 3D point cloud classification problem,
there have been previous works [17, 42, 30, 38] in which
scattered 3D points are assigned to individual cells in a
well structured 3D grid framework. This type of conversion from 3D points to 3D volumetric data can facilitate the
extension from 2D CNN to 3D CNN but it also loses the
intrinsic geometric property of the point cloud. A pioneering work, PointNet [6], addresses the fundamental representation problem for the point cloud by obtaining the in14606

