Automatic 3D Indoor Scene Modeling from Single Panorama
Yang Yang1
1

Shi Jin2

University of Delaware
yyangwin@udel.edu

Ruiyang Liu2
2

Sing Bing Kang4

Jingyi Yu2,3
3

ShanghaiTech University

{jinshi,liury}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
4

Plex-VR Inc.

jingyi.yu@plex-vr.com

Microsoft Research

sbkang@microsoft.com

Abstract
We describe a system that automatically extracts 3D geometry of an indoor scene from a single 2D panorama. Our
system recovers the spatial layout by finding the floor, walls,
and ceiling; it also recovers shapes of typical indoor objects such as furniture. Using sampled perspective subviews, we extract geometric cues (lines, vanishing points,
orientation map, and surface normals) and semantic cues
(saliency and object detection information). These cues are
used for ground plane estimation and occlusion reasoning.
The global spatial layout is inferred through a constraint
graph on line segments and planar superpixels. The recovered layout is then used to guide shape estimation of
the remaining objects using their normal information. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets show that our approach is state-of-the-art in both accuracy and efficiency.
Our system can handle cluttered scenes with complex geometry that are challenging to existing techniques.

1. Introduction
The recent surge in interest in immersive mixed reality
has resulted in the widespread availability of both commercial and consumer 360◦ camera systems. The consumergrade cameras include Ricoh Theta and Samsung Gear 360
while the higher-end ones include Nokia Ozo and Jaunt
One. Immersive panoramas are used in social apps such
as Facebook Spaces. Also, consumers can now contribute
to Google Street View by uploading panoramas. These developments highlight the importance of panoramic content
creation.
Panoramic or 360◦ images and videos, however, can only
provide limited immersive experience, due to lack of stereo
parallax. In this paper, we address the problem of automatically adding depth to a single 360◦ panorama. This has the
benefit of being able to synthesize stereo views, thus allowing the user to experience 3D immersive visualization of the

Depth map

Object

(a)

Object depth

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Our approach. (a) Geometric cues (such as line segments, surface normal) and semantic cues (object masks) are used
to automatically convert 2D panoramas to 3D ones. (b) Recovered
3D depth map and closeup views of an object. (c) Two different
virtual views.

scene using a VR headset. We currently restrict the scope
to indoor scenes.
We present a novel efficient technique to infer 3D structure based on a single 2D panorama. More specifically, we
estimate the spatial layout (consisting of floor, wall, and
ceiling) using the Manhattan world assumption, and recover
depths of typical indoor objects (e.g., furniture). Fig. 1 illustrates our proposed technique, with results for a representative input panorama.
What sets our work apart from prior work on adding
depth to panoramas is that in addition to inferring the global
layout, we use semantic cues and depth propagation to recover object depth. This is critical to producing plausible
13926

