Semantic Video Segmentation by Gated Recurrent Flow Propagation
David Nilsson1 and Cristian Sminchisescu1,2
1
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
{david.nilsson, cristian.sminchisescu}@math.lth.se

Abstract
Semantic video segmentation is challenging due to the
sheer amount of data that needs to be processed and labeled in order to construct accurate models. In this paper we present a deep, end-to-end trainable methodology
for video segmentation that is capable of leveraging the information present in unlabeled data, besides sparsely labeled frames, in order to improve semantic estimates. Our
model combines a convolutional architecture and a spatiotemporal transformer recurrent layer that is able to temporally propagate labeling information by means of optical
flow, adaptively gated based on its locally estimated uncertainty. The flow, the recognition and the gated temporal propagation modules can be trained jointly, end-to-end.
The temporal, gated recurrent flow propagation component
of our model can be plugged into any static semantic segmentation architecture and turn it into a weakly supervised
video processing one. Our experiments in the challenging
CityScapes and Camvid datasets, and for multiple deep architectures, indicate that the resulting model can leverage
unlabeled temporal frames, next to a labeled one, in order
to improve both the video segmentation accuracy and the
consistency of its temporal labeling, at no additional annotation cost and with little extra computation.

1. Introduction
Systems capable of computing accurate and temporally consistent semantic segmentations in video are central to scene understanding, being useful in applications in
robotics, for instance grasping, or for autonomous vehicles
where one naturally works with videos rather than single
images, and high levels of precision are needed. Since the
emergence of deep learning methods for image classification, the problem of semantic image segmentation has received increasing attention, with some of the most successful methods based on fully trainable convolutional architectures (CNN). Data for training and refining single frame,
static models is now quite diverse [7, 29]. In contrast, fully

trainable approaches to semantic video segmentation face
the difficulty of obtaining detailed annotations for individual video frames, although datasets are emerging for the
(unsupervised) video segmentation problem [11, 36, 27].
Therefore some of the existing approaches to semantic
video segmentation [42, 43, 25] rely on single frame models with corresponding variables connected in time using
random fields with higher-order potentials, and mostly prespecified parameters. Fully trainable approaches to video
are rare. The computational complexity of video processing further complicated matters.
One possible approach to designing semantic video segmentation models in the long run can be to only label frames, sparsely, in video, as it was done for static
datasets[7, 29]. Then one should be able to leverage temporal dependencies in order to propagate and aggregate information in order to decrease uncertainty during both learning
and inference. This would require a model that can integrate
spatio-temporal dependencies across video frames.
While approaches based on CNNs appear right, they are
non-trivial to adapt to video segmentation due to the amount
of data that needs to be processed for dense predictions. If
video processing and temporal matching were to be learned
without explicit components such as optical flow warping,
one possibility would be to design a model based on 3Dconvolutions, as used e.g. for action recognition[20, 3]. To
our knowledge no such approach has been pursued for semantic video segmentation. Instead, we will take an explicit
modeling approach relying on existing single-frame CNNs
augmented with spatial transformer structures that implement warping along optical flow fields. These will be combined with adaptive recurrent units in order to learn to fuse
the estimates from single (unlabeled) frames with the labeling information temporally propagated from nearby ones,
properly gated based on their uncertainty. The proposed
model is differentiable and end-to-end trainable.

2. Related Work
Our semantic video segmentation work relates to the different fields of semantic image segmentation, as well as,
16819

