Learned Shape-Tailored Descriptors for Segmentation
Naeemullah Khan and Ganesh Sundaramoorthi
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
{naeemullah.khan,ganesh.sundaramoorthi}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We address the problem of texture segmentation by
grouping dense pixel-wise descriptors. We introduce and
construct learned Shape-Tailored Descriptors that aggregate image statistics only within regions of interest to avoid
mixing statistics of different textures, and that are invariant
to complex nuisances (e.g., illumination, perspective and
deformations). This is accomplished by training a neural
network to discriminate base shape-tailored descriptors of
oriented gradients at various scales. These descriptors are
defined through partial differential equations to obtain data
at various scales in arbitrarily shaped regions. We formulate and optimize a joint optimization problem in the segmentation and descriptors to discriminate these base descriptors using the learned metric, equivalent to grouping
learned descriptors. Experiments on benchmark datasets
show that the descriptors learned on a small dataset of segmented images generalize well to unseen textures in other
datasets, showing the generic nature of these descriptors.
We also show state-of-the-art results on texture segmentation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Segmentation of an image into textures is a fundamental problem in computer vision, and may play a key role in
higher level tasks such as object segmentation, both in human and computer vision. Textures are composed of small
tokens, called textons, that may vary by photometric (e.g.,
illumination) and geometric (e.g., perspective of the camera) nuisances, but are otherwise stationary within the texture. Thus, a natural approach to segment textures is to construct descriptors at each pixel that are invariant to variations of textons within textures and are discriminative of
textons in different textures. Such descriptors can then be
grouped to form the segmentation.
There are two difficulties with this descriptor grouping
approach to segmentation. First, in order to construct invariant descriptors for segmentation, one needs to know the
segmentation. This is because invariant descriptors aggre-

gate image statistics from a neighborhood around a pixel,
and to be descriptive of the texton within the texture, they
must aggregate image statistics only within the texture to
which the pixel belongs. Otherwise, statistics from different textured regions are mixed, and such pixels, usually near
boundaries, become difficult to group. Second, provided the
region in which to aggregate statistics is known, one needs
to construct descriptors that are invariant to complex nuisances. The first problem has been addressed by [9]. There,
segmentation is formulated as a joint problem of regions of
the segmentation and dense invariant descriptors. Those descriptors, called Shape-Tailored Descriptors, are defined as
solutions of partial differential equations (PDE) within regions of interest, and thus they only aggregate image statistics within regions of interest. The segmentation algorithm
consists of an iterative process of updates of the descriptors based on the current segmentation, and updates of the
segmentation based on the current descriptors.
In this work, we address the second problem, that of
constructing descriptors invariant to complex nuisances yet
discriminative of textures, while aggregating image statistics only within regions of interest. To do this, we use the
base shape-tailored descriptors of [9], which are color channels and oriented gradients at various scales defined through
PDEs, and learn a function of such base descriptors that is
invariant to more complex nuisances than the limited invariances to small contrast and small geometric distortions
that the base descriptors possess. By learning a function
of base shape-tailored descriptors, we automatically inherit
the shape-tailored property, i.e., that the learned descriptors
aggregate image statistics only within regions of interest.
Thus, they are naturally suited for a joint problem in the
segmentation and the descriptors.
The problem we wish to address does not fit into a labeling problem, where one labels each pixel in the image
according to pre-defined labels, representing certain categories in a training set. In particular, we do not wish to segment classes of textures (e.g., different types of tree barks or
different types of sea shells should not be labeled the same).
Since the set of textures in the natural world is enormous,
perhaps not even enumerable, it is infeasible to construct a
1666

