pOSE: Pseudo Object Space Error for Initialization-Free Bundle Adjustment
Je Hyeong Hong
University of Cambridge

Christopher Zach
Toshiba Research Europe

jhh37@cantab.net

christopher.m.zach@gmail.com

Abstract
Bundle adjustment is a nonlinear refinement method for
camera poses and 3D structure requiring sufficiently good
initialization. In recent years, it was experimentally observed that useful minima can be reached even from arbitrary initialization for affine bundle adjustment problems
(and fixed-rank matrix factorization instances in general).
The key success factor lies in the use of the variable projection (VarPro) method, which is known to have a wide basin
of convergence for such problems. In this paper, we propose
the Pseudo Object Space Error (pOSE), which is an objective with cameras represented as a hybrid between the affine
and projective models. This formulation allows us to obtain
3D reconstructions that are close to the true projective reconstructions while retaining a bilinear problem structure
suitable for the VarPro method. Experimental results show
that using pOSE has a high success rate to yield faithful 3D
reconstructions from random initializations, taking one step
towards initialization-free structure from motion.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-motion (SfM, visual SLAM or multiview 3D reconstruction) aims to generate 3D models and
camera poses from multiple overlapping images. A complete SfM framework usually consists of several stages,
starting from feature extraction and matching, and ranging
to a final bundle adjustment step aiming to explain all image
observations and correspondences by finding the most probable configuration of 3D structure and camera parameters.
The first stages of a typical SfM pipeline (feature extraction,
robust matching and relative pose verification) are relatively
well understood, and different SfM toolkits and frameworks
vary surprisingly little in their respective implementations
of these initial steps. Likewise, the final bundle adjustment
is generally understood as an instance of a nonlinear least
squares problem and implemented accordingly using e.g.
the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithm [26, 31].
It is also well understood that bundle adjustment requires
a fairly good initialization for the 3D structure and camera

Figure 1. Reconstruction of Vercingetorix [39] from arbitrary initial camera and point parameters.

matrices in order to determine a good (local) minimum. The
various proposals in the literature for structure-from-motion
computation (e.g. [46, 10, 34, 54, 51, 44] among many others) are very diverse in how this initial estimate is obtained.
Since no gold-standard method for SfM computation has
emerged over several decades of research in this field, we
conjecture that a) SfM is a hard problem and b) the sources
of its difficulty are not well understood. By looking at a
typical bundle adjustment objective

X 
2
min
ρ kπ (Ki [Ri | ti ]x̃j ) − mi,j k2 (1)
{Ri },{ti },{x̃j }
Ri ∈SO(3) (i,j)∈Ω

(where ρ is a robust kernel, π([x, y, z]⊤ ) := [x/z, y/z]⊤ is
the perspective projection, {Ki [Ri | ti ] = Pi } are the camera
matrices, {xj }/{x̃j } are the inhomogeneous and homogenous 3D points, mi,j ∈ R2 is the 2D observation of point j
in image i respectively and Ω represents the set of visible
projections), we conclude that this objective function has
several sources of nonlinearities:
1. Each rotation matrix Ri is constrained to SO(3), which is
a non-convex manifold of orthogonal matrices with positive determinants. In this work, we avoid this difficulty
by using a stratified approach that first operates in the
projective space.
2. The projection function π is non-convex. In general, the
(convex) object-space error is a good surrogate for the
image-based reprojection error, which we will build on
in this work.
11876

