Learning Compact Recurrent Neural Networks
with Block-Term Tensor Decomposition
Jinmian Ye1 , Linnan Wang2 , Guangxi Li1 , Di Chen1 , Shandian Zhe3 , Xinqi Chu4 and Zenglin Xu1
1

{jinmian.y,gxli2017,chendi1995425,zenglin}@gmail.com, SMILE Lab, University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
wangnan318@gmail.com, Department of Computer Science, Brown University
3
zhe@cs.utah.edu, School of Computing, University of Utah
4
ethan@xjeralabs.com, Xjera Labs, Pte.Ltd

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are powerful sequence modeling tools. However, when dealing with high
dimensional inputs, the training of RNNs becomes computational expensive due to the large number of model parameters. This hinders RNNs from solving many important computer vision tasks, such as Action Recognition in Videos and
Image Captioning. To overcome this problem, we propose
a compact and flexible structure, namely Block-Term tensor decomposition, which greatly reduces the parameters
of RNNs and improves their training efficiency. Compared
with alternative low-rank approximations, such as tensortrain RNN (TT-RNN), our method, Block-Term RNN (BTRNN), is not only more concise (when using the same rank),
but also able to attain a better approximation to the original RNNs with much fewer parameters. On three challenging tasks, including Action Recognition in Videos, Image
Captioning and Image Generation, BT-RNN outperforms
TT-RNN and the standard RNN in terms of both prediction accuracy and convergence rate. Specifically, BT-LSTM
utilizes 17,388 times fewer parameters than the standard
LSTM to achieve an accuracy improvement over 15.6% in
the Action Recognition task on the UCF11 dataset.

Figure 1: Architecture of BT-LSTM. The redundant dense
connections between input and hidden state is replaced by
low-rank BT representation.
Memory (LSTM) introduces a number of gates and passes
information with element-wise operations [14]. This improvement drastically alleviates the gradient vanishing issue; therefore LSTM and its variants, e.g. Gated Recurrent
Unit (GRU) [5], are widely used in various Computer Vision (CV) tasks [3, 22, 37] to model the long-term correlations in sequences.
The current formulation of LSTM, however, suffers from
an excess of parameters, making it notoriously difficult to
train and susceptible to overfitting. The formulation of
LSTM can be described by the following equations:
ft = σ(Wf · xt + Uf · ht−1 + bf )
it = σ(Wi · xt + Ui · ht−1 + bi )
ot = σ(Wo · xt + Uo · ht−1 + bo )
c̃t = tanh(Wc · xt + Uc · ht−1 + bc )
ct = ft ⊙ ct−1 + it ⊙ c˜t
ht = ot ⊙ tanh(ct ),

1. Introduction
Best known for the sequence-to-sequence learning, the
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) belong to a class of
neural architectures designed to capture the dynamic temporal behaviors of data. The vanilla fully connected RNN
utilizes a feedback loop to memorize previous information,
while it is inept to handle long sequences as the gradient exponentially vanishes along the time [13, 2]. Unlike
the vanilla RNNs passing information between layers with
direct matrix-vector multiplications, the Long Short-Term

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

where ⊙ denotes the element-wise product, σ(·) denotes
the sigmoid function and tanh(·) is the hyperbolic tangent
function. The weight matrices W∗ and U∗ transform the
input xt and the hidden state ht−1 , respectively, to cell up-

9378

