Adversarial Feature Augmentation for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Riccardo Volpi1 , Pietro Morerio1 , Silvio Savarese2 , Vittorio Murino1,3
{riccardo.volpi,pietro.morerio,vittorio.murino}@iit.it, ssilvio@stanford.edu
1

Pattern Analysis & Computer Vision - Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
2
Stanford Vision and Learning Lab - Stanford University
3
Computer Science Department - Università di Verona

Abstract
Recent works showed that Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) can be successfully applied in unsupervised domain adaptation, where, given a labeled source
dataset and an unlabeled target dataset, the goal is to train
powerful classifiers for the target samples. In particular,
it was shown that a GAN objective function can be used
to learn target features indistinguishable from the source
ones. In this work, we extend this framework by (i) forcing
the learned feature extractor to be domain-invariant, and
(ii) training it through data augmentation in the feature
space, namely performing feature augmentation. While
data augmentation in the image space is a well established
technique in deep learning, feature augmentation has not
yet received the same level of attention. We accomplish it
by means of a feature generator trained by playing the GAN
minimax game against source features. Results show that
both enforcing domain-invariance and performing feature
augmentation lead to superior or comparable performance
to state-of-the-art results in several unsupervised domain
adaptation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs [10]) are models capable of mapping noise vectors into realistic samples
from a data distribution. GANs are defined by two neural
networks, a generator and a discriminator, and the training
procedure is a minimax game where the generator is optimized to fool the discriminator, and the discriminator is
optimized to correctly classify generated samples from actual training samples. Recently, this framework proved to
be able to generate images with impressive accuracy [24],
to generate videos from static frames [37], and to translate

images from one style to another [32, 18, 1, 17].
Furthermore, GANs have been exploited in the context
of unsupervised domain adaptation. Here, a source (labeled) dataset and a target (unlabeled) dataset are considered, which are separated by the so-called domain shift [33],
i.e., they are drawn from two different data distributions.
Unsupervised domain adaptation aims at building models
that are able to correctly classify target samples, despite
the domain shift. In this framework, adversarial training
has been used (i) to learn feature extractors that map target
samples in a feature space indistinguishable from the one
where source samples are mapped [8, 34], and (ii) to develop image-to-image translation algorithms [32, 18, 1, 17]
aimed at converting source images in a style that resembles
that of the target image domain.
In this paper, we build on the work by Tzeng et al.
[34], which proposes to use a GAN objective to learn
target features that are indistinguishable from the source
ones, leading to a pair of feature extractors, one for the
source and one for the target samples. We extend this
approach in two directions: (a) we force domain-invariance
in a single feature extractor trained through GANs, and
(b) we perform data augmentation in the feature space
(i.e., feature augmentation), by defining a more complex
minimax game. More specifically, we perform feature
augmentation by devising a feature generator trained with
a Conditional GAN (CGAN [21]). The minimax game is
here played with features instead of images, allowing to
generate features conditioned to the desired classes. The
CGAN generator is thus able to learn the class distribution
in the feature space, and therefore to generate an arbitrary
number of labeled feature vectors. Our results show that
forcing domain-invariance and augmenting features are
both valuable approaches in the unsupervised domain adaptation setting, leading to higher classification accuracies.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are
the following:
15495

