A Perceptual Measure for Deep Single Image Camera Calibration
Yannick Hold-Geoffroy1* , Kalyan Sunkavalli† , Jonathan Eisenmann† , Matt Fisher† ,
Emiliano Gambaretto† , Sunil Hadap† , Jean-François Lalonde*
Université Laval* , Adobe†
yannick.hold-geoffroy.1@ulaval.ca, {sunkaval,eisenman,matfishe,emiliano,hadap}@adobe.com, jflalonde@gel.ulaval.ca

Abstract
Most current single image camera calibration methods
rely on specific image features or user input, and cannot be
applied to natural images captured in uncontrolled settings.
We propose directly inferring camera calibration parameters from a single image using a deep convolutional neural
network. This network is trained using automatically generated samples from a large-scale panorama dataset, and
considerably outperforms other methods, including recent
deep learning-based approaches, in terms of standard L2
error. However, we argue that in many cases it is more important to consider how humans perceive errors in camera
estimation. To this end, we conduct a large-scale human
perception study where we ask users to judge the realism of
3D objects composited with and without ground truth camera calibration. Based on this study, we develop a new perceptual measure for camera calibration, and demonstrate
that our deep calibration network outperforms other methods on this measure. Finally, we demonstrate the use of our
calibration network for a number of applications including
virtual object insertion, image retrieval and compositing.

1. Introduction
The first step for many vision and graphics tasks—
ranging from 3D scene reconstruction to image metrology
to photographic editing—is to geometrically calibrate the
camera that captured the image [13]. In this work, we are
specifically interested in calibrating a camera from a single image of a natural scene, thereby precluding the use of
multiple views of the scene or calibration targets. There is
a extensive body of work even in this challenging setting;
however, most approaches rely on detecting specific image
features like vanishing lines [26], coplanar circles [3] and
repeated texture patterns [32, 6, 29], making them inapplicable to images without these features.
Inspired by the success of deep learning for related
scene reconstruction tasks [4, 1], we propose training a
deep convolutional network to directly estimate camera
1

Research partly done when Y. Hold-Geoffroy was an intern at Adobe Research.

parameters—more specifically the focal length, pitch and
roll–from a single image. This is similar to recent work on
CNN-based focal length [39] and horizon estimation [41].
We significantly improve on their results by jointly estimating all the parameters and by training on sample images automatically extracted from a large-scale panorama
dataset [42]. We also analyze the features learned by
the network to understand how it differs from pre-defined
feature-based calibration.
While our calibration network produces state-of-the-art
results, there are a number of cases where it fails. For images with no clear geometric or semantic cues, there is ambiguous evidence for what the “right” camera calibration
parameters should be. In many situations, recovering the
exact camera calibration may not even be required; for example, humans are known to tolerate strong deviations from
realism in painting [2] and digital composites [9]. This lead
us to ask the question: how do humans perceive inaccuracies in geometric camera calibration? To answer this, we
conducted a large-scale user study to test the human perception of errors in camera calibration. We composited virtual objects into images using both ground truth calibration
parameters as well as randomly perturbed parameters, and
asked users to evaluate which image in each pair looked
“real” to them. The results of this user study are described
in sec. 6. To our knowledge, this is the first large-scale user
study to systematically evaluate human perception of camera perspective. We use this data to design a new perceptual measure for calibration errors that we believe can prove
to be important as we evaluate how precise our algorithms
need to be for applications like augmented reality and 3D
object composition.
While our calibration network was trained to minimize
an entropy-based loss, we show that it also outperforms previous methods on our perceptual measure. In addition, we
also demonstrate the use of our network for a wide range
of applications, including 3D object insertion, calibrationbased image retrieval and compositing.

2. Related Work
Geometric camera calibration is a widely studied topic
that has a significant impact on a variety of applications in-

2354

