A Papier-Mâché Approach to Learning 3D Surface Generation
∗

Thibault Groueix1 , Matthew Fisher2 , Vladimir G. Kim2 , Bryan C. Russell2 , Mathieu Aubry1
1
LIGM (UMR 8049), École des Ponts, UPE, 2 Adobe Research
http://imagine.enpc.fr/ groueixt/atlasnet/

Figure 1. Given input as either a 2D image or a 3D point cloud (a), we automatically generate a corresponding 3D mesh (b) and its atlas
parameterization (c). We can use the recovered mesh and atlas to apply texture to the output shape (d) as well as 3D print the results (e).

Abstract
We introduce a method for learning to generate the surface of 3D shapes. Our approach represents a 3D shape as
a collection of parametric surface elements and, in contrast
to methods generating voxel grids or point clouds, naturally
infers a surface representation of the shape. Beyond its novelty, our new shape generation framework, AtlasNet, comes
with significant advantages, such as improved precision and
generalization capabilities, and the possibility to generate
a shape of arbitrary resolution without memory issues. We
demonstrate these benefits and compare to strong baselines
on the ShapeNet benchmark for two applications: (i) autoencoding shapes, and (ii) single-view reconstruction from
a still image. We also provide results showing its potential
for other applications, such as morphing, parametrization,
super-resolution, matching, and co-segmentation.

1. Introduction
Significant progress has been made on learning good representations for images, allowing impressive applications
in image generation [16, 34]. However, learning a representation for generating high-resolution 3D shapes remains
an open challenge. Representing a shape as a volumetric
function [6, 12, 30] only provides voxel-scale sampling of
the underlying smooth and continuous surface. In contrast, a
point cloud [24, 25] provides a representation for generating
on-surface details [8], efficiently leveraging sparsity of the
data. However, points do not directly represent neighborhood
∗ Work done at Adobe Research during TG’s summer internship

information, making it difficult to approximate the smooth
low-dimensional manifold structure with high fidelity.
To remedy shortcomings of these representations, surfaces are a popular choice in geometric modeling. A surface
is commonly modeled by a polygonal mesh: a set of vertices, and a list of triangular or quad primitives composed
of these vertices, providing piecewise planar approximation
to the smooth manifold. Each mesh vertex contains a 3D
(XYZ) coordinate, and, frequently, a 2D (UV) embedding
to a plane. The UV parameterization of the surface provides
an effective way to store and sample functions on surfaces,
such as normals, additional geometric details, textures, and
other reflective properties such as BRDF and ambient occlusion. One can imagine converting point clouds or volumetric
functions produced with existing learned generative models
as a simple post-process. However, this requires solving
two fundamental, difficult, and long-standing challenges in
geometry processing: global surface parameterization and
meshing.
In this paper we explore learning the surface representation directly. Inspired by the formal definition of a surface
as a topological space that locally resembles the Euclidean
plane, we seek to approximate the target surface locally by
mapping a set of squares to the surface of the 3D shape. The
use of multiple such squares allows us to model complex
surfaces with non-disk topology. Our representation of a
shape is thus extremely similar to an atlas, as we will discuss
in Section 3. The key strength of our method is that it jointly
learns a parameterization and an embedding of a shape. This
1216

