Convolutional Sequence to Sequence Model for Human Dynamics
Chen Li∗

Zhen Zhang∗
Wee Sun Lee
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science,
National University of Singapore, Singapore

{lic,zhangz,leews,gimhee.lee}comp.nus.edu.sg

Understanding human motion is extremely important for
various applications in computer vision and robotics, particularly for applications that require interaction with humans.
For example, an unmanned vehicle must have the ability to
predict human motion in order to avoid potential collision in
a crowded street. Besides, applications such as sports analysis and medical diagnosis may also benefit from human
motion modeling.
The biomechanical dynamics of human motion is extremely complicated. Although several analytic models
have been proposed, they are limited to few simple actions
∗ Considered as equal contribution.
1 https://github.com/chaneyddtt/ConvolutionalSequence-to-Sequence-Model-for-Human-Dynamics

Short-term Prediction

···

OURS

1. Introduction

Observed Frames

···

GT

Human motion modeling is a classic problem in computer vision and graphics. Challenges in modeling human
motion include high dimensional prediction as well as extremely complicated dynamics.We present a novel approach
to human motion modeling based on convolutional neural
networks (CNN). The hierarchical structure of CNN makes
it capable of capturing both spatial and temporal correlations effectively. In our proposed approach, a convolutional
long-term encoder is used to encode the whole given motion
sequence into a long-term hidden variable, which is used
with a decoder to predict the remainder of the sequence.
The decoder itself also has an encoder-decoder structure, in
which the short-term encoder encodes a shorter sequence to
a short-term hidden variable, and the spatial decoder maps
the long and short-term hidden variable to motion predictions. By using such a model, we are able to capture both
invariant and dynamic information of human motion, which
results in more accurate predictions. Experiments show that
our algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on
the Human3.6M and CMU Motion Capture datasets. Our
code is available at the project website1 .

···

RNN

Abstract

Long-term Prediction

Figure 1. Frames on the left are the observations fed into our network. The middle part is the short-term prediction results for RNN
(on the top) and our model (in the bottom). The right part is the
long-term prediction results, in which RNN converge to a mean
pose, while our model can predict future frames which are similar
to the ground truth (in the middle).

such as standing and walking [18]. For more complicated
actions, data-driven methods are required to attain acceptable accuracy [3, 14, 18]. In this paper, we focus on the
human motion prediction task, using learning based methods from motion capture data.
Recently, along with the success of deep learning in various areas of computer vision and machine learning, deep recurrent neural network based models have been introduced
in human motion prediction [5, 7, 10, 14]. In earlier works
[5, 10], it is often observed that there is a significant discontinuity between the first predicted frame of motion and
the last frame of the true observed motion. Martinez et al.
[14] solved the problem by adding a residual unit in the recurrent network. However, their residual unit based model
often converges to an undesired mean pose in the long-term
predictions, i.e., the predictor gives static predictions similar to the mean of the ground truth of future sequences (see
Figure 1). We believe that the mean pose problem is caused
by the fact that it is difficult for recurrent models to learn
to keep track of long-term information; the mean pose becomes a good prediction of the future pose when the model
loses track of information from the distant past. For a chainstructured RNN model, it takes n steps for two elements that
15226

