Bidirectional Attentive Fusion with Context Gating for Dense Video Captioning
Jingwen Wang†∗
Wenhao Jiang‡§
Lin Ma‡§
†
South China University of Technology

Wei Liu‡
Yong Xu†
‡
Tencent AI Lab

{jaywongjaywong, cswhjiang, forest.linma}@gmail.com
wliu@ee.columbia.edu

yxu@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Dense video captioning is a newly emerging task that
aims at both localizing and describing all events in a video.
We identify and tackle two challenges on this task, namely,
(1) how to utilize both past and future contexts for accurate
event proposal predictions, and (2) how to construct informative input to the decoder for generating natural event descriptions. First, previous works predominantly generate
temporal event proposals in the forward direction, which
neglects future video context. We propose a bidirectional
proposal method that effectively exploits both past and future contexts to make proposal predictions. Second, different events ending at (nearly) the same time are indistinguishable in the previous works, resulting in the same
captions. We solve this problem by representing each event
with an attentive fusion of hidden states from the proposal
module and video contents (e.g., C3D features). We further propose a novel context gating mechanism to balance
the contributions from the current event and its surrounding
contexts dynamically. We empirically show that our attentively fused event representation is superior to the proposal
hidden states or video contents alone. By coupling proposal
and captioning modules into one unified framework, our
model outperforms the state-of-the-arts on the ActivityNet
Captions dataset with a relative gain of over 100% (Meteor
score increases from 4.82 to 9.65).

1. Introduction
With the rapid growing of videos on the Internet, it becomes much more important to automatically classify and
retrieve these videos. While images and short videos have
attracted extensive attentions from vision research community [43, 25, 40, 30, 15, 9, 31, 6, 24], understanding long
untrimmed videos remains an open question. To help further understand videos and bridge them with human lan∗ Work done while Jingwen Wang was a Research Intern with Tencent
AI Lab.
§ Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Two main challenges in dense video captioning.
First, previous works, e.g., SST [3], process a video sequence
in the forward direction. Future video context (c) expressing “The man begins to mold his hair” is not considered, which presents close relationship with current proposal
(b) expressing “The man blow drys his hair”. Second,
previous work only uses the proposal hidden state ht at time step t
to represent the detected proposal, which cannot distinguish events
(e.g., P1, P2) that end at the same time step.

guage, a new task of dense video captioning is proposed
[20]. The goal is to automatically localize events in videos
and describe each one with a sentence. The capability of localizing and describing events in videos will benefit a broad
range of applications, such as video summarization [23, 29],
video retrieval [35, 44], video object detection [48], video
segment localization with language query [1, 11], and so on.
Compared to video captioning, which targets at describing a short video clip (e.g., 20s long in MSR-VTT
dataset [41]), dense video captioning requires analyzing a
much longer and complicated video sequence (e.g., 120s
long in ActivityNet Captions [20]). Since long videos usually involve multiple events, dense video captioning requires simultaneously performing temporal localization and

7190

