Document Enhancement using Visibility Detection

Input

Netanel Kligler
Technion
Haifa, Israel

Sagi Katz
Technion
Haifa, Israel

Ayellet Tal
Technion
Haifa, Israel

nati.bk@gmail.com

sagi.katz@gmail.com

ayellet@ee.technion.ac.il

[13]’s Output
Our output
(a) Text image binarization

Input

[1]’s Output
(b) Unshadowing

Our output

Figure 1: Document enhancement: Combining visibility detection with state-of-the-art algorithms for document processing,
improves performance. (a) Producing a binary image of a document, given a gray-level stained one, reveals the text behind
the stain. (b) Removing shadows from a color image recovers the original colors.

Abstract
This paper re-visits classical problems in document enhancement. Rather than proposing a new algorithm for a
specific problem, we introduce a novel general approach.
The key idea is to modify any state-of-the-art algorithm, by
providing it with new information (input), improving its own
results. Interestingly, this information is based on a solution to a seemingly unrelated problem of visibility detection
in R3 . We show that a simple representation of an image as
a 3D point cloud, gives visibility detection on this cloud a
new interpretation. What does it mean for a point to be visible? Although this question has been widely studied within
computer vision, it has always been assumed that the point
set is a sampling of a real scene. We show that the answer
to this question in our context reveals unique and useful information about the image. We demonstrate the benefit of
this idea for document binarization and for unshadowing.

1. Introduction
Images of documents such as books, articles, and fliers
frequently show up in our everyday lives. Many of these
images are damaged, often for one of two reasons. The

first is that the documents might contain artifacts such as
stains, ink spills or simple degradations that happen over
time [4, 13, 19, 20, 29] (Figure 1(a)). The second is that
documents, when captured using cellphone cameras, become highly susceptible to non-uniform lighting caused by
multiple light sources or by shadows, resulting from occlusion of the light sources [1, 22] (Figure 1(b)). Though
these problems are inherently different and are thus traditionally handled by specialized algorithms, we propose a
unified modification approach, applicable to both problems,
which can be combined ”on-top” of existing algorithms.
The key idea of our algorithm is that if we choose a suitable representation of pixels as points in R3 and then detect
the subset of the points that are visible from a viewpoint
(and/or occluding it), hidden information about the image
is revealed. This information is used to create a new image,
which when given as input to an existing algorithm, will improve its own results, while leaving the algorithm’s general
structure as usual.
Visibility has been defined in various dimensions and for
different types of objects [3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 17, 18]. This paper focuses on a specific variant of it: Given a point set in
R3 and a viewpoint, the goal is to determine the subset of
points visible from the viewpoint. Since points cannot occlude each other (unless they accidentally fall on the same
12374

