Inverse Composition Discriminative Optimization for Point Cloud Registration
Jayakorn Vongkulbhisal1,2 , Beñat Irastorza Ugalde2 , Fernando De la Torre2,3 , João P. Costeira1
1
ISR - IST, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3
Facebook Inc., Menlo Park, CA, USA
jvongkul@andrew.cmu.edu, birastor@andrew.cmu.edu, ftorre@cs.cmu.edu, jpc@isr.ist.utl.pt

Abstract
Rigid Point Cloud Registration (PCReg) refers to the
problem of finding the rigid transformation between two
sets of point clouds. This problem is particularly important due to the advances in new 3D sensing hardware, and
it is challenging because neither the correspondence nor
the transformation parameters are known. Traditional local PCReg methods (e.g., ICP) rely on local optimization
algorithms, which can get trapped in bad local minima in
the presence of noise, outliers, bad initializations, etc. To
alleviate these issues, this paper proposes Inverse Composition Discriminative Optimization (ICDO), an extension of
Discriminative Optimization (DO), which learns a sequence
of update steps from synthetic training data that search the
parameter space for an improved solution. Unlike DO,
ICDO is object-independent and generalizes even to unseen shapes. We evaluated ICDO on both synthetic and real
data, and show that ICDO can match the speed and outperform the accuracy of state-of-the-art PCReg algorithms.

(a)

(R,t)?

Input shapes

Registered shape

(b)

(R,t)

Training data

Initial estimate

Solution

Figure 1. Rigid Point Cloud Registration (PCReg) with ICDO. (a)
The goal of PCReg is to estimate rigid transformation parameter
that registers two point clouds together. (b) ICDO learns an inverse
composition update rule that searches for the solution from PCReg
examples. The learned update rule of ICDO generalizes to shapes
that are not even in the training set.

1. Introduction
Rigid Point Cloud Registration (PCReg) refers to the
problem of finding the rigid transformation between two
or more point clouds without correspondence (Fig. 1a).
PCReg algorithms are fundamental to 3D data processing, especially nowadays with the ever increasing access to
3D sensors (e.g., iPhone X, Kinect, LIDAR). Applications
of PCReg span 3D reconstruction, pose estimation, tracking, etc. Many successful approaches formulate PCReg as
an optimization problem and solve it with local optimization algorithms. Unfortunately, these local methods tend to
get trapped in bad local optima without a good initialization.
To achieve robustness against local optima, several authors proposed different formulations and algorithms. A
major class of successful algorithms relies on deterministic annealing strategies [16, 20, 7]. In short, these algorithms first optimize a coarse, non-robust cost function with

a small number of local optima, then continually increase
the robustness by modifying the cost function. One issue
with annealing approaches is that they require a schedule
for such modification, i.e., how fast and to what shape the
cost should be modified. Setting this schedule is not trivial. With an improper schedule, the optimization might take
longer than necessary or even skip the correct solution to a
different optimum altogether.
Recently, Discriminative Optimization (DO) [38] has
been proposed as a learning-based technique to solve
PCReg. DO searches for a solution by mapping a feature
vector to a parameter update vector, where the maps are
learned from a set of training data. Although it was shown
to be very robust, DO has a significant limitation: the features and the maps are object-specific, i.e., they only work
for the particular object they were trained on. This limits the

2993

