Inferring Semantic Layout for Hierarchical Text-to-Image Synthesis
†

Seunghoon Hong

†

†

Dingdong Yang
Jongwook Choi
†
University of Michigan
‡
Google Brain

{hongseu,didoyang,jwook,honglak}@umich.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel hierarchical approach for text-toimage synthesis by inferring semantic layout. Instead of
learning a direct mapping from text to image, our algorithm
decomposes the generation process into multiple steps, in
which it first constructs a semantic layout from the text by
the layout generator and converts the layout to an image by
the image generator. The proposed layout generator progressively constructs a semantic layout in a coarse-to-fine
manner by generating object bounding boxes and refining
each box by estimating object shapes inside the box. The
image generator synthesizes an image conditioned on the
inferred semantic layout, which provides a useful semantic structure of an image matching with the text description.
Our model not only generates semantically more meaningful images, but also allows automatic annotation of generated images and user-controlled generation process by
modifying the generated scene layout. We demonstrate the
capability of the proposed model on challenging MS-COCO
dataset and show that the model can substantially improve
the image quality, interpretability of output and semantic
alignment to input text over existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Generating images from text description has been an active research topic in computer vision. By allowing users to
describe visual concepts in natural language, it provides a
natural and flexible interface for conditioning image generation. Recently, approaches based on conditional Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) have shown promising results
on text-to-image synthesis task [21, 34, 23]. Conditioning
both generator and discriminator on text, these approaches
are able to generate realistic images that are both diverse
and relevant to input text. Based on conditional GAN
framework, recent approaches further improve the prediction quality by generating high-resolution images [34] or
augmenting text information [6, 4].
However, the success of existing approaches has been
mainly limited to simple datasets such as birds [33] and
flowers [17], while generation of complicated, real-world

‡

†

‡,†

Honglak Lee

honglak@google.com

Input Text : People riding on elephants that are walking through a river.

box generation

mask generation

pixel generation

Reed et al. [19] result

StackGAN [32] result

real image

Figure 1. Overall framework of the proposed algorithm. Given a
text description, our algorithm sequentially constructs a semantic
structure of a scene and generates an image conditioned on the
inferred layout and text. Best viewed in color.

images such as MS-COCO [13] remains an open challenge.
As illustrated in Figure 1, generating image from a general sentence “people riding on elephants that are walking through a river” requires multiple reasonings on various visual concepts, such as object category (people and
elephants), spatial configurations of objects (riding), scene
context (walking through a river), etc., which is much more
complicated than generating a single, large object as in simpler datasets [33, 17]. Existing approaches have not been
successful in generating reasonable images for such complex text descriptions, because of the complexity of learning
a direct text-to-pixel mapping from general images.
Instead of learning a direct mapping from text to image,
we propose an alternative approach that constructs semantic
layout as an intermediate representation between text and
image. Semantic layout defines a structure of scene based
on object instances and provides fine-grained information of
the scene, such as the number of objects, object category, location, size, shape, etc. (Figure 1). By introducing a mechanism that explicitly aligns the semantic structure of an image to text, the proposed method can generate complicated
images that match complex text descriptions. In addition,
conditioning the image generation on semantic structure al17986

