Direction-aware Spatial Context Features for Shadow Detection
Xiaowei Hu1,∗ , Lei Zhu2,∗, Chi-Wing Fu1,3 , Jing Qin2 , and Pheng-Ann Heng1,3
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Abstract
Shadow detection is a fundamental and challenging task,
since it requires an understanding of global image semantics and there are various backgrounds around shadows.
This paper presents a novel network for shadow detection
by analyzing image context in a direction-aware manner.
To achieve this, we first formulate the direction-aware attention mechanism in a spatial recurrent neural network
(RNN) by introducing attention weights when aggregating spatial context features in the RNN. By learning these
weights through training, we can recover direction-aware
spatial context (DSC) for detecting shadows. This design is
developed into the DSC module and embedded in a CNN to
learn DSC features at different levels. Moreover, a weighted
cross entropy loss is designed to make the training more effective. We employ two common shadow detection benchmark datasets and perform various experiments to evaluate
our network. Experimental results show that our network
outperforms state-of-the-art methods and achieves 97% accuracy and 38% reduction on balance error rate.

1. Introduction
Shadow is a monocular cue in human vision for depth
and geometry perception. Knowing where the shadow is, on
the one hand, allows us to acquire the lighting direction [14]
and scene geometry [19, 10], as well as the camera location
and parameters [9]. However, the presence of shadow, on
the other hand, could deteriorate the performance of many
fundamental computer vision tasks, such as object detection
and tracking [2, 17]. Hence, shadow detection has long been
a fundamental problem in computer vision.
Existing methods detect shadows by developing physical
models of color and illumination [4, 3], or by using datadriven approaches based on hand-crafted features [7, 15, 30]
or learned features [11, 24, 18]. While state-of-the-art meth∗ Joint first authors

Figure 1: In this example image, region B would give a
stronger indication that A is a shadow compared to region
C. This motivates us to analyze the global image context in
a direction-aware manner for shadow detection.
ods have already achieved accuracy of 87% to 90% on two
benchmark datasets [24, 30], they may misrecognize black
objects as shadows and miss unobvious shadows. These situations are revealed by the balance error rate (BER), which
equally considers shadow and non-shadow regions; see Section 4 for quantitative comparison results.
Shadow detection requires an understanding of global
image semantics, as shown very recently in [18]. To improve the understanding, we propose to analyze the image
(or spatial) context in a direction-aware manner. Taking region A in Figure 1 as an example, comparing it with regions
B and C, region B would give a stronger indication that A
is a shadow as compared to region C. Hence, spatial contexts along different directions would give different amount
of contributions in suggesting the presence of shadows.
To take directional variance into account when reasoning the spatial contexts, we first design a network module
called the direction-aware spatial context (DSC) module,
or DSC module for short, by adopting a spatial recurrent
neural network (RNN) to aggregate spatial contexts in four
principal directions, and formulating the direction-aware attention mechanism in the RNN to learn attention weights for

7454

