Learning to Act Properly: Predicting and Explaining Affordances from Images
Ching-Yao Chuang1 , Jiaman Li1 , Antonio Torralba2 , Sanja Fidler1
1
University of Toronto 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{cychuang, ljm, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu torralba@mit.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of affordance reasoning in diverse scenes that appear in the real world. Affordances relate the agent’s actions to their effects when taken on the
surrounding objects. In our work, we take the egocentric
view of the scene, and aim to reason about action-object
affordances that respect both the physical world as well as
the social norms imposed by the society. We also aim to
teach artificial agents why some actions should not be taken
in certain situations, and what would likely happen if these
actions would be taken. We collect a new dataset that builds
upon ADE20k [32], referred to as ADE-Affordance, which
contains annotations enabling such rich visual reasoning.
We propose a model that exploits Graph Neural Networks
to propagate contextual information from the scene in order
to perform detailed affordance reasoning about each object.
Our model is showcased through various ablation studies,
pointing to successes and challenges in this complex task.

1. Introduction
Autonomous agents are not simply passive observers but
need to be active in an environment. For example, we might
want them to fetch us dinner from a restaurant, take the dog
for a walk, or carry our bags at the airport. While this seems
futuristic today, we may quite likely see robots mingling
among us in the near future. In order to blend naturally
within the society, robots will need to act as humans would.
Thus, these agents will need to understand both, the affordances and constraints imposed by the 3D environment, as
well as what actions are socially acceptable in a given scene.
For example, running into physical obstacles is dangerous
for an agent and thus should be avoided. Furthermore, sitting on a chair with a purse on top is not appropriate as
the chair is likely reserved by someone else. Running in a
classroom during a lecture is also not conventional.
Introduced by Gibson [10], affordances define the relationship between an agent and the environment by means of

Sit

Grasp

Grasp

Relationship: Physical Obstacle

Relationship: Socially Forbidden

Relationship: Socially Forbidden

Explanation: People are already
sitting on the chair.

Explanation: The man sitting on the
chair is reading his book.

Explanation: This bag belongs to the
person sitting on the chair.

Consequence: People on the chair
will get hurt.

Consequence: The man will be mad
and you will violate the law.

Consequence: People will be mad
and you will violate the law.

Sit

Run

Relationship: Positive

Relationship: Positive

Relationship: Negative

Figure 1. Example of Affordance in Real World

the agent’s perception. Thus, they relate the agent’s actions
to their effects when taken upon the surrounding objects.
In our work, we are interested in reasoning about actionobject affordances that respect both the physical world as
well as the social norms imposed by the society. This is
a very challenging and unexplored problem. Understanding such affordances cannot be determined by, for example,
building a simple knowledge base, as they are a function of
the complete dynamic scene around us.
We adopt the egocentric view, where a given photo is
considered as the current view of the agent. Given a set of
actions that the agent is aiming to take, our goal is to find
all objects/places in the scene for which taking such an action would be safe and appropriate. We further aim to teach
the agent why certain objects, to which these actions could
normally be applied to, are considered an exception in the
current scene. Moreover, we want the agent to also understand the most likely consequence to occur if this action
would in fact be taken with such an object.
Since no such information exists to date, we collect
a new dataset building upon ADE20k [32] containing 20
thousand images taken in various types of scenes. In particular, we first crowdsource typical affordances for actionobject pairs, thus giving us a list of all object classes to
which a particular action can normally be applied to. We
then mark all objects belonging to these classes in ADE20k
imagery, and ask annotators to mark exceptions, i.e., objects

975

