A Neural Multi-sequence Alignment TeCHnique (NeuMATCH)
Pelin Dogan1,4∗ Boyang Li2 Leonid Sigal3 Markus Gross1,4
1
ETH Zürich 2 Liulishuo AI Lab 3 University of British Columbia 4 Disney Research
{pelin.dogan, grossm}@inf.ethz.ch, albert.li@liulishuo.com, lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
The alignment of heterogeneous sequential data (video
to text) is an important and challenging problem. Standard
techniques for this task, including Dynamic Time Warping
(DTW) and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs), suffer from
inherent drawbacks. Mainly, the Markov assumption implies that, given the immediate past, future alignment decisions are independent of further history. The separation between similarity computation and alignment decision also
prevents end-to-end training. In this paper, we propose
an end-to-end neural architecture where alignment actions
are implemented as moving data between stacks of Long
Short-term Memory (LSTM) blocks. This flexible architecture supports a large variety of alignment tasks, including one-to-one, one-to-many, skipping unmatched elements,
and (with extensions) non-monotonic alignment. Extensive
experiments on semi-synthetic and real datasets show that
our algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
Sequence alignment (see Figure 1) is a prevalent problem that finds diverse applications in molecular biology
[27], natural language processing [3], historic linguistics
[33], and computer vision [7]. In this paper, we focus on
aligning heterogeneous sequences with complex correspondences. Heterogeneity refers to the lack of an obvious surface matching (a literal similarity metric between elements
of the sequences). A prime example is the alignment between visual and textual content. Such alignment requires
sophisticated extraction of comparable feature representations in each modality, often performed by a deep neural
network.
A common solution to the alignment problem consists
of two stages that are performed separately: (1) the learning of a similarity metric between elements in the sequences and (2) finding the optimal alignment between the
∗ The technique was conceived when all authors worked for Disney Research.

2 3 4

1

1 2 3

1 1 1 2 3 3

4

(b)

1 1 2 2 1 3 4
1

4 5

1 2 3

(a)

5

2 3 4 5 5 6 6

(c)

Figure 1: Types of sequence correspondence. Matching
blocks in two sequences have identical colors and numbers.
(a) A one-to-one matching where the white blocks do not
match anything. (b) A one-to-many matching where one
block on the bottom sequence matches multiple blocks on
the top. (c) A non-monotonic situation where the matching
does not always proceed strictly from left to right due to the
red-1 block after the yellow-2 on top.
sequences. Alignment techniques based on dynamic programming, such as Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [4] and
Canonical Time Warping (CTW) [59], are widely popular. In a simple form, DTW can be understood as finding
the shortest path where the edge costs are computed with
the similarity metric, so the decision is Markov. Variations of DTW [43, 60] accommodate some degrees of nonmonotonicity (see Figure 1 (c)). In all cases, these approaches are disadvantaged by the separation of the two
stages. Conceptually, learning a metric that directly helps to
optimize alignment should be beneficial. Further, methods
with first-order Markov assumptions take only limited local
context into account, but contextual information conducive
to alignment may be scattered over the entire sequence. For
example, knowledge of the narrative structure of a movie
may help to align shots to their sentence descriptions.
To address these limitations, we propose an end-toend differentiable neural architecture for heterogeneous sequence alignment, which we call NeuMATCH. The NeuMATCH architecture represents the current state of the
workspace using four Long Short-term Memory (LSTM)
chains: two for the partially aligned sequences, one for the
matched content, and one for historical alignment decisions.

8749

