A Face-to-Face Neural Conversation Model
Hang Chu1,2 Daiqing Li1 Sanja Fidler1,2
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute
{chuhang1122, daiqing, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Neural networks have recently become good at engaging
in dialog. However, current approaches are based solely
on verbal text, lacking the richness of a real face-to-face
conversation. We propose a neural conversation model that
aims to read and generate facial gestures alongside with
text. This allows our model to adapt its response based on
the “mood” of the conversation. In particular, we introduce an RNN encoder-decoder that exploits the movement
of facial muscles, as well as the verbal conversation. The
decoder consists of two layers, where the lower layer aims
at generating the verbal response and coarse facial expressions, while the second layer fills in the subtle gestures,
making the generated output more smooth and natural. We
train our neural network by having it “watch” 250 movies.
We showcase our joint face-text model in generating more
natural conversations through automatic metrics and a human study. We demonstrate an example application with a
face-to-face chatting avatar.

1. Introduction
We make conversation everyday. We talk to our family, friends, colleagues, and sometimes we also chat with
robots. Several online services employ robot agents to direct customers to the service they are looking for. Questionanswering systems like Apple Siri and Amazon Alexa have
also become a popular accessory. However, while most of
these automatic systems feature a human voice, they are far
from acting like human beings. They lack in expressivity,
and are typically emotionless.
Language alone can often be ambiguous with respect to
the person’s mood, unless indicative sentiment words are
being used. In real life, people make gestures and read other
people’s gestures when they communicate. Whether someone is smiling, crying, shouting, or frowning when saying
“thank you” can indicate various feelings from gratitude to
irony. People also form their response depending on such
demo/data: http://www.cs.toronto.edu/face2face

Figure 1: Facial gestures convey sentiment information. Words
have different meanings with different facial gestures. Saying
“Thank you” with different gestures could either express gratitude,
or irony. Therefore, a different response should be triggered.

context, not only in what they say but also in how they say
it. We aim at developing a more natural conversation model
that jointly models text and gestures, in order to act and
converse in a more natural way.
Recently, neural networks have been shown to be good
conversationalists [33, 15]. These typically make use of
an RNN encoder which represents the history of the verbal conversation and an RNN decoder that generates a response. [16] built on top of this idea with the aim to personalize the model by adapting the conversation to a particular
user. However, all these approaches are based solely on text,
lacking the richness of a real face-to-face conversation.
In this paper, we introduce a neural conversation model
that reads and generates both a verbal response (text) and
facial gestures. We exploit movies as a rich resource of
such information. Movies show a variety of social situations with diverse emotions, reactions, and topics of conversation, making them well suited for our task. Movies
are also multi-modal, allowing us to exploit both visual as
well as dialogue information. However, the data itself is
also extremely challenging due to many characters that appear on-screen at any given time, as well as large variance
in pose, scale, and recording style.
Our model adopts the encoder-decoder architecture and
adds gesture information in both the encoder as well as the
decoder. We exploit the FACS representation [8] of ges17113

