3D-RCNN: Instance-level 3D Object Reconstruction via Render-and-Compare
Abhijit Kundu†
Yin Li‡ †
James M. Rehg†
†Georgia Institute of Technology ‡Carnegie Mellon University
http://abhijitkundu.info/projects/3D-RCNN

Abstract
We present a fast inverse-graphics framework for
instance-level 3D scene understanding. We train a deep
convolutional network that learns to map image regions to
the full 3D shape and pose of all object instances in the
image. Our method produces a compact 3D representation
of the scene, which can be readily used for applications like
autonomous driving. Many traditional 2D vision outputs,
like instance segmentations and depth-maps, can be obtained by simply rendering our output 3D scene model. We
exploit class-specific shape priors by learning a low dimensional shape-space from collections of CAD models. We
present novel representations of shape and pose, that strive
towards better 3D equivariance and generalization. In order to exploit rich supervisory signals in the form of 2D
annotations like segmentation, we propose a differentiable
Render-and-Compare loss that allows 3D shape and pose
to be learned with 2D supervision. We evaluate our method
on the challenging real-world datasets of Pascal3D+ and
KITTI, where we achieve state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
The term “scene understanding” has been used in computer vision to broadly describe high-level understanding
of image content. A scene understanding algorithm builds
a compact representation of the image that is well-suited
for subsequent tasks. Traditional scene understanding algorithms have primarily been used to assign semantic labels to
pixels or to output 2D bounding boxes around objects of interest. However, such 2D representations are insufficient for
tasks like planning and 3D spatial reasoning. In this work,
we argue for the importance of a rich 3D scene model which
can reason about object instances.
A 2D image is a complex function of multiple attributes, such as the lighting, shape, and surface properties of
objects in the scene. An instance level 3D model provides a representation of the scene that disentangles the 2D
‡ This work was conducted while the 2nd author was at Georgia Tech.

projection. This disentangled 3D representation makes our
method more suitable for real-world applications. The output from our system can be directly used for tasks like pathplanning, or accurately predicting an object’s 3D location
in the future. Another major benefit of doing scene understanding with a rich 3D scene model is that traditional 2D
scene representations like segmentation, bounding box, and
2D depth-maps are all available for free. They can be generated by simply rendering the output 3D scene model. But
how do we invert the complex image formation process to
obtain the 3D scene model?
One classical approach to solving inverse problems
is analysis-by-synthesis. It consists of using a model that
describes the data generation process (synthesis), which is
then used to estimate the parameters of the model that generated the particular observed data (analysis). Analysisby-synthesis with a 3D scene model is like “solving vision
as inverse-graphics”. Synthesis describes the process of
generating image content from the 3D scene model in the
style of computer graphics. Vision is then like analysis by
searching the best 3D scene configuration to explain the
observed image. The idea of analysis-by-synthesis can be
traced back to Helmhotz’s 1867 work on unconscious inference [21], and it has a long history [3, 26, 61, 23, 9].
While conceptually elegant, it has only been successful for
a limited set of problems. This is due to the fact that useful
3D scene representations are high-dimensional. So analysis
then becomes a difficult search problem over a vast, highdimensional space of scene variables.
Recently there has been a re-emergence of the inversegraphics approach [11, 27, 44, 60, 51, 24, 25, 34], in which
an efficient, discriminative bottom-up method like a convolutional network is used to cut down on the search space.
However, most of these approaches are still restricted to
simple scenes often containing only one object. In this work
we present an inverse-graphics approach which is capable
of handling complex real-world 3D scenes. Our approach
uses a deep convolutional network to map image regions to
3D representations of all object instances in an image.
To enable the inverse graphics approach to scale to complex scenes, we made four key design choices: (i) Instead of
13559

