Learning Deep Descriptors with Scale-Aware Triplet Networks
Michel Keller

Zetao Chen
Fabiola Maffra
Patrik Schmuck
Margarita Chli
Vision for Robotics Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

γ = 0.5: mixed-context

γ = 1: triplet loss

(FPR95 = 7.6%)

(FPR95 = 4.8%)

(FPR-95 = 12.5%)

precision

γ = 0: Siamese loss

1.0

michel.keller@alumni.ethz.ch, {chenze, pschmuck, chlim}@ethz.ch, fmaffra@mavt.ethz.ch

0.8

siamese
mixed-context
triplet

0.8

recall

1.0

Figure 1: Two-dimensional descriptors obtained with our mixed-context loss approach (center) in comparison with a Siamese
(left) and a triplet loss (right) evaluated on the MNIST test set. A normal distribution has been fit to each cluster and its
confidence ellipses plotted. The triplet network shows clear signs of the localized-context problem (Section 3.2), resulting
in inconsistently scaled descriptors. While the Siamese loss does not show this effect, it does not properly take advantage
of context and therefore still learns rather poor descriptors. Our mixed-context loss (Section 4.1) in contrast shows neither
problem, yielding consistently scaled descriptors and the lowest false positive rate at 95% recall (FPR95) and best PR curves.

Abstract
Research on learning suitable feature descriptors for
Computer Vision has recently shifted to deep learning where
the biggest challenge lies with the formulation of appropriate loss functions, especially since the descriptors to be
learned are not known at training time. While approaches
such as Siamese and triplet losses have been applied with
success, it is still not well understood what makes a good
loss function. In this spirit, this work demonstrates that
many commonly used losses suffer from a range of problems. Based on this analysis, we introduce mixed-context
losses and scale-aware sampling, two methods that when
combined enable networks to learn consistently scaled descriptors for the first time.

1. Introduction
Local feature descriptors are a key in a plethora of
tasks in Computer Vision and in fact, the quality of a feature descriptor, which is typically measured in terms of
the distinctiveness and the descriptability of the image region it summarizes, is of vital importance to the performance of the task at hand. It is, therefore, not surpris-

ing that considerable effort has been undertaken to improve on hand-crafted descriptors such as SIFT [17] and
SURF [5] in order to make them more robust to common
image changes, such as viewpoint and illumination variations. In the last ten years, features obtained with machine
learning techniques have become increasingly popular, a
development that was partly driven by the introduction of
high-quality labelled datasets [7, 27, 3]. While in earlier approaches [1, 7, 13, 20], learning was limited to selecting the
hyper-parameters of otherwise hand-crafted descriptors, research focus has gradually shifted towards models that have
more learnable degrees of freedom (e.g. [25, 26]). Driven
by the recent advances in deep learning, attention has now
almost completely turned to learning descriptors with neural networks [30, 4, 2, 23, 18] an approach that is entirely
data-driven.
The main challenge encountered in this context is that
the descriptors to be learned are not known at training time,
making the formulation of loss functions difficult. This
is most commonly addressed by first propagating multiple
patches through a network and then comparing the obtained
descriptors relative to one another. Generally, the goal is to
encourage similar patches to have descriptors that are closer
to each other in the descriptors’ space than dissimilar ones.
While this leads to losses that are simple and concise, it

2762

