Estimation of Camera Locations in Highly Corrupted Scenarios:
All About that Base, No Shape Trouble
Yunpeng Shi
University of Minnesota

Gilad Lerman
University of Minnesota

shixx517@umn.edu

lerman@umn.edu

Abstract
We propose a strategy for improving camera location estimation in structure from motion. Our setting assumes highly
corrupted pairwise directions (i.e., normalized relative location
vectors), so there is a clear room for improving current state-ofthe-art solutions for this problem. Our strategy identifies severely
corrupted pairwise directions by using a geometric consistency
condition. It then selects a cleaner set of pairwise directions
as a preprocessing step for common solvers. We theoretically
guarantee the successful performance of a basic version of our
strategy under a synthetic corruption model. Numerical results on
artificial and real data demonstrate the significant improvement
obtained by our strategy.

1. Introduction
The problem of Structure from Motion (SfM), that is,
reconstructing 3D structure from 2D images, is critical in
computer vision. The common pipeline for 3D reconstruction
consists of the following steps: 1. Matching keypoints among
images using SIFT [12]; 2. Computing the essential matrices
from the matched image pairs and extracting relative camera
rotations [8]; 3. Finding global camera orientations via rotation
synchronization and estimating relative camera translations
[1, 3, 6, 9, 13, 17]; 4. Estimating camera locations from estimated
pairwise directions [1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 15, 16, 17, 21, 22], where a
pairwise direction between two cameras is the normalized relative
location vector between them; 5. Recovering the 3D structure
using bundle adjustment [20]. The key for successful 3D recovery
is the accurate estimation of camera parameters, including camera
locations and orientations. These parameters can be misestimated
due to erroneous keypoint matching, which results in inaccurate
estimates of the essential matrices [18]. This paper develops
a robust and theoretically-guaranteed strategy for improving
camera location estimation from corrupted pairwise directions.

1.1. Previous Works
A variety of camera location solvers have been proposed in
the past two decades [18]. The least squares methods [1, 2, 5] are
among the earliest solvers. However, these methods are not robust
to outliers (namely, maliciously corrupted pairwise directions) and

furthermore they typically produce collapsed location estimates.
That is, the estimated camera locations are usually clustered
around few points. The constrained least squares (CLS) method
[21, 22] introduced an anti-collapsed constraint, which makes it
more stable to noise but not outliers. The semidefinite relaxation
(SDR) solver [17] converts the least squares problem into an SDP
formulation with a nonconvex anti-collapse constraint. However,
it is not outliers-robust, and its computation is challenging even
after convex relaxation. Other solvers include the ℓ∞ method
[15] and the Lie-algebraic averaging method [6], but the ℓ∞
norm is sensitive to outliers and [6] suffers from convergence
to local minima and from sensitivity to outliers.
Recent outlier-robust methods have been proposed for camera
location estimation. One class of solvers use outlier detection
algorithms as a preprocessing step to improve their subsequent
estimator. For the different problem of camera rotation estimation,
cycle-consistency constraints were proposed in [15, 24] to
remove outlying relative orientation measurements. For camera
location recovery, the 1DSfM algorithm was proposed in [23] for
removing outlying pairwise directions. It projects the 3D direction
vectors onto 1D, reformulates the cycle-consistency constraints as
an ordering problem and solves it using a heuristic combinatorial
method. However, its convergence to the global minimum is
not guaranteed. Another class of methods directly solve robust
convex optimization problems and include the least unsquared
deviations (LUD) algorithm [16] and the ShapeFit algorithm [7].
Exact recovery guarantees under a certain corruption model were
established for ShapeFit and LUD in [7] and [11] respectively.
An ADMM-accelerated version of ShapeFit, called ShapeKick,
was proposed in [4]. However, it sacrifices accuracy for speed.
A robust formulation for estimating the fundamental matrices
was presented in [19]. However, it may suffer from convergence
to local minima and requires good initialization.

1.2. Contribution of This Work
We propose a novel algorithm for detecting and removing
highly corrupted pairwise directions. We use it as a preprocessing
step for existing location recovery algorithms. Our method
forms a statistic for any pairwise direction between two given
cameras. This statistic estimates the average inconsistency of this
pairwise direction with any two pairwise directions associated
with an additional camera. This inconsistency is based on the

2868

