Unsupervised Deep Generative Adversarial Hashing Network
Kamran Ghasedi Dizaji1 , Feng Zheng1 , Najmeh Sadoughi Nourabadi1 , Yanhua Yang2
Cheng Deng2 , Heng Huang1∗
1
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
Xidian University, Xi’an, Shanxi, China
kag221@pitt.edu, feng.zheng@pitt.edu, najme.sadoughi@gmail.com, yanhyang@xidian.edu.cn
chdeng.xd@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised deep hash functions have not shown satisfactory improvements against their shallow alternatives,
and usually require supervised pretraining to avoid overfitting. In this paper, we propose a new deep unsupervised
hashing function, called HashGAN, which efficiently obtains binary representation of input images without any supervised pretraining. HashGAN consists of three networks,
a generator, a discriminator and an encoder. By sharing
the parameters of the encoder and discriminator, we benefit from the adversarial loss as a data-dependent regularization in training our deep hash function. Moreover, a
novel hashing loss function is introduced for real images,
which results in minimum entropy, uniform frequency, consistent and independent hash bits. Furthermore, we employ
a collaborative loss in training our model, enforcing similar random inputs and hash bits for synthesized images. In
our experiments, HashGAN outperforms the previous unsupervised hash functions in image retrieval and achieves the
state-of-the-art performance in image clustering on benchmark datasets. We also provide an ablation study, showing
the contribution of each component in our loss function.

1. Introduction
Image similarity search in big datasets has gained
tremendous attentions in different applications such as information retrieval, data mining and pattern recognition
[47]. With rapid growth of image data, it has become crucial to find compact and discriminative representations of
images in huge datasets in order to have efficient storage
and real-time matching for millions of images. Hashing
functions provide an effective solution for this problem by
attributing a binary code to each image, and consequently
∗ Corresponding Author. KD, FZ, HH were supported by NSF IIS
1302675, IIS 1344152, DBI 1356628, IIS 1619308, IIS 1633753, NIH
R01 AG049371.

Figure 1: Visualization of HashGAN discriminative representations for a query set on MNIST using TSNE projection.
The real and synthesized data are indicated by colored and
gray circles respectively. Some of the synthesized images
are randomly shown from different parts of space.
reducing the similarity search between high dimensional
images to calculating the Hamming distance between their
binary codes [14, 50, 33, 30]. Typically, hash functions
are carefully designed to extract distinctive patterns from
images relevant to their semantic categorizes, while being
robust to various image transformations such as rotation,
translation, scale, and lightning [32, 55, 22].
Generally, hash functions can be divided into supervised
[33, 52, 16, 30] and unsupervised methods [18, 50, 46, 19].
The supervised hashing methods, especially deep hash
functions [27, 8, 59, 55], showed remarkable performance
in representing input data with binary codes. Although,
these deep hash functions take advantages of deep learning models in representing images with discriminative attributes, they require costly human-annotated labels to train
their large set of parameters. Thus, their performance is
dramatically degraded by getting stuck in bad local minima
when there is not enough labeled data for training.
13664

