Trapping Light for Time of Flight
Ruilin Xu
Columbia University

Mohit Gupta
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Shree K. Nayar
Columbia University

rxu@cs.columbia.edu

mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

nayar@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel imaging method for near-complete,
surround, 3D reconstruction of geometrically complex objects, in a single scan. The key idea is to augment a timeof-flight (ToF) based 3D sensor with a multi-mirror system,
called a light-trap. The shape of the trap is chosen so that
light rays entering it bounce multiple times inside the trap,
thereby visiting every position inside the trap multiple times
from various directions. We show via simulations that this
enables light rays to reach more than 99.9% of the surface
of objects placed inside the trap, even those with strong occlusions, for example, lattice-shaped objects. The ToF sensor provides the path length for each light ray, which, along
with the known shape of the trap, is used to reconstruct the
complete paths of all the rays. This enables performing
dense, surround 3D reconstructions of objects with highly
complex 3D shapes, in a single scan. We have developed a
proof-of-concept hardware prototype consisting of a pulsed
ToF sensor, and a light trap built with planar mirrors. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of the light trap based 3D reconstruction method on a variety of objects with a broad
range of geometry and reflectance properties.

1. Introduction
The ability to measure complete surround 3D shape of
objects has a wide range of applications, from digital modeling of rare specimen and artifacts in museums, to motion capture for digital entertainment and bio-mechanics research, and to medical applications such as 3D scanning of
anatomical features for surgical planning, customized orthopedic casts, and customized prosthetics. Single viewpoint 3D imaging systems can image only a part of an object’s surface at a time. Furthermore, single viewpoint systems have limited capability in dealing with occlusions inherent in geometrically complex objects. These limitations
can be addressed by capturing images from multiple perspectives, either by multiple cameras placed at different locations [27], or by rotating the object mechanically [26, 1].
These systems, while capable of measuring surround 3D

shapes, require synchronization of multiple cameras, sophisticated stitching algorithms, and/or a slow capture process which prohibits scanning of dynamic scenes.
We propose light trap 3D imaging, a novel imaging
technique that enables single-scan, surround and dense 3D
imaging of geometrically complex objects. The proposed
technique uses a time-of-flight (ToF) 3D sensor, and a light
trap built by planar mirrors. The object to be scanned is
placed inside the trap. Light rays emitted by the ToF sensor are trapped within the mirror system, i.e., they bounce
several times within the trap. This creates a diverse set of
light paths that sweep through the entire inside space of the
trap. Furthermore, light rays visit every location inside the
trap from several different directions, thus providing a continuous set of virtual view-points. This ensures that for a
trap with the appropriate shape, light rays can reach more
than 99.9% of the surface of geometrically complex objects with strong occlusions (e.g., a closely spaced lattice
of spheres) and cavities, even after a relatively small number of bounces.
The use of mirrors for 3D reconstruction has been
explored in the past, in conjunction with multi-view
stereo [25] and structured light [12, 20]. The main challenge
with mirror based multi-view methods is the need to solve
the correspondence problem. Reflection of a ray at every
mirror surface creates a new virtual sensor view. Solving
the correspondence problem requires assigning every pixel
to a specific virtual view, i.e., determining the number of
bounces that light entering the pixel has gone through. Unfortunately, this labeling problem is intractable for general
shapes, especially those with self-occlusions, given the exponentially large number of virtual views. In contrast, our
approach does not need to solve the labeling problem. This
is because a ToF sensor is used, which can estimate the path
length of each ray. Since the shape of the light trap is known
a priori, the entire path of each ray can be computed, including the number of bounces. This enables measuring the
3D shape of objects with complex 3D geometry including
strong self-occlusions, from a single scan of a ToF sensor.
Since rays bounce multiple times inside the trap, a ray
emitted from the sensor may visit a scene point multiple
16219

