UV-GAN: Adversarial Facial UV Map Completion for Pose-invariant Face
Recognition
Jiankang Deng, Shiyang Cheng, Niannan Xue, Yuxiang Zhou, Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London
{j.deng16, shiyang.cheng11,n.xue15,yuxiang.zhou10,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Recently proposed robust 3D face alignment methods establish either dense or sparse correspondence between a
3D face model and a 2D facial image. The use of these
methods presents new challenges as well as opportunities
for facial texture analysis. In particular, by sampling the
image using the fitted model, a facial UV can be created.
Unfortunately, due to self-occlusion, such a UV map is always incomplete. In this paper, we propose a framework for
training Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) to
complete the facial UV map extracted from in-the-wild images. To this end, we first gather complete UV maps by fitting a 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) to various multiview
image and video datasets, as well as leveraging on a new
3D dataset with over 3,000 identities. Second, we devise a
meticulously designed architecture that combines local and
global adversarial DCNNs to learn an identity-preserving
facial UV completion model. We demonstrate that by attaching the completed UV to the fitted mesh and generating
instances of arbitrary poses, we can increase pose variations for training deep face recognition/verification models,
and minimise pose discrepancy during testing, which lead
to better performance. Experiments on both controlled and
in-the-wild UV datasets prove the effectiveness of our adversarial UV completion model. We achieve state-of-theart verification accuracy, 94.05%, under the CFP frontalprofile protocol only by combining pose augmentation during training and pose discrepancy reduction during testing.
We will release the first in-the-wild UV dataset (we refer as
WildUV) that comprises of complete facial UV maps from
1,892 identities for research purposes.

1. Introduction
During the past few years, we have witnessed considerable progress in sparse and dense 3D face alignment. Some
of the developments include the use of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to recover 3D facial structure [30, 47, 21],

Figure 1. Adversarial UV completion. After fitting a 3DMM to
the image, we retrieve a 3D face with an incomplete UV map. We
learn a generative model to recover the self-occluded regions. By
rotating a 3D shape with complete UV map, we can generate 2D
faces of arbitrary poses, which can either augment pose variations
during training or narrow pose discrepancy during testing for poseinvariant face recognition.

as well as a robust framework for fitting a 3D Morphable
Model (3DMM) to images in-the-wild [3]. Furthermore,
benchmarks suitable for training sparse 3D face alignment
models have been developed recently [44, 20]. The utilisation of these methods introduces new challenges and opportunities, as far as facial texture is concerned. More specifically, by sampling over the fitted image, a facial UV map
that embeds the manifold of a 3D face as a 2D contiguous atlas can be created. An example of the facial UV map
is shown in Fig. 1. It is evident that such UV map contains a considerable amount of missing pixels due to selfocclusion (filled with random noise in the figure). In this
paper, we tackle the problem of facial UV map completion
from a single image, which has not received considerable
attention. We demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed
UV completion framework by creating synthetic samples to
train deep neural networks for face recognition.
Face representation using Deep Convolutional Neural
Network (DCNN) embeddings is considered the method
of choice for face verification, face clustering, and recognition [35, 32, 26, 34]. However, when it comes to
17093

