Functional Map of the World
Gordon Christie1
Neil Fendley1
James Wilson2
Ryan Mukherjee1
1
The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory 2 DigitalGlobe
{gordon.christie,neil.fendley,ryan.mukherjee}@jhuapl.edu
james.wilson@digitalglobe.com

Abstract
1
We present a new dataset, Functional Map of the World
(fMoW), which aims to inspire the development of machine
learning models capable of predicting the functional purpose of buildings and land use from temporal sequences
of satellite images and a rich set of metadata features.
The metadata provided with each image enables reasoning
about location, time, sun angles, physical sizes, and other
features when making predictions about objects in the image. Our dataset consists of over 1 million images from over
200 countries1 . For each image, we provide at least one
bounding box annotation containing one of 63 categories,
including a “false detection” category. We present an analysis of the dataset along with baseline approaches that reason about metadata and temporal views. Our data, code,
and pretrained models have been made publicly available.

1. Introduction
Satellite imagery presents interesting opportunities for
the development of object classification methods. Most
computer vision (CV) datasets for this task focus on images
or videos that capture brief moments [24, 20]. With satellite
imagery, temporal views of objects are available over long
periods of time. In addition, metadata is available to enable
reasoning beyond visual information. For example, by combining temporal image sequences with timestamps, models
may learn to differentiate office buildings from multi-unit
residential buildings by observing whether or not their parking lots are full during business hours. Models may also be
able to combine certain metadata parameters with observations of shadows to estimate object heights. In addition to
these possibilities, robust models must be able to generalize
to unseen areas around the world that may include different
building materials and unique architectural styles.
Enabling the aforementioned types of reasoning requires
a large dataset of annotated and geographically diverse
1 fMoW contains 1,047,691 images covering 207 of the total 247 ISO
Alpha-3 country codes.

1
FD

…

FD

flooded road

flooded road
2

gsd: 0.5349
utm: 21J
timestamp: 2014-07-08T14:10:29Z
…
off_nadir_angle_dbl: 21.865
…

2
gsd: 0.5087
utm: 21J
timestamp: 2017-03-26T14:04:08Z
…
off_nadir_angle_dbl: 17.407
...

Figure 1: In fMoW, temporal sequences of images, multispectral imagery, metadata, and bounding boxes are provided. In this example, if we only look inside the yellow
box in the right image, we will only see a road and vegetation. On the other hand, if we only see the water in the
left image, then we will potentially predict this to be a lake.
However, by observing both views of this area, we can now
reason that this sequence contains a flooded road.
satellite images. In this work, we present our efforts to collect such a dataset, entitled Functional Map of the World
(fMoW). fMoW has several notable features, including
global diversity, a variable number of temporal images per
scene, multispectral imagery, and metadata associated with
each image. The task posed for our dataset falls in between
object detection and classification. That is, for each temporal sequence of images, at least one bounding box is provided that maps to one of 63 categories, including a “false
detection” (FD) category that represents content not characterized by the other 62 categories. These boxes are intended
to be used as input to a classification algorithm. Figure 1
shows an example.
Collecting a dataset such as fMoW presents some interesting challenges. For example, one consideration would
be to directly use crowdsourced annotations provided by
OpenStreetMap2 (OSM). However, issues doing so include
2 https://www.openstreetmap.org

16172

