MX-LSTM: mixing tracklets and vislets to jointly forecast
trajectories and head poses
Irtiza Hasan1,2 , Francesco Setti1 , Theodore Tsesmelis1,2,3 , Alessio Del Bue3 ,
Fabio Galasso2 , and Marco Cristani1
1

University of Verona (UNIVR)

2

OSRAM GmbH

3

Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT)

{irtiza.hasan,francesco.setti,marco.cristani}@univr.it,
{t.tsesmelis,f.galasso}@osram.com, alessio.delbue@iit.it

Abstract
Recent approaches on trajectory forecasting use tracklets to predict the future positions of pedestrians exploiting Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) architectures. This
paper shows that adding vislets, that is, short sequences
of head pose estimations, allows to increase significantly
the trajectory forecasting performance. We then propose to
use vislets in a novel framework called MX-LSTM, capturing the interplay between tracklets and vislets thanks to a
joint unconstrained optimization of full covariance matrices during the LSTM backpropagation. At the same time,
MX-LSTM predicts the future head poses, increasing the
standard capabilities of the long-term trajectory forecasting approaches. With standard head pose estimators and
an attentional-based social pooling, MX-LSTM scores the
new trajectory forecasting state-of-the-art in all the considered datasets (Zara01, Zara02, UCY, and TownCentre) with
a dramatic margin when the pedestrians slow down, a case
where most of the forecasting approaches struggle to provide an accurate solution.

1. Introduction
Anticipating the trajectories that could occur in the future is important for several reasons: in computer vision,
path forecasting helps the dynamics modeling for target
tracking [40, 47, 48, 59] and behavior understanding [3, 30,
33, 35, 47]; in robotics, autonomous systems should plan
routes that will avoid collisions and be respectful of the human proxemics [13, 21, 31, 36, 53, 62]. Recently, path forecasting has benefited from the introduction of Long Short
Term Memory (LSTM) architectures [3, 22, 26, 50, 51, 55].
All of these approaches use exclusively the (x, y) position coordinates for the prediction, forgetting that humans act and react using their senses to explore the environment, in particular, through the visual information

conveyed by the gaze and inferred by the head pose [8,
9, 11, 14, 15, 16, 27, 39, 46, 49, 54]. In particular,
[8, 11, 14, 15, 16, 27, 39, 54] found that the head pose correlates to the person destination and pathway: these findings
are also supported by a statistical analysis presented in our
paper (Sec. 4).
For the first time this work considers the head pose,
jointly with the positional information, as a cue to perform
forecasting. In particular, tracklets (sequences of (x, y)
coordinates) and vislets, that is, reference points indicating the head pan orientation, are the input of the novel
MiXing LSTM (MX-LSTM), an LSTM-based model that
learns how tracklet and vislet streams are related, mixing
them together in the LSTM hidden state recursion by means
of cross-stream full covariance matrices, optimized during
backpropagation.
MX-LSTM is able to encode how movements of the head
and the people dynamics are connected. For example, it
captures the fact that rotating the head towards a particular
direction may anticipate a trajectory drifting with an acceleration (as in the case of a person leaving a group after a
conversation). This happens thanks to a novel optimization
of the LSTM parameters using a Gaussian full covariance
through an unconstrained log-Cholesky parameterization in
the backpropagation, securing positive semidefinite matrices. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time Gaussian distributions with covariance matrices of order higher
than two are optimized in LSTMs.
Vislet information is also used to build a scene context,
i.e. where are the other people and how they are moving,
by a shared state pooling as in [3, 55], that here is further
improved using the head pose by discarding the people that
an individual cannot see.
As a by-product, MX-LSTM predicts head orientations
too, allowing to reason where people will most probably
look at, providing a fine grained level of long-term prediction never reached so far in crowded scenarios.

6067

