AdaDepth: Unsupervised Content Congruent Adaptation for Depth Estimation
Jogendra Nath Kundu∗
Phani Krishna Uppala∗
Anuj Pahuja
R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
jogendrak@iisc.ac.in, {krishnaphaniiitg, anujpahuja13}@gmail.com, venky@iisc.ac.in

Supervised deep learning methods have shown promising results for the task of monocular depth estimation; but
acquiring ground truth is costly, and prone to noise as well
as inaccuracies. While synthetic datasets have been used
to circumvent above problems, the resultant models do not
generalize well to natural scenes due to the inherent domain
shift. Recent adversarial approaches for domain adaption have performed well in mitigating the differences between the source and target domains. But these methods are
mostly limited to a classification setup and do not scale well
for fully-convolutional architectures. In this work, we propose AdaDepth - an unsupervised domain adaptation strategy for the pixel-wise regression task of monocular depth
estimation. The proposed approach is devoid of above limitations through a) adversarial learning and b) explicit imposition of content consistency on the adapted target representation. Our unsupervised approach performs competitively with other established approaches on depth estimation tasks and achieves state-of-the-art results in a semisupervised setting.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have brought a sudden sense of
optimism for solving challenging computer vision tasks, especially in a data-hungry supervised setup. However, the
generalizability of such models relies heavily on the availability of accurate annotations for massive amount of diverse training samples. To disentangle this dependency, researchers have started focusing towards the effectiveness of
easily obtainable synthetic datasets in training deep neural
models. For problem domains like semantic scene understanding, which face difficulty due to insufficient groundtruth for supervision, use of graphically rendered images
has been a primary alternative. Even though synthetic images look visually appealing, deep models trained on them
∗ Equal contribution

Synthetic Domain

Predicted Depth

Resnet-50
Encoder

AdaDepth

Abstract

Decoder
CNN

Resnet-50
Encoder
Natural Domain

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed domain adaptation method
with input image domain discrepancy (red and blue background)
followed by depth-map prediction. Color coded arrows represent
corresponding RGB image and depth predictions for the synthetictrained encoder (red and pink bordered) and for the adapted encoder (blue bordered); indicating that synthetic-trained model
shows sub-optimal performance on natural images.

often perform sub-optimally when tested on real scenes,
showing lack of generalization [19, 35]. From a probabilistic perspective, considering input samples for a network being drawn from a certain source distribution, the network
can perform sufficiently well on test set only if the test data
is also sampled from the same distribution. Hence, the general approach has been to transfer learned representations
from synthetic to real datasets by fine-tuning the model on
a mixed set of samples [42].
For depth estimation tasks, the ground-truth acquired using devices like Kinect or other depth sensors exhibits noisy
artifacts [40] and hence severely limits the performance of
a supervised depth prediction network. In the widely used
NYU Depth Dataset [34], such cases are addressed by manually inpainting the depth values in the distorted regions.
But the dataset has only a handful of such crafted samples,
mainly because the process is laborious and prone to pixellevel annotation errors. These shortcomings show the need
for a framework that is minimally dependent on scarce clean

2656

