Multiple Granularity Group Interaction Prediction
Taiping Yao∗, Minsi Wang∗ , Bingbing Ni∗†, Huawei Wei, Xiaokang Yang
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science,
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmission,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
sndlytp@sjtu.edu.cn,
nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn,

mswang1994@gmail.com

weihuawei26@gmail.com,

Abstract

xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn

Observed

Prediction
trajectory

Most human activity analysis works (i.e., recognition or
prediction) only focus on a single granularity, i.e., either
modelling global motion based on the coarse level movement such as human trajectories or forecasting future detailed action based on body parts’ movement such as skeleton motion. In contrast, in this work, we propose a multigranularity interaction prediction network which integrates
both global motion and detailed local action. Built on a bidirectional LSTM network, the proposed method possesses
between granularities links which encourage feature sharing as well as cross-feature consistency between both global
and local granularity (e.g., trajectory or local action), and
in turn predict long-term global location and local dynamics of each individual. We validate our method on several
public datasets with promising performance.

1. Introduction
In collective activities, predicting multi-person interaction in multi-granularity including action and trajectory details of each individual is a challenging problem. It has
many applications, such as group activity analysis, social
event prediction and collective activity recognition.
Most works for human motion prediction mainly focus
on a single person in a single granularity. Namely, they
either forecast human activity by analyzing the action information of each person, or predict human movement only
focusing on its trajectory. Previous works [19, 4, 15] utilize
deep RNNs to model human dynamics. These works only
consider local human action, but without global motion, i.e.,
trajectory. Other works [2, 25, 29] only focus on human trajectory prediction in crowd spaces without considering the
information of detailed action. All above works utilize only
∗ Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

trajectory

1

...

T

T+1

T+2

T+3

Figure 1. Given a short video clip, we propose a method to predict future group interaction in multi-granularity, including global
motion (trajectory) and local motion (part movement )

one type of information to independently analyze the complex human activity. However, global and local information (i.e., trajectory and human action) describe the human
activity from different views. Only using one of these information can not comprehensively represent the activity,
especially in details. We believe that considering both granularities, i.e., global and local information, and their interactions, can definitely help action analysis, i.e., prediction.
We present the first study on multi-person interaction
prediction focusing on multi-granularity. To predict the action and trajectory details of each individual involved in
a group activity, we propose a method considering both
global and local granularities, i.e., trajectory and detailed
body part movements. As shown in Figure.1, taking a short
video clip with various number of persons as input, we aim
to predict a sequence of future skeletal motion data and trajectory for all individuals.
This multi-person interaction prediction in a panoramic
view is a challenging task. On the one hand, existing works
only focus on a single granularity, but the information in
single granularity is not sufficient to represent individual

2246

