Multi-Label Zero-Shot Learning with Structured Knowledge Graphs
Chung-Wei Lee1∗, Wei Fang1∗, Chih-Kuan Yeh2 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA2
{b02901088,b02901054,ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw, cjyeh@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel deep learning architecture for multi-label zero-shot learning (ML-ZSL), which
is able to predict multiple unseen class labels for each input instance. Inspired by the way humans utilize semantic knowledge between objects of interests, we propose a
framework that incorporates knowledge graphs for describing the relationships between multiple labels. Our model
learns an information propagation mechanism from the semantic label space, which can be applied to model the interdependencies between seen and unseen class labels. With
such investigation of structured knowledge graphs for visual reasoning, we show that our model can be applied for
solving multi-label classification and ML-ZSL tasks. Compared to state-of-the-art approaches, comparable or improved performances can be achieved by our method.

1. Introduction
Real-world machine learning applications such as image
annotation, music categorization, or medical diagnosis require assigning more than one class label to each input instance. Take image annotation for example, the learning
models have to predict multiple labels like sky, sea, or ship
for a single input image. Different from traditional multiclass methods which only predict one class label for each instance, learning multi-label classification models typically
require additional efforts. More specifically, we not only
need to relate the images with their multiple labels, it is
often desirable to exploit label correlation due to the cooccurrences of the labels of interest.
In general, binary relevance [44] is the simplest solution to multi-label classification problems, which coverts
the original task to multiple disjoint binary classification
problems. However, it lacks the ability to model label
co-occurrences, and thus might not be preferable. Approaches such as [38, 7] take cross-label correlation by as∗ Indicates equal contribution

animal

bird

supersubordinate
postive
negative

eagle

dusk

sunset

urban

sunny

Figure 1. Illustration of structured knowledge graph for modeling
the dependency between labels in the semantic space. We learn
and utilize such graphs for relating the belief for each label, so
that prediction of multiple seen or unseen labels can be achieved.
The ground truth labels are noted in blue.

suming label priors, while label-embedding based methods
[3, 43, 6, 5, 4] project both input images and their labels
onto a latent space to exploit label correlation. Methods that
utilize deep neural networks have also been proposed. BPMLL [50] first proposed a loss function for modeling the dependency across labels, while other recent works proposed
different loss functions [18, 34] or architectures [46, 45, 49]
to further improve performance.
Extending from multi-label classification, multi-label
zero-shot learning (ML-ZSL) is a branch of zero-shot learning (ZSL), which require the prediction of unseen labels
which are not defined during training. Traditional multilabel approaches such as binary relevance or label-prior
based methods obviously cannot be directly applied to MLZSL, since such methods lack the ability to generalize to
unseen class labels. In contrast, approaches that utilize
label representations in the semantic space such as labelembedding methods can be more easily adapted to MLZSL, given label representations of the unseen classes.
Generally, label representations are obtained from humanannotated attribute vectors that describe the labels of interest either in a specific domain, or via distributed word embeddings learned from linguistic resources.
Nevertheless, although recent ML-ZSL methods such as

1576

