Learning Generative ConvNets via Multi-grid Modeling and Sampling
Ruiqi Gao1∗, Yang Lu2∗, Junpei Zhou3 , Song-Chun Zhu1 , Ying Nian Wu1
1 University of California, Los Angeles, USA, 2 Amazon, 3 Zhejiang University, China
ruiqigao@ucla.edu, ylumzn@amazon.com
jpzhou1996@gmail.com, {sczhu, ywu}@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a multi-grid method for learning
energy-based generative ConvNet models of images. For
each grid, we learn an energy-based probabilistic model
where the energy function is defined by a bottom-up convolutional neural network (ConvNet or CNN). Learning such
a model requires generating synthesized examples from the
model. Within each iteration of our learning algorithm, for
each observed training image, we generate synthesized images at multiple grids by initializing the finite-step MCMC
sampling from a minimal 1 × 1 version of the training image. The synthesized image at each subsequent grid is obtained by a finite-step MCMC initialized from the synthesized image generated at the previous coarser grid. After
obtaining the synthesized examples, the parameters of the
models at multiple grids are updated separately and simultaneously based on the differences between synthesized and
observed examples. We show that this multi-grid method
can learn realistic energy-based generative ConvNet models, and it outperforms the original contrastive divergence
(CD) and persistent CD.

1. Introduction
This paper studies the problem of learning energy-based
generative ConvNet models [24, 10, 12, 11, 39, 25, 35,
28, 45, 46, 15] of images. The model is in the form of
a Gibbs distribution where the energy function is defined
by a bottom-up convolutional neural network (ConvNet or
CNN). It can be derived from the commonly used discriminative ConvNet [23, 21] as a direct consequence of the
Bayes rule [4], but unlike the discriminative ConvNet, the
generative ConvNet is endowed with the gift of imagination
in that it can generate images by sampling from the probability distribution of the model. As a result, the generative
ConvNet can be learned in an unsupervised setting without
requiring class labels. The learned model can be used as a
∗ Equal contributions.

Figure 1. Synthesized images at multi-grids. From left to right: 4×
4 grid, 16 × 16 grid and 64 × 64 grid. Synthesized image at each
grid is obtained by 30 step Langevin sampling initialized from the
synthesized image at the previous coarser grid, beginning with the
1 × 1 grid.

prior model for image processing. It can also be turned into
a discriminative ConvNet for classification.
The maximum likelihood learning of the energy-based
generative ConvNet model follows an “analysis by synthesis” scheme: we sample the synthesized examples from
the current model, usually by Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC), and then update the model parameters based on
the difference between the observed training examples and
the synthesized examples. The probability distribution or
the energy function of the learned model is likely to be
multi-modal if the training data are highly varied. The
MCMC may have difficulty traversing different modes and
may take a long time to converge. A simple and popular
modification of the maximum likelihood learning is the contrastive divergence (CD) learning [10], where for each observed training example, we obtain a corresponding synthesized example by initializing a finite-step MCMC from the
observed example. Such a method can be scaled up to large
training datasets using mini-batch training. However, the
synthesized examples may be far from fair samples of the
current model, thus resulting in bias of the learned model
parameters. A modification of CD is persistent CD [42],
19155

