End-to-end Flow Correlation Tracking with Spatial-temporal Attention
Zheng Zhu1,2 , Wei Wu3 , Wei Zou1,2,4 , Junjie Yan3
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
SenseTime Group Limited, Beijing, China
4
TianJin Intelligent Tech.Institute of CASIA Co.,Ltd, Tianjin, China
{zhuzheng2014,wei.zou}@ia.ac.cn {wuwei,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Discriminative correlation filters (DCF) with deep convolutional features have achieved favorable performance in
recent tracking benchmarks. However, most of existing DCF trackers only consider appearance features of current frame, and hardly benefit from motion and inter-frame
information. The lack of temporal information degrades
the tracking performance during challenges such as partial occlusion and deformation. In this paper, we propose
the FlowTrack, which focuses on making use of the rich
flow information in consecutive frames to improve the feature representation and the tracking accuracy. The FlowTrack formulates individual components, including optical
flow estimation, feature extraction, aggregation and correlation filters tracking as special layers in network. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to jointly
train flow and tracking task in deep learning framework.
Then the historical feature maps at predefined intervals are
warped and aggregated with current ones by the guiding of
flow. For adaptive aggregation, we propose a novel spatialtemporal attention mechanism. In experiments, the proposed method achieves leading performance on OTB2013,
OTB2015, VOT2015 and VOT2016.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking, which tracks a specified target in
a changing video sequence automatically, is a fundamental
problem in many computer vision topics such as visual analysis, automatic driving, pose estimation. A core problem of
tracking is how to detect and locate the object accurately
in changing scenarios with occlusions, shape deformation,
illumination variations [42, 20].
Recently, significant attention has been paid to discriminative correlation filters (DCF) based methods for visual
tracking such as KCF [14], SAMF [22], LCT [26], MUSTer

FlowTrack
(Ours)

CCOT

CFNet

CREST

Figure 1: Tracking results comparison of our approach with three state-of-the-art
trackers in the challenging scenarios. Best viewed on color display.

[17], SRDCF [7] and CACF [27]. Most of these methods
use handcrafted features, which hinder their accuracy and
robustness. Inspired by the success of convolution neural
networks (CNN) in object recognition, the visual tracking
community has been focused on the deep trackers that exploit the strength of CNN in recent years. Representative
deep trackers include DeepSRDCF [5], HCF [25], SiamFC
[2] and CFNet [37]. However, most existing trackers only consider appearance features of current frame, and can
hardly benefit from motion and inter-frame information.
The lack of temporal information degrades the tracking performance during challenges such as partial occlusion and
deformation. Although some trackers utilize optical flow
to upgrade performance [36, 11], the flow feature is off-theshelf and not trained end-to-end. These methods do not take
full advantage of flow information.
In this paper, we develop an end-to-end flow correlation
tracking framework (FlowTrack) to utilize both the flow information and appearance features, which improves the feature representation and tracking accuracy. Specifically, we

548

