“Learning-Compression” Algorithms for Neural Net Pruning
Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
EECS, University of California, Merced

Yerlan Idelbayev
EECS, University of California, Merced

http://eecs.ucmerced.edu

http://eecs.ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Pruning a neural net consists of removing weights without degrading its performance. This is an old problem
of renewed interest because of the need to compress ever
larger nets so they can run in mobile devices. Pruning has
been traditionally done by ranking or penalizing weights
according to some criterion (such as magnitude), removing low-ranked weights and retraining the remaining ones.
We formulate pruning as an optimization problem of finding the weights that minimize the loss while satisfying a
pruning cost condition. We give a generic algorithm to
solve this which alternates “learning” steps that optimize a
regularized, data-dependent loss and “compression” steps
that mark weights for pruning in a data-independent way.
Magnitude thresholding arises naturally in the compression
step, but unlike existing magnitude pruning approaches, our
algorithm explores subsets of weights rather than committing irrevocably to a specific subset from the beginning. It is
also able to learn automatically the best number of weights
to prune in each layer of the net without incurring an exponentially costly model selection. Using a single pruninglevel user parameter, we achieve state-of-the-art pruning in
LeNet and ResNets of various sizes.
Pruning neural nets is an old problem that has been revived in recent years. It consists of removing weights and/or
neurons with the goal of reducing the size of the net without
hurting its accuracy, learning automatically the right number of neurons and weights, or avoiding overfitting. Work
in the 90s produced various algorithms that generally operate by using some criterion or penalty to detect unimportant weights or neurons, removing them and retraining the
remaining ones, possibly on the fly while training the net.
The 2010s have shown that neural nets achieve state-of-theart performance in various applications if trained on large
data sets using GPUs and using a large net, having many
layers, neurons and weights. The large size of these nets
(upwards of millions of weights) make them difficult to deploy in limited-computation devices such as mobile phones.
This has brought a renewed interest in pruning and gener-

ally in neural net compression, so that one can obtain small
yet accurate nets. Pruning and compression are possible
because these large nets are hugely overparameterized, and
empirical evidence suggests it is easier to train a large net
and compress it than to train a smaller net from start [28].
Although pruning can be seen as a way to find the right
architecture for a net or to improve generalization, here we
focus on pruning as a way to compress a well-trained, reference net with little accuracy loss (the reference net is also
helpful in telling us what is the best that we can achieve, up
to local optima). Much pruning work uses a heuristic modification of the usual neural net training so that one removes
weights on the fly via some criterion. While this can succeed in practice, it is not clear whether the resulting pruned
net is optimal and in what sense. We take a top-down optimization view: we define the problem mathematically as
an optimization over the net weights that incorporates our
conflicting desires of minimizing the loss (e.g. classification
error) and minimizing the number of weights. Specifically,
we are inspired by recent work [2, 3] that formulates neural net compression in a general way via constrained optimization and shows how this leads to a powerful weight
quantization algorithm. Here, we develop and extend this
approach for the problem of pruning a deep net. In addition, we seek algorithms that are able to identify exactly
which weights should be zero. An example that does not
satisfy this are interior-point methods (one of the best approaches for large-scale problems), since their iterates are
nonzero throughout training and only converge to exact zeros in the limit. The reason to identify the zeros exactly
is that, with many weights, optimizing to high accuracy
is impractical, and this introduces uncertainty about which
nonzero weights should really be zero based on their value.
We consider pruning as a form of compression, where
unpruned weights w ∈ Rn are compressed into sparse
weights θ ∈ Rn satisfying a condition dependent on a
pruning cost function C(θ) which promotes sparsity in the
weight vector θ, such as ℓ0 or ℓ1 , and is mathematically
expressed as either a constraint or a penalty. The result is
a “learning-compression” (LC) algorithm that alternates a
learning step that optimizes the data-dependent loss over
18532

