Direct Shape Regression Networks for End-to-End Face Alignment
Xin Miao1,∗

Xiantong Zhen2,1,∗
Xianglong Liu2
Cheng Deng3
Vassilis Athitsos1
Heng Huang4,1∗
1
University of Texas at Arlington, TX, USA, 2 Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Xidian University, Xi’an, China, 4 University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
xin.miao@mavs.uta.edu, zhenxt@gmail.com, xlliu@nlsde.edu.cn, chdeng.xd@gmail.com
athitsos@uta.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Face alignment has been extensively studied in computer vision community due to its fundamental role in facial
analysis, but it remains an unsolved problem. The major
challenges lie in the highly nonlinear relationship between
face images and associated facial shapes, which is coupled
by underlying correlation of landmarks. Existing methods
mainly rely on cascaded regression, suffering from intrinsic shortcomings, e.g., strong dependency on initialization
and failure to exploit landmark correlations. In this paper, we propose the direct shape regression network (DSRN)
for end-to-end face alignment by jointly handling the aforementioned challenges in a unified framework. Specifically,
by deploying doubly convolutional layer and by using the
Fourier feature pooling layer proposed in this paper, DSRN
efficiently constructs strong representations to disentangle
highly nonlinear relationships between images and shapes;
by incorporating a linear layer of low-rank learning, DSRN
effectively encodes correlations of landmarks to improve
performance. DSRN leverages the strengths of kernels for
nonlinear feature extraction and neural networks for structured prediction, and provides the first end-to-end learning architecture for direct face alignment. Its effectiveness
and generality are validated by extensive experiments on
five benchmark datasets, including AFLW, 300W, CelebA,
MAFL, and 300VW. All empirical results demonstrate that
DSRN consistently produces high performance and in most
cases surpasses state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Face alignment or facial landmark detection has recently
drawn significant attention in computer vision due to its
fundamental role in various applications, including facial
image analysis e.g. face recognition [36, 35], face verifi∗ Corresponding Authors.

cation [45], and facial attribute analysis [2]. Face alignment is the task of estimating a set of predefined key points,
known as landmarks, providing the semantic description
of facial shapes. Face alignment has been studied extensively in recent years, but several aspects of it remain unresolved. Its great challenges stem from the nonlinear relationship between input images and output shapes, since
images are usually represented by low-level features while
facial shapes contain high-level semantic meanings. Meanwhile, landmarks are spatially correlated, which can also be
exploited for more robust and accurate alignment.
Cascaded regression has been a popular method for face
alignment and made significant progress in the past decades.
Nevertheless, the cascaded regression model suffers from
intrinsic shortcomings. It is an indirect method and progressively estimates shape increments in an iterative way,
with results highly dependent on initialization. Therefore,
the final solution of cascade models is prone to getting
trapped in local optima when the initialized shape is far
from the true shape. Cascade models rely on local feature descriptors, and only the regions around landmarks are
passed through the feature extractor. As a result, the semantic information of faces and correlations between landmarks are largely overlooked. Moreover, cascaded models extract handcrafted features, e.g., SIFT [19], which fail
to leverage the strength of convolutional neural networks.
In addition, those local descriptors need to be calculated in
each iteration based on updated shapes, which can be timeconsuming and makes it hard to integrate feature learning
into one single architecture for end-to-end learning.
In this paper, we propose direct shape regression networks (DRSN) to directly predict facial landmarks from images without relying on cascaded regression. DSRN tackles
the aforementioned challenges by jointly modeling inputoutput relationships and landmark correlations in a compact end-to-end learning architecture which is composed of
one doubly convolutional layer, one Fourier feature pooling
layer, and one low-rank learning layer as illustrated in Fig 1.
4321
5040

