Radially-Distorted Conjugate Translations
James Pritts1

Zuzana Kukelova1

Visual Recognition Group, CTU in Prague1

Viktor Larsson2

Ondřej Chum1

Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University2

Abstract
This paper introduces the first minimal solvers that
jointly solve for affine-rectification and radial lens distortion from coplanar repeated patterns. Even with imagery
from moderately distorted lenses, plane rectification using
the pinhole camera model is inaccurate or invalid. The proposed solvers incorporate lens distortion into the camera
model and extend accurate rectification to wide-angle imagery, which is now common from consumer cameras. The
solvers are derived from constraints induced by the conjugate translations of an imaged scene plane, which are integrated with the division model for radial lens distortion.
The hidden-variable trick with ideal saturation is used to
reformulate the constraints so that the solvers generated by
the Gröbner-basis method are stable, small and fast.
Rectification and lens distortion are recovered from either one conjugately translated affine-covariant feature or
two independently translated similarity-covariant features.
The proposed solvers are used in a RANSAC-based estimator, which gives accurate rectifications after few iterations.
The proposed solvers are evaluated against the state-ofthe-art and demonstrate significantly better rectifcations on
noisy measurements. Qualitative results on diverse imagery
demonstrate high-accuracy undistortion and rectification.

1. Introduction
Scene-plane rectification is used in many classic
computer-vision tasks, including single-view 3D reconstruction, camera calibration, grouping coplanar symmetries, and image editing [26, 21, 15]. In particular, the affine
rectification of a scene plane transforms the camera’s principal plane so that it is parallel to the scene plane. This restores the affine invariants of the imaged scene plane, which
include parallelism of lines and translational symmetries
[9, 21]. There is only an affine transformation between the
affine-rectified imaged scene plane and its real-world counterpart. The removal of the effects of perspective imaging is
helpful to understanding the geometry of the scene plane.
Wide-angle imagery that has significant lens distortion

Figure 1: Input (top left) is a distorted view of a scene plane,
and the outputs (top right, bottom) are the the undistorted
and rectified scene plane. The method is fully automatic.

is common since consumer photography is now dominated
by mobile-phone and GoPro-type cameras. High-accuracy
rectification from wide-angle imagery is not possible with
only pinhole camera models [11, 25]. Lens distortion can be
estimated by performing a camera calibration apriori, but a
fully automated method is desirable.
Several state-of-the-art planar-rectification methods assume a pinhole camera model, which ignores the effect of
lens distortion [1, 4, 15, 27]. Pritts et al. [21] attempt to upgrade the pinhole camera model with radial lens distortion
by giving an initial guess of the scene plane’s rectification
that is consistent with a pinhole camera to a non-linear optimization that incorporates a lens-distortion model. However, even with relaxed thresholds, a robust estimator (i.e.
RANSAC ) will discard measurements that capture the most
extreme effects of lens distortion, especially around the
boundary of the image, since these measurements are not
consistent with the pinhole-camera assumption. Thus, failing to account for lens distortion while labeling the measurements as outliers, as done during a RANSAC iteration,
11993

