Deep Video Super-Resolution Network Using
Dynamic Upsampling Filters Without Explicit Motion Compensation
Younghyun Jo

Seoung Wug Oh

Jaeyeon Kang

Seon Joo Kim

Yonsei University

Abstract
Video super-resolution (VSR) has become even more important recently to provide high resolution (HR) contents
for ultra high definition displays. While many deep learning based VSR methods have been proposed, most of them
rely heavily on the accuracy of motion estimation and compensation. We introduce a fundamentally different framework for VSR in this paper. We propose a novel end-to-end
deep neural network that generates dynamic upsampling filters and a residual image, which are computed depending
on the local spatio-temporal neighborhood of each pixel to
avoid explicit motion compensation. With our approach, an
HR image is reconstructed directly from the input image using the dynamic upsampling filters, and the fine details are
added through the computed residual. Our network with the
help of a new data augmentation technique can generate
much sharper HR videos with temporal consistency, compared with the previous methods. We also provide analysis
of our network through extensive experiments to show how
the network deals with motions implicitly.

1. Introduction
The goal of super-resolution (SR) is to generate a highresolution (HR) image or video from its corresponding lowresolution (LR) image or video. SR is widely used in many
fields ranging from medical imaging [7] to satellite imaging [2] and surveillance [38]. With the advances in the display technology, the video super-resolution (VSR) for LR
videos are becoming more important as the ultra high definition televisions target 4K (3840×2160) and 8K resolution
(7680 × 4320), but the contents that match such high resolution are still scarce.
With the success of deep learning in computer vision
as in image classification [19] and image segmentation
[25], the deep learning based single-image super-resolution
(SISR) methods have emerged [3, 17, 31, 21, 33, 20, 35, 30].
These methods are showing state-of-the-art performances
in terms of the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and the

GT

VSRnet

Ours

Figure 1. ×4 VSR for the scene ferriswheel. To visualize the temporal consistency in 2D, we also plot the transition of the dotted
orange horizontal scanline over time in the orange box with the
x−t axis. We can observe that our method produces much sharper
and temporally consistent HR frames compared with VSRnet [16].

structural similarity index (SSIM) [37].
A straightforward way to perform VSR is to run SISR
frame by frame. However, since the SISR methods do not
consider the temporal relationship between frames, there is
a high possibility that consecutive frames are not connected
naturally, resulting in the flickering artifact.
Traditional VSR (or multi-image super-resolution) algorithms take multiple LR frames as inputs and output HR
frames by taking into account subpixel motions between the
neighboring LR frames [28, 4, 23, 26]. All deep learning
based VSR methods follow similar steps and are composed
of two steps: a motion estimation and compensation procedure followed by an upsampling process [16, 22, 1, 24, 34].
One problem with this two-step approach is that the results
rely heavily on the accurate motion estimation. Another
potential problem with this type of approach is that the HR
output frame is produced by mixing the values from multiple motion compensated input LR frames through a convolutional neural networks (CNN), which can lead to a blurry
output HR frame.

3224

