Future Frame Prediction for Anomaly Detection – A New Baseline
Wen Liu∗, Weixin Luo∗, Dongze Lian, Shenghua Gao†
ShanghaiTech University
{liuwen, luowx, liandz, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

/ŶƉƵƚ
‫ܫ‬ଵ ǡ ‫ܫ‬ଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ‫ܫ‬௧

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection in videos refers to the identification
of events that do not conform to expected behavior [3]. It
is an important task because of its applications in video
surveillance. However, it is extremely challenging because
abnormal events are unbounded in real applications, and it
is almost infeasible to gather all kinds of abnormal events
and tackle the problem with a classification method.
∗ The authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author.

'ƌŽƵŶĚƚƌƵƚŚ
‫ܫ‬௧ାଵ

ĂďŶŽƌŵĂů

Anomaly detection in videos refers to the identification of
events that do not conform to expected behavior. However,
almost all existing methods tackle the problem by minimizing the reconstruction errors of training data, which cannot guarantee a larger reconstruction error for an abnormal event. In this paper, we propose to tackle the anomaly
detection problem within a video prediction framework. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that leverages the difference between a predicted future frame and
its ground truth to detect an abnormal event. To predict a
future frame with higher quality for normal events, other
than the commonly used appearance (spatial) constraints
on intensity and gradient, we also introduce a motion (temporal) constraint in video prediction by enforcing the optical flow between predicted frames and ground truth frames
to be consistent, and this is the first work that introduces
a temporal constraint into the video prediction task. Such
spatial and motion constraints facilitate the future frame
prediction for normal events, and consequently facilitate
to identify those abnormal events that do not conform the
expectation. Extensive experiments on both a toy dataset
and some publicly available datasets validate the effectiveness of our method in terms of robustness to the uncertainty in normal events and the sensitivity to abnormal
events. All codes are released in https://github.
com/StevenLiuWen/ano_pred_cvpr2018.

WƌĞĚŝĐƚŝŽŶ
‫ܫ‬መ௧ାଵ

ŶŽƌŵĂů

Abstract

Figure 1. Some predicted frames and their ground truth in normal and abnormal events. Here the region is walking zone. When
pedestrians are walking in the area, the frames can be well predicted. While for some abnormal events (a bicycle intrudes/ two
men are fighting), the predictions are blurred and with color distortion. Best viewed in color.

Lots of efforts have been made for anomaly detection [14][22][25]. Of all these work, the idea of feature
reconstruction for normal training data is a commonly used
strategy. Further, based on the features used, all existing
methods can be roughly categorized into two categories: i)
hand-crafted features based methods [6][22]. They represent each video with some hand-crafted features including
appearance and motion ones. Then a dictionary is learnt to
reconstruct normal events with small reconstruction errors.
It is expected that the features corresponding to abnormal
events would have larger reconstruction errors. But since
the dictionary is not trained with abnormal events and it is
usually overcomplete, we cannot guarantee the expectation.
ii) deep learning based methods [5][14][28]. They usually
learn a deep neural network with an Auto-Encoder way and
they enforce it to reconstruct normal events with small reconstruction errors. But the capacity of deep neural network
is high, and larger reconstruction errors for abnormal events
do not necessarily happen. Thus, we can see that almost all
training data reconstruction based methods cannot guarantee the finding of abnormal events.
It is interesting that even though anomaly is defined as

6536

