A Biresolution Spectral framework for Product Quantization
Lopamudra Mukherjee
University of Wisconsin-Whitewater

Sathya N. Ravi
University of Wisconsin-Madison

mukherjl@uww.edu

ravi5@wisc.edu

Jiming Peng
University of Houston

Vikas Singh
University of Wisconsin-Madison

jopeng@uh.edu

vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
Product quantization (PQ) (and its variants) has been effectively used to encode high-dimensional data into compact
codes for many problems in vision. In principle, PQ decomposes the given data into a number of lower-dimensional
subspaces where the quantization proceeds independently
for each subspace. While the original PQ approach does
not explicitly optimize for these subspaces, later proposals
have argued that the performance tends to benefit significantly if such subspaces are chosen in an optimal manner. Despite such consensus, existing approaches in the
literature diverge in terms of which specific properties of
these subspaces are desirable and how one should proceed
to solve/optimize them. Nonetheless, despite the empirical
support, there is less clarity regarding the theoretical properties that underlie these experimental benefits for quantization problems in general. In this paper, we study the quantization problem in the setting where subspaces are orthogonal and show that this problem is intricately related to a
specific type of spectral decomposition of the data. This insight not only opens the door to a rich body of work in spectral analysis, but also leads to distinct computational benefits. Our resultant biresolution spectral formulation captures both the subspace projection error as well as the quantization error within the same framework. After a reformulation, the core steps of our algorithm involve a simple
eigen decomposition step, which can be solved efficiently.
We show that our method performs very favorably against
a number of state of the art methods on standard data sets.

1. Introduction
Nearest neighbor search is a fundamental problem in computer vision [32, 25]. With a rapid increase in sizes of the
datasets/repositories that numerous end applications in vision leverage towards various tasks, mechanisms that of-

fer accurate retrieval of nearest neighbors (approximately)
from massive datasets are seeing renewed interest [41, 21]
— both in terms of their theoretical/empirical properties as
well as how such schemes can be translated to novel architectures (such as small form factor devices). At the high
level, the goal is to retrieve (one or more) nearest neighbors N (x) = argminy D(x, y) for a query image x, where
D(·, ·) is a placeholder function for measuring distances (or
similarities) between a pair of images. The classical strategy is to use hashing-based ideas from theoretical computer
science, specifically, Euclidean Locality sensitive hashing
(LSH) [9], which offers nice performance guarantees. However, there is a general consensus within the vision community that empirically, certain simple schemes that are informed by the distribution of the data, such as hierarchical k-means often work better [34, 40]. These considerations have led to the development of a parallel body of work
on high dimensional indexing schemes in computer vision
that are better tailored to the requirements posed by problems/applications we encounter in practice.
A widely used technique that emerged in computer vision,
partly out of the issues described above, is vector quantization [33, 18]. The basic premise here is that highdimensional vectorial representations of the image (derived
from certain upstream feature extraction methods) can be
encoded into a compact code and indexed. Then, when provided a query vector, we similarly quantize it into a codeword – the distances between codewords thereby serve as a
surrogate for exhaustively calculating the original distances.
The idea hits a sweet spot balancing retrieval performance
and efficiency. For instance, mapping the distributions into
a short code keeps the memory footprint small, enabling one
to index/query from billion-sized dataset stored within the
main memory. Second, if the codeword embedding is sensible, we obtain sizable gains in calculating distances, with a
minor dependence on the ambient dimensionality d. When
used together with inverted indexing [4], we can perform
13329

