CNN based Learning using Reflection and Retinex Models for Intrinsic Image
Decomposition
Anil S. Baslamisli, Hoang-An Le, Theo Gevers
Informatics Institute
University of Amsterdam
{a.s.baslamisli, h.a.le, th.gevers}@uva.nl

Abstract
Most of the traditional work on intrinsic image decomposition rely on deriving priors about scene characteristics.
On the other hand, recent research use deep learning models as in-and-out black box and do not consider the wellestablished, traditional image formation process as the basis of their intrinsic learning process. As a consequence,
although current deep learning approaches show superior
performance when considering quantitative benchmark results, traditional approaches are still dominant in achieving
high qualitative results.
In this paper, the aim is to exploit the best of the two
worlds. A method is proposed that (1) is empowered by
deep learning capabilities, (2) considers a physics-based
reflection model to steer the learning process, and (3) exploits the traditional approach to obtain intrinsic images
by exploiting reflectance and shading gradient information.
The proposed model is fast to compute and allows for the
integration of all intrinsic components. To train the new
model, an object centered large-scale datasets with intrinsic ground-truth images are created.
The evaluation results demonstrate that the new model
outperforms existing methods. Visual inspection shows that
the image formation loss function augments color reproduction and the use of gradient information produces sharper
edges.
Datasets, models and higher resolution images are available at https://ivi.fnwi.uva.nl/cv/retinet.

1. Introduction
Intrinsic image decomposition is the process of separating an image into its formation components such as
reflectance (albedo) and shading (illumination) [2]. Reflectance is the color of the object, invariant to camera viewpoint and illumination conditions, whereas shading, depen-

dent on camera viewpoint and object geometry, consists of
different illumination effects, such as shadows, shading and
inter-reflections. Using intrinsic images, instead of the original images, can be beneficial for many computer vision algorithms. For instance, for shape-from-shading algorithms,
the shading images contain important visual cues to recover
geometry, while for segmentation and detection algorithms,
reflectance images can be beneficial as they are independent
of confounding illumination effects. Furthermore, intrinsic
images are used in a wide range of computational photography applications, such as material recoloring [42, 26], relighting [3, 10], retexturing [6, 41] and stylization [42].
Most of the pioneering work on intrinsic image decomposition, such as [1, 2, 38, 40], rely on deriving priors
about scene characteristics to understand the physical interactions of objects and lighting in a scene. In general,
an optimization approach is taken imposing constraints on
reflectance and shading intrinsics for a pixel-wise decomposition. [20] introduces the well-known Retinex algorithm
which is based on the assumption that larger gradients in an
image usually correspond to reflectance changes, whereas
smaller gradients are more likely to correspond to illumination changes. In addition to the traditional work, more
recent research focuses on using deep learning (e.g. CNN)
models [27, 35]. However, these deep learning-based methods do not consider the well-established, traditional image
formation process as the basis of their intrinsic learning
process. Deep learning is used as in-and-out black box,
which may lead to inadequate or restricted results. Furthermore, the contribution and physical interpretation of what
the network learned is often difficult to interpret. As a consequence, although current deep learning approaches show
superior performance when considering quantitative benchmark results, traditional approaches are still dominant in
achieving high qualitative results. Therefore, the goal of
this paper is to exploit the best of the two worlds. A method
is proposed that (1) is empowered by deep learning capabilities, (2) considers a physics-based reflection model to steer
the learning process, and (3) exploits the traditional ap-

6674

