RayNet: Learning Volumetric 3D Reconstruction with Ray Potentials
Despoina Paschalidou1,5 Ali Osman Ulusoy2 Carolin Schmitt1 Luc van Gool3 Andreas Geiger1,4
1
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
2
Microsoft 3 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich & KU Leuven
4
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zürich
5
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of reconstructing a dense 3D model using images captured from different views. Recent methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNN) allow learning the entire task from
data. However, they do not incorporate the physics of
image formation such as perspective geometry and occlusion. Instead, classical approaches based on Markov Random Fields (MRF) with ray-potentials explicitly model these
physical processes, but they cannot cope with large surface
appearance variations across different viewpoints. In this
paper, we propose RayNet, which combines the strengths
of both frameworks. RayNet integrates a CNN that learns
view-invariant feature representations with an MRF that explicitly encodes the physics of perspective projection and
occlusion. We train RayNet end-to-end using empirical risk
minimization. We thoroughly evaluate our approach on
challenging real-world datasets and demonstrate its benefits over a piece-wise trained baseline, hand-crafted models
as well as other learning-based approaches.

(a) Input Image

(b) Ground-truth

(c) Ulusoy et al. [35]

(d) Hartmann et al. [14]

(e) RayNet

1. Introduction
Passive 3D reconstruction is the task of estimating a 3D
model from a collection of 2D images taken from different
viewpoints. This is a highly ill-posed problem due to large
ambiguities introduced by occlusions and surface appearance variations across different views.
Several recent works have approached this problem by
formulating the task as inference in a Markov random field
(MRF) with high-order ray potentials that explicitly model
the physics of the image formation process along each viewing ray [19, 33, 35]. The ray potential encourages consistency between the pixel recorded by the camera and the
color of the first visible surface along the ray. By accumulating these constrains from each input camera ray, these

Figure 1: Multi-View 3D Reconstruction. By combining
representation learning with explicit physical constraints
about perspective geometry and multi-view occlusion relationships, our approach (e) produces more accurate results
than entirely model-based (c) or learning-based methods
that ignore such physical constraints (d).
approaches estimate a 3D model that is globally consistent
13897

