CSGNet: Neural Shape Parser for Constructive Solid Geometry
Gopal Sharma

Rishabh Goyal Difan Liu Evangelos Kalogerakis
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Subhransu Maji

{gopalsharma,risgoyal,dliu,kalo,smaji}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
We present a neural architecture that takes as input a 2D or
3D shape and outputs a program that generates the shape.
The instructions in our program are based on constructive solid geometry principles, i.e., a set of boolean operations on shape primitives defined recursively. Bottomup techniques for this shape parsing task rely on primitive
detection and are inherently slow since the search space
over possible primitive combinations is large. In contrast,
our model uses a recurrent neural network that parses the
input shape in a top-down manner, which is significantly
faster and yields a compact and easy-to-interpret sequence
of modeling instructions. Our model is also more effective
as a shape detector compared to existing state-of-the-art detection techniques. We finally demonstrate that our network
can be trained on novel datasets without ground-truth program annotations through policy gradient techniques.

Figure 1. Our shape parser produces a compact program that
generates an input 2D or 3D shape. On top is an input image of
2D shape, its program and the underlying parse tree where primitives are combined with boolean operations. On the bottom is an
input voxelized 3D shape, the induced program, and the resulting
shape from its execution.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in generative models of 2D or 3D shapes, especially through
the use of deep neural networks as image or shape priors [28, 9, 12, 16]. However, current methods are limited
to the generation of low-level shape representations consisting of pixels, voxels, or points. Human designers, on the
other hand, rarely model shapes as a collection of these individual elements. For example, in vector graphics modeling
packages (Inkscape, Illustrator, and so on), shapes are often
created through higher-level primitives, such as parametric
curves (e.g., Bezier curves) or basic shapes (e.g., circles,
polygons), as well as operations acting on these primitives,
such as boolean operations, deformations, extrusions, and
so on. The reason for choosing higher-level primitives is not
incidental. Describing shapes with as few as possible primitives and operations is highly desirable for designers since it
is compact, makes subsequent editing easier, and is perhaps
better at capturing aspects of human shape perception such
as view invariance, compositionality, and symmetry [5].

The goal of our work is to develop an algorithm that parses
shapes into their constituent modeling primitives and operations within the framework of Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) modeling [29] as seen in Figure 1. This poses a
number of challenges. First, the number of primitives and
operations is not the same for all shapes i.e., our output does
not have constant dimensionality, as in the case of pixel arrays, voxel grids, or fixed point sets. Second, the order of
these operations matters. Figure 1 demonstrates an example
where a complex object is created through boolean operations that combine simpler objects. If one performs a small
change e.g., swap two operations, the resulting object becomes entirely different. From this aspect, the shape modeling process could be thought of as a visual program i.e.,
an ordered set of modeling instructions. Finally, a challenge
is that we would like to learn an efficient parser that generates a compact program (e.g., with the fewest instructions)
without relying on a vast number of shapes annotated with
their programs for a target domain.
15515

