Hybrid Camera Pose Estimation
Federico Camposeco1 Andrea Cohen1 Marc Pollefeys1,2 Torsten Sattler1
1
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
Microsoft
{fede, acohen, pomarc, tsattler}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to solve the pose estimation problem of calibrated pinhole and generalized cameras w.r.t. a
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) model by leveraging both 2D3D correspondences as well as 2D-2D correspondences.
Traditional approaches either focus on the use of 2D3D matches, known as structure-based pose estimation
or solely on 2D-2D matches (structure-less pose estimation). Absolute pose approaches are limited in their performance by the quality of the 3D point triangulations as
well as the completeness of the 3D model. Relative pose
approaches, on the other hand, while being more accurate, also tend to be far more computationally costly and
often return dozens of possible solutions. This work aims to
bridge the gap between these two paradigms. We propose
a new RANSAC-based approach that automatically chooses
the best type of solver to use at each iteration in a datadriven way. The solvers chosen by our RANSAC can range
from pure structure-based or structure-less solvers, to any
possible combination of hybrid solvers (i.e. using both types
of matches) in between. A number of these new hybrid minimal solvers are also presented in this paper. Both synthetic
and real data experiments show our approach to be as accurate as structure-less approaches, while staying close to
the efficiency of structure-based methods.

1. Introduction
Camera pose estimation, i.e., estimating the position and
orientation of a given image, is a central step in 3D computer vision approaches such as SfM [1, 11, 25], Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [7], and visual
localization [4,18,22,27,35]. In addition, camera pose estimation plays an important role in applications such as selfdriving cars [9] and augmented reality [19].
The traditional approach to camera pose estimation is
to estimate the pose from a set of 2D-3D matches between pixels in a query image and 3D points in a scene
model [10]. The pose is typically computed by applying a
structure-based minimal pose solver inside a RANSAC [8]

Figure 1. Visualization of 2D-2D matches (pink) and 2D-3D
matches (blue) used by one of our hybrid pose solvers. The query
camera is represented in red and SfM cameras in green.

loop. There is a large body of work on absolute pose
estimation from n 2D-3D matches, a problem typically
referred to as n-point perspective pose (PnP). Solutions
to this problem exist for calibrated [8, 10], partially calibrated [31, 34], and uncalibrated cameras [12]. When the
3D model is obtained via SfM, as is typical for visual localization [4, 18, 22, 27, 35], not all 3D points will be accurately triangulated, leading to potentially inaccurate pose
estimates. An alternative to pose estimation from 2D-3D
matches is structure-less pose resectioning [36]: The pose
of a query image is estimated from a set of 2D-2D correspondences between the query and two or more images in
the reconstruction. While this approach avoids the problem of inaccurately triangulated points and incompleteness
of the model, structure-less pose solvers are significantly
less computationally efficient (up to orders of magnitude
slower).
The availability of both structure-based and structureless camera pose estimation techniques leads to a set of interesting questions: Are they mutually exclusive, i.e., is one
always preferable over the other, or is there value in using
both 2D-3D and 2D-2D matches for pose estimation? Is it
best to use ”pure” solvers, i.e., solvers that use either 2D3D or 2D-2D correspondences, or do hybrid solvers (c.f .
Fig. 1) using both type of matches improve pose estimation
performance? Should one decide prior to RANSAC which
1136

