CLEAR: Cumulative LEARning for One-Shot One-Class Image Recognition
Jedrzej Kozerawski
Matthew Turk
University of California, Santa Barbara
{jkozerawski, mturk}@ucsb.edu

Abstract
This work addresses the novel problem of one-shot oneclass classification. The goal is to estimate a classification
decision boundary for a novel class based on a single image
example. Our method exploits transfer learning to model
the transformation from a representation of the input, extracted by a Convolutional Neural Network, to a classification decision boundary. We use a deep neural network to
learn this transformation from a large labelled dataset of
images and their associated class decision boundaries generated from ImageNet, and then apply the learned decision
boundary to classify subsequent query images. We tested
our approach on several benchmark datasets and significantly outperformed the baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Thanks to a combination of advanced machine learning
algorithms and access to an abundance of annotated data
sets, object recognition tasks have become easier to solve
and can achieve very high accuracy [28, 21, 17, 18]. However, in many cases there may not be enough data to sufficiently train a classifier for a given object category. There
are many reasons why this might be the case, such as data
being unavailable, prohibitively expensive, or time consuming to obtain. Data availability forces a change in the
methodology for classification tasks and has been a major
factor in the need for novel approaches to recognition.
Table 1 presents a division of classification tasks based
on the amount of available positive and negative examples
in the training data. Reading from the top left to the bottom
right, the first is presented the optimal recognition problem
setting where we have access to an abundance of positive
and negative examples to train on [18]. To the right is the
one-shot/few-shot scenario, which occurs when we want to
quickly learn a novel category with only one or a few examples [19, 15, 7, 37]. Next is the zero-shot classification problem, where we learn to recognize an object without seeing
any examples, usually by utilizing the verbal description or
some additional attribute information. This subset of clas-

sification problems is quickly gaining the attention of the
research community [30, 27, 11, 13, 20, 16, 6, 22, 8]. Another significant direction is one-class classification, where
we have access to a large number of positive examples but
only a handful of (or no) negatives. This is the outlier detection problem, illustrated, for example, by the problem of
detecting when a nuclear power plant is not working appropriately, while having only data describing its normal operation. It also has been widely studied [29, 32, 33, 23, 35].
Both one-shot and one-class classification have received
much attention from the machine learning community [1,
19, 14], but the intersection of these scenarios – the oneshot one-class (OSOC) problem – remains rather unexplored, as does the overlap of the zero-shot and one-class
(ZSOC) problems. This work focuses on tackling the particular problem of one-shot one-class (OSOC) classification,
which occurs when it is necessary to build a classifier for a
novel category having only a single example and no negatives.
The motivation behind this work is based on the way
people learn new skills. While “practice makes perfect” –
i.e., repetition or multiple attempts at the same task lead
to mastering it – there is a additional aspect of learning: the
more similar skills you already know, the easier it is to grasp
a new one. For example, in learning foreign languages, a
third language is usually easier to master than the second
one, as we are more experienced in the action of learning itself – this is relevant to the concept of learning-to-learn [36].
In a similar fashion, we should be able to impart to an image recognition system the ability to improve its recognition
skill – the more object categories it has already learned, the
better and faster it will learn the next category.
Data availability
Negatives

Many
None

Many
Recognition
One-class

Positives
One
One-shot
OSOC

Zero
Zero-shot
ZSOC

Table 1: Taxonomy of classification problems based on the
amount of available training data

3446

