Disentangling 3D Pose in A Dendritic CNN
for Unconstrained 2D Face Alignment
Amit Kumar
Rama Chellappa
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, CFAR and UMIACS
University of Maryland-College Park,USA
akumar14@umiacs.umd.edu, rama@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Heatmap regression has been used for landmark localization for quite a while now. Most of the methods use a
very deep stack of bottleneck modules for heatmap classification stage, followed by heatmap regression to extract the
keypoints. In this paper, we present a single dendritic CNN,
termed as Pose Conditioned Dendritic Convolution Neural Network (PCD-CNN), where a classification network is
followed by a second and modular classification network,
trained in an end to end fashion to obtain accurate landmark points. Following a Bayesian formulation, we disentangle the 3D pose of a face image explicitly by conditioning the landmark estimation on pose, making it different from multi-tasking approaches. Extensive experimentation shows that conditioning on pose reduces the localization error by making it agnostic to face pose. The proposed
model can be extended to yield variable number of landmark points and hence broadening its applicability to other
datasets. Instead of increasing depth or width of the network, we train the CNN efficiently with Mask-Softmax Loss
and hard sample mining to achieve upto 15% reduction in
error compared to state-of-the-art methods for extreme and
medium pose face images from challenging datasets including AFLW, AFW, COFW and IBUG.

1. Introduction
Face alignment or facial landmark estimation is the task
of estimating keypoints such as eye-corners, mouth corners etc. on a face image. As shown in [5], accurate
face alignment improves the performance of a face verification system, as well as other applications such as 3D
face modelling, face animation etc. Currently, face alignment is dominated by regression-based approaches which
yield a fixed number of points. Explicit Shape Regression
(ESR) [13] and Supervised Descent Method (SDM) [48]
have addressed the problem of face alignment for faces in

Figure 1: A bird’s eye view of the proposed method. Dendritic
CNN is explicitly conditioned on 3D pose. A generic CNN is used
for auxiliary tasks such as fine-grained localization or occlusion
detection.

medium pose. To achieve sub-pixel accuracy on such face
images, coarse to fine approaches have also been proposed
in the literature [31, 52, 54]. It is evident that such methods perform poorly on face images with extreme pose, expression and lighting mainly because they are dependent on
bounding box and mean face shape intializations. On the
other hand, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
achieved breakthroughs in many vision tasks including the
task of keypoints estimation [35]. Lately, researchers have
used heatmap regression extensively for the task of face
alignment and pose estimation using an Encoder-Decoder
architecture in the form of Convolution-Deconvolution Networks [14]. Most of the approaches in the literature perform
heatmap classification followed by regression [6, 9–11]. In
this paper, we propose the Pose Conditioned Dendritic Convolution Neural Network (PCD-CNN); which models the
dendritic structure of facial landmarks using a single CNN
(see Figure 1).
Shape constraint: Methods such as ESR [13] and SDM
[48] impose the shape constraint by jointly regressing over
all the points. Such a shape constraint cannot be applied
to a profile face as a consequence of extreme pose leading
to a variable number of points. Tree structured part models
(TSPM) [58] by Zhu et al. had two major limitations associated with it; namely pre-determined models and slower run1430

