Cascaded Pyramid Network for Multi-Person Pose Estimation
Yilun Chen∗ Zhicheng Wang∗ Yuxiang Peng1 Zhiqiang Zhang2 Gang Yu Jian Sun
1
Tsinghua University 2 HuaZhong University of Science and Technology
Megvii Inc. (Face++), {chenyilun, wangzhicheng, pyx, zhangzhiqiang, yugang, sunjian}@megvii.com
Abstract
The topic of multi-person pose estimation has been
largely improved recently, especially with the development
of convolutional neural network. However, there still exist
a lot of challenging cases, such as occluded keypoints, invisible keypoints and complex background, which cannot be
well addressed. In this paper, we present a novel network
structure called Cascaded Pyramid Network (CPN) which
targets to relieve the problem from these “hard” keypoints.
More specifically, our algorithm includes two stages: GlobalNet and RefineNet. GlobalNet is a feature pyramid network which can successfully localize the “simple” keypoints like eyes and hands but may fail to precisely recognize the occluded or invisible keypoints. Our RefineNet
tries explicitly handling the “hard” keypoints by integrating all levels of feature representations from the GlobalNet together with an online hard keypoint mining loss. In
general, to address the multi-person pose estimation problem, a top-down pipeline is adopted to first generate a set
of human bounding boxes based on a detector, followed by
our CPN for keypoint localization in each human bounding
box. Based on the proposed algorithm, we achieve state-ofart results on the COCO keypoint benchmark, with average
precision at 73.0 on the COCO test-dev dataset and 72.1 on
the COCO test-challenge dataset, which is a 19% relative
improvement compared with 60.5 from the COCO 2016 keypoint challenge. Code1 and the detection results for person
used will be publicly available for further research.

1. Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation is to recognize and locate
the keypoints for all persons in the image, which is a fundamental research topic for many visual applications like
human action recognition and human-computer interaction.
Recently, the problem of multi-person pose estimation

has been greatly improved by the involvement of deep convolutional neural networks [22, 16]. For example, in [5],
convolutional pose machine is utilized to locate the keypoint joints in the image and part affinity fields (PAFs) is
proposed to assemble the joints to different person. MaskRCNN [15] predicts human bounding boxes first and then
warps the feature maps based on the human bounding boxes
to obtain human keypoints. Although great progress has
been made, there still exist a lot of challenging cases, such
as occluded keypoints, invisible keypoints and crowded
background, which cannot be well localized. The main reasons lie at two points: 1) these “hard” joints cannot be simply recognized based on their appearance features only, for
example, the torso point; 2) these “hard” joints are not explicitly addressed during the training process.
To address these “hard” joints, in this paper, we present
a novel network structure called Cascaded Pyramid Network (CPN). There are two stages in our network architecture: GlobalNet and RefineNet. Our GlobalNet learns
a good feature representation based on feature pyramid network [24]. More importantly, the pyramid feature representation can provide sufficient context information, which
is inevitable for the inference of the occluded and invisible
joints. Based on the pyramid features, our RefineNet explicitly address the “hard” joints based on an online hard
keypoints mining loss.
Based on our Cascaded Pyramid Network, we address
the multi-person pose estimation problem based on a topdown pipeline. Human detector is first adopted to generate
a set of human bounding boxes, followed by our CPN for
keypoint localization in each human bounding box. In addition, we also explore the effects of various factors which
would contribute to the performance of multi-person pose
estimation, including person detector and data preprocessing. These details are valuable for the further improvement
of accuracy and robustness of our algorithm.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold as follows:
• We propose a novel and effective network called
cascaded pyramid network (CPN), which integrates
global pyramid network (GlobalNet) and pyramid refined network based on online hard keypoints min-

∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.

This work is
done when Yilun Chen, Xiangyu Peng and Zhiqiang Zhang are interns at
Megvii Research.
1 https://github.com/allenchen9512/tf-cpn

17103

