Deep Material-aware Cross-spectral Stereo Matching
Tiancheng Zhi, Bernardo R. Pires, Martial Hebert and Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University
{tzhi,bpires,hebert,srinivas}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Cross-spectral imaging provides strong benefits for
recognition and detection tasks. Often, multiple cameras
are used for cross-spectral imaging, thus requiring image
alignment, or disparity estimation in a stereo setting. Increasingly, multi-camera cross-spectral systems are embedded in active RGBD devices (e.g. RGB-NIR cameras in
Kinect and iPhone X). Hence, stereo matching also provides
an opportunity to obtain depth without an active projector
source. However, matching images from different spectral
bands is challenging because of large appearance variations. We develop a novel deep learning framework to simultaneously transform images across spectral bands and
estimate disparity. A material-aware loss function is incorporated within the disparity prediction network to handle regions with unreliable matching such as light sources,
glass windshields and glossy surfaces. No depth supervision is required by our method. To evaluate our method,
we used a vehicle-mounted RGB-NIR stereo system to collect 13.7 hours of video data across a range of areas in and
around a city. Experiments show that our method achieves
strong performance and reaches real-time speed.

(a) Left RGB

(b) Right NIR

(c) Difficult regions for matching

(d) Predicted disparity

Figure 1. A challenging case for RGB-NIR stereo matching and our result. Red box: The light source is visible in
RGB but not in NIR. Yellow box: The transmittance and
reflectance of the windshield are different in RGB and NIR.
Cyan box (brightened): Some light sources reflected by the
specular car surface are only visible in RGB. Our approach
uses a deep learning based simultaneous disparity prediction and spectral translation technique with material-aware
confidence assessment to perform this challenging task.

1. Introduction
Cross-spectral imaging is broadly used in computer vision and image processing. Near infrared (NIR), short-wave
infrared (SWIR) and mid-wave infrared (MWIR) images
assist RGB images in face recognition [1, 16, 23, 29]. RGBNIR pairs are utilized for shadow detection [35], scene
recognition [2] and scene parsing [5]. NIR images also help
color image enhancement [42] and dehazing [11]. Blue
fluorescence and ultraviolet images assist skin appearance
modeling [24]. Color-thermal images help pedestrian detection [19, 40].
As multi-camera multi-spectral systems become more
common in modern devices (e.g. RGB-NIR cameras in
iPhone X and Kinect), the cross-spectral alignment problem
is becoming critical since most cross-spectral algorithms require aligned images as input. Aligning images in hardware

with a beam splitter is often impractical as it leads to significant light loss and thus needs longer exposure, resulting
in motion blur. Stereo matching handles this problem by
estimating disparity from a rectified image pair. Aligned
images are obtained by image warping according to disparity. Stereo matching also provides an opportunity to obtain
depth without an active projector source (as is done in the
Kinect), helping tasks like detection [14] and tracking [37].
Cross-spectral stereo matching is challenging because of
large appearance changes in different spectra. Figure 1 is an
example of RGB-NIR stereo. Headlights have different apparent sizes or intensities in RGB and NIR. LED tail-lights
are not visible in NIR. Glass often shows different light
transmittance and reflectance in RGB and NIR. Glossy surfaces have different specular reflectance. Additionally, veg-

1916

