Preserving Semantic Relations for Zero-Shot Learning
Yashas Annadani∗
National Institute of Technology - Karnataka

Soma Biswas
Indian Institute of Science

yashas.annadani@gmail.com

somabiswas@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Zero-shot learning has gained popularity due to its potential to scale recognition models without requiring additional training data. This is usually achieved by associating categories with their semantic information like attributes. However, we believe that the potential offered
by this paradigm is not yet fully exploited. In this work,
we propose to utilize the structure of the space spanned
by the attributes using a set of relations. We devise objective functions to preserve these relations in the embedding space, thereby inducing semanticity to the embedding
space. Through extensive experimental evaluation on five
benchmark datasets, we demonstrate that inducing semanticity to the embedding space is beneficial for zero-shot
learning. The proposed approach outperforms the state-ofthe-art on the standard zero-shot setting as well as the more
realistic generalized zero-shot setting. We also demonstrate
how the proposed approach can be useful for making approximate semantic inferences about an image belonging to
a category for which attribute information is not available.

1. Introduction
Novel categories of objects arise dynamically in nature.
It is estimated that around 8000 species of animals and
plants are discovered every year [1]. However, current
recognition models are quite incapable of handling this dynamic scenario when labeled examples of novel categories
are not available. Obtaining labeled examples followed by
retraining or transfer learning can be expensive and cumbersome. Zero-shot learning (ZSL) [25, 3, 24, 36, 46, 18] offers
an elegant way to address this problem by utilizing the midlevel semantic descriptions of the categories. These descriptions are usually encoded in an attribute vector [12, 11, 10],
sometimes referred to as side information or class embeddings. This paradigm is useful not only for emerging categories, but also for extending the recognition capabilities
∗ Currently at IIIT-H. Majority of the work was completed when Yashas
was at NITK and was an intern at IISc.

Figure 1: t-SNE visualization [20] of the ten unseen categories
of AWA2 [40] dataset. Black dot denotes the mapped embeddings
obtained using the proposed approach. Best viewed in color.

of a model beyond the categories it is trained on without
requiring additional training data.
Some of the existing approaches treat zero-shot recognition as a ranking problem [4, 39, 13]. In these approaches,
a compatibility function between the image feature and the
class embeddings is learned such that its score for the correct class is higher than that for an incorrect class by a fixed
margin. Ranking can lead to loss of some of the semantic structure available from the attributes due to the fixed
margin and the unbounded nature of the compatibility function. In some of the other approaches [16, 44, 31], zero-shot
recognition is typically achieved by embedding either the
image features or the attribute vectors, or both, to a predefined embedding space using a ridge regression or a mean
squared error objective. Here, proper choice of the embedding space is essential. If the space spanned by the attributes
(semantic space) is used as the embedding space, then the
semantic structure is preserved, but the problem of hubness
surfaces [34, 29]. To alleviate this problem, few recent approaches [44, 34] map the class embeddings to the space
spanned by the image features (visual space). However, the
visual space may not contain semantic properties, as it may
be inherited from a model trained on a supervised classifi-

7603

