SemStyle: Learning to Generate Stylised Image Captions using Unaligned Text
Alexander Mathews∗† , Lexing Xie∗† , Xuming He‡
Australian National University∗ , Data to Decision CRC† , ShanghaiTech University‡
alex.mathews@anu.edu.au, lexing.xie@anu.edu.au, hexm@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Linguistic style is an essential part of written communication, with the power to affect both clarity and attractiveness. With recent advances in vision and language, we
can start to tackle the problem of generating image captions that are both visually grounded and appropriately
styled. Existing approaches either require styled training
captions aligned to images or generate captions with low
relevance. We develop a model that learns to generate visually relevant styled captions from a large corpus of styled
text without aligned images. The core idea of this model,
called SemStyle, is to separate semantics and style. One
key component is a novel and concise semantic term representation generated using natural language processing
techniques and frame semantics. In addition, we develop
a unified language model that decodes sentences with diverse word choices and syntax for different styles. Evaluations, both automatic and manual, show captions from
SemStyle preserve image semantics, are descriptive, and are
style shifted. More broadly, this work provides possibilities
to learn richer image descriptions from the plethora of linguistic data available on the web.

1. Introduction
An image can be described in different styles, for example, from a first-person or third-person perspective, with a
positive or neutral sentiment, in a formal or informal voice.
Style is an essential part of written communication that reflects personality [42], influences purchasing decisions [30]
and fosters social interactions [10, 37]. The analysis of linguistic styles [10, 39] and generating natural language descriptions [54] are two fast developing topics in language
understanding and computer vision, but an open challenge
remains at their intersection: writing a visually relevant sentence in a given style. Incorporating style into image captions will help to communicate image content clearly, attractively, and in a way that is emotionally appropriate. For
this work, we focus on writing one sentence to describe an
image.
Style traditionally refers [42] to linguistic aspects other

Semantic Terms

Caption Style: Story

train_NOUN
Placing_FRAME
station_NOUN

Caption Style: Factual

I stopped short when I saw the
train sitting at the station.

A train that stopped at a
train station.

Figure 1. SemStyle distils an image into a set of semantic terms,
which are then used to form captions of different styles.

than the message content. It can be defined in terms of a
fixed set of attributes [39, 14] such as formality and complexity, or implicitly with a document collection from a single author [46] or genre [24]. The early works on stylistic image captioning model word changes [36], and transformation of word embeddings [15], but do not explicitly
separate content and style. These works also require manually created, style specific, image caption datasets [36, 15],
and are unable to use large collections of styled text that
does not describe images. We aim to address three gaps in
the current solutions. The first is human-like style transfer: using large amounts of unrelated text in a given style
to compose styled image captions. This is in contrast to existing systems that require aligned images and styled text.
The second is representing an image so that the semantics
are preserved while allowing flexible word and syntax use.
The third is ensuring stylistic text remains descriptive and
relevant to the image.
We develop a model, dubbed SemStyle, for generating stylistically interesting and semantically relevant image
captions by learning from a large corpus of stylised text
without aligned images. Central to our approach is a separation of concerns regarding semantic relevance and style.
We propose a novel semantic terms representation that is
concise and promotes flexibility in word choice. This term
representation consists of normalised words with part-ofspeech tag, and verbs generalised using the lexical database
FrameNet [5]. Further, we develop a term generator for obtaining a list of terms related to an image, and a language
generator that decodes the ordered set of semantic terms
into a stylised sentence. The term generator is trained on
images and terms derived from factual captions. The language generator is trained on sentence collections and is
conditioned to generate the desired style. As illustrated in

8591

