LAMV: Learning to align and match videos with kernelized temporal layers
Lorenzo Baraldi1∗, Matthijs Douze2 , Rita Cucchiara1 , Hervé Jégou2
1
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
This paper considers a learnable approach for comparing and aligning videos. Our architecture builds upon and
revisits temporal match kernels within neural networks: we
propose a new temporal layer that finds temporal alignments by maximizing the scores between two sequences
of vectors, according to a time-sensitive similarity metric
parametrized in the Fourier domain. We learn this layer
with a temporal proposal strategy, in which we minimize a
triplet loss that takes into account both the localization accuracy and the recognition rate.
We evaluate our approach on video alignment, copy detection and event retrieval. Our approach outperforms the
state on the art on temporal video alignment and video copy
detection datasets in comparable setups. It also attains the
best reported results for particular event search, while precisely aligning videos.

Learnable
Temporal kernels

Forward
Period

Video
descriptor
…

Frame-level
descriptors

normalizations

Backpropagation
Kernel scores

Figure 1: We present a learnable temporal layer that compares and precisely aligns videos by means of multi-period
temporal kernels parametrized in the Fourier domain.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the success of neural networks and the availability of large annotated collections of images like Imagenet [4] and COCO [23], we have recently witnessed
drastic improvements on many core computer vision problems, such as image classification [22, 14] and segmentation [13]. The analysis of videos has largely benefited from
this game-changing adoption of neural networks, in particular by exploiting state-of-the-art image networks. Current methods for tackling video-related tasks mostly rely
on the trunk of neural network architectures trained on images [32, 34, 9, 21].
Many attempts to exploit the temporal axis of videos
within neural architectures have been proposed. These approaches typically extract information at the frame level and
∗ This work was carried out while L. Baraldi was in a internship at Facebook AI Research.
This academic article may contain images and/or data from sources that
are not affiliated with the article submitter. Inclusion should not be construed as approval, endorsement or sponsorship of the submitter, article or
its content by any such party.

subsequently enforce or mesure the temporal consistency.
For instance, Kang et al. [21] propose a temporal convolutional network to regularize object detection results. Fernando et al. [9] postulate that a method able to temporally
re-order the frames of a video would be more suitable to
detect the evolution of appearance, and use this supervision
signal to improve action recognition. Diba et al. [5] investigate different ways of aggregating feature maps from
image-level convolutional neural networks to achieve an
end-to-end learning of a video representation.
On the contrary, only few works consider learning a joint
spatio-temporal representation, like the C3D network [32].
Several difficulties may explain this situation. First, the
amount of temporally-labelled data is limited: for large collections the annotation is provided at the video level only,
or automatically extracted, or both [1]. Second, the number of parameters to learn a spatio-temporal representation
is generally much larger than for still images. Third, depending on the task, it is not obvious that temporality is at
all useful. For instance, the recent high-profile leaderbord

7804

