On the convergence of PatchMatch and its variants
Thibaud Ehret
CMLA, ENS Cachan, CNRS,
Université Paris-Saclay, 94235 Cachan, France

Pablo Arias
CMLA, ENS Cachan, CNRS,
Université Paris-Saclay, 94235 Cachan, France

thibaud.ehret@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

pablo.arias@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

Abstract

with the product of the number of pixels in the query and
the database images, and is therefore prohibitively slow. The
first practical approaches rely on data structures such as hash
tables or partition trees (see [18] and references therein).
The approximate k nearest neighbors of each query patch are
computed independently. Even if these approaches greatly
improve with respect to the brute-force search, they are still
too slow (and moreover scale badly with the patch size) for
many applications such as those requiring user interaction.
The introduction of the PatchMatch algorithm [4] and its
generalized version [5] has represented a breakthrough in
the field. It brings a speed-up of almost two orders of magnitude over previous search techniques. The main reason for
this is that PatchMatch performs all queries simultaneously
and in collaboration, exploiting the fact that overlapping
query patches are likely to have overlapping matches in the
database image.
PatchMatch is an iterative algorithm which starts from
a random initial guess for the k-ANNF and gradually refines it. In each iteration, each patch propagates its current
candidates to its neighboring patches on the query image
grid. Additionally, new candidates are searched randomly
in the database image. This is performed by uniformly sampling in a series of concentric squares with decreasing radius
centered at the position of the current best candidate.
Several works have improved the original PatchMatch
algorithm reporting gains of one order of magnitude or even
more. The main theme of these works is to combine PatchMatch with classical search structures to improve the random initialization or the random search. Coherency Sensitive
Hashing (CSH) [17] uses locality sensitive hashing [15] to
improve both the propagation and the random search steps.
KD-trees [8] are used in [21] instead of the random initialization (after reducing the dimensionality of the patches). In
[13] a KD-tree is used for the random search.
In this work we extend and generalize the theoretical
framework of [1] formalizing PatchMatch-like techniques.
We apply it to study their convergence and give upper bounds
on their convergence speed which are tighter than the ones
of [1]. In particular we study the original PatchMatch [4],

Many problems in image/video processing and computer
vision require the computation of a dense k-nearest neighbor
field (k-NNF) between two images. For each patch in a query
image, the k-NNF determines the positions of the k most similar patches in a database image. With the introduction of
the PatchMatch algorithm, Barnes et al. demonstrated that
this large search problem can be approximated efficiently
by collaborative search methods that exploit the local coherency of image patches. After its introduction, several
variants of the original PatchMatch algorithm have been
proposed, some of them reducing the computational time by
two orders of magnitude. In this work we study the convergence of PatchMatch and its variants, and derive bounds on
their convergence rate. We consider a generic PatchMatch
algorithm from which most specific instances found in the
literature can be derived as particular cases. We also derive
more specific bounds for two of these particular cases: the
original PatchMatch and Coherency Sensitive Hashing. The
proposed bounds are validated by contrasting them to the
convergence observed in practice.

1. Introduction
Patch-based methods are among the state-of-the-art in
several image/video processing and computer vision applications. Often these methods require finding for all patches of
a query image, the (approximate) k nearest neighbors among
the set of patches of a database image. This is referred to as
an approximate k nearest neighbors field (k-ANNF) from
the query image to the database image.
Examples of the application of k-ANNFs can be found for
image completion (and editing) [2, 4], denoising of images
[5] and video [7, 19], video stylization [6, 7], alpha matting
[12], optical flow [3, 11, 14, 20] and stereo-vision [20, 9].
Also in the close field of computer graphics ANNFs of 3D
surface patches have been applied to mesh tracking [16] and
texture transfer [10].
The brute-force computation of the k-NNF scales linearly

11121

