Resource Aware Person Re-identiﬁcation across Multiple Resolutions
Yan Wang∗1 , Lequn Wang∗1 , Yurong You∗2 , Xu Zou3 , Vincent Chen1 ,
Serena Li1 , Gao Huang1 , Bharath Hariharan1 , Kilian Q. Weinberger1
Cornell University1 , Shanghai Jiao Tong University2 , Tsinghua University3
{yw763, lw633}@cornell.edu, yurongyou@sjtu.edu.cn, zoux14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{zc346, sl2327, gh349}@cornell.edu, bharathh@cs.cornell.edu, kqw4@cornell.edu

Abstract
Not all people are equally easy to identify: color statistics might be enough for some cases while others might require careful reasoning about high- and low-level details.
However, prevailing person re-identiﬁcation(re-ID) methods use one-size-ﬁts-all high-level embeddings from deep
convolutional networks for all cases. This might limit their
accuracy on difﬁcult examples or makes them needlessly expensive for the easy ones. To remedy this, we present a
new person re-ID model that combines effective embeddings
built on multiple convolutional network layers, trained with
deep-supervision. On traditional re-ID benchmarks, our
method improves substantially over the previous state-ofthe-art results on all ﬁve datasets that we evaluate on.
We then propose two new formulations of the person reID problem under resource-constraints, and show how our
model can be used to effectively trade off accuracy and computation in the presence of resource constraints.

1. Introduction
Consider the two men shown in Figure 1. The man on the
left is easier to identify: even from far away, or on a lowresolution photograph, one can easily recognize the brightly
colored attire with medals of various kinds. By contrast, the
man on the right has a nondescript appearance. One might
need to look closely at the set of the eyes, the facial hair,
the kind of briefcase he is holding or other such subtle and
ﬁne-grained properties to identify him correctly.
Current person re-identiﬁcation(re-ID) systems treat
both persons the same way. Both images would be
run through deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
Coarse-resolution and semantic embeddings from the last
layer would be used to look the image up in the database.
However, this kind of an architecture causes two major
problems: ﬁrst, for the hard cases such as the man on the
right in Figure 1, these embeddings are too coarse and dis∗ Authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Some people have distinctive appearance and are easy
to identify (left), while others have nondescript appearance and
require sophisticated reasoning to identify correctly (right).

card too much information. Features from the last layer of
a CNN mostly encode semantic features, like object presence [15], but lose all information about the ﬁne spatial details such as the pattern of one’s facial hair or the particular
shape of one’s body. Instead, to tackle both cases, ideally
we would want to reason jointly across multiple levels of semantic abstraction, taking into account both high-resolution
(shape and color), as well as highly semantic details (objects
or object parts).
In contrast, for the easy cases such as the man on the left
in Figure 1, using a 50-layer network is overkill. A color
histogram or the low-level statistics computed in the early
layers of the network might work just as well. This may not
be a problem if all we are interested in is the ﬁnal accuracy.
However, sometimes we need to be more resource efﬁcient
in terms of time, memory, or power. For example, a robot
might need to make decisions within a time limit, or it may
have a limited battery supply that precludes the running of
a massive CNN on every frame.
Thus standard CNN-based person re-ID systems are only
one point on a spectrum. On one end, early layers of the
CNN can be used to identify people quickly under some
resource constraints, but might sacriﬁce accuracy on hard
images. On the other end of the spectrum, highly accurate
person re-ID might require reasoning across multiple layers
of the CNN. Ideally, we want a single model that encapsu-

8042

