Towards dense object tracking in a 2D honeybee hive
Katarzyna Bozek
OIST Graduate University
Okinawa, Japan

Laetitia Hebert

Alexander S. Mikheyev

laetitia.hebert@oist.jp

alexander.mikheyev@oist.jp

kasia.bozek@oist.jp

Greg J. Stephens
OIST Graduate University and
VU University - Faculty of Sciences
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
greg.stephens@oist.jp

Abstract
From human crowds to cells in tissue, the detection and
efficient tracking of multiple objects in dense configurations
is an important and unsolved problem. In the past, limitations of image analysis have restricted studies of dense
groups to tracking a single or subset of marked individuals, or to coarse-grained group-level dynamics, all of which
yield incomplete information. Here, we combine convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with the model environment
of a honeybee hive to automatically recognize all individuals in a dense group from raw image data. We create new,
adapted individual labeling and use the segmentation architecture U-Net with a loss function dependent on both object identity and orientation. We additionally exploit temporal regularities of the video recording in a recurrent manner and achieve near human-level performance while reducing the network size by 94% compared to the original
U-Net architecture. Given our novel application of CNNs,
we generate extensive problem-specific image data in which
labeled examples are produced through a custom interface
with Amazon Mechanical Turk. This dataset contains over
375,000 labeled bee instances across 720 video frames at
2 FPS, representing an extensive resource for the development and testing of tracking methods. We correctly detect
96% of individuals with a location error of ∼ 7% of a typical body dimension, and orientation error of 12◦ , approximating the variability of human raters. Our results provide an important step towards efficient image-based dense
object tracking by allowing for the accurate determination
of object location and orientation across time-series image
data efficiently within one network architecture.

Introduction
Image-based dense object tracking is of broad interest
in the monitoring of crowd movement as well as the study
of collective behavior in biological systems [19]. Automated recognition of individuals in a dense group based on
video recording would allow for the efficient implementation of monitoring and tracking frameworks with no additional manual labeling or tracking devices, which are often either impractical or invasive. The challenges in imagebased dense object recognition include occlusions and variability in viewpoints and individual appearance. However,
recent progress in convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
for image segmentation [20], scene analysis [25], and object detection [5, 11, 31, 27] represent promising developments towards dense object detection and tracking. Here we
apply these tools to a classical unsolved problem in behavioral ecology, the identification of individual organisms in a
honeybee hive.
Honeybees have long drawn fascination and the study
of their behavior has yielded important insights into animal
communication, physiology, and neuroscience [35, 30, 37,
14]. Honeybees also provide an excellent model system for
the study of social behavior as they can be viewed in the natural environment of an observation hive (Fig. 1). However,
the complexity of a hive environment presents significant
challenges for automated image-based analysis and previous techniques have shown only limited success, particularly under natural conditions [8, 12, 16, 15, 36, 34]. A
typical colony consists of hundreds or thousands of closely
packed, often occluded, and continually moving individuals. The bees are unevenly distributed over a complex background, the honeycomb, which consists of a variety of different cells containing nectar, pollen, and brood in various
14185

