Learning Convolutional Networks for Content-weighted Image Compression
Mu Li1 Wangmeng Zuo2 Shuhang Gu1 Debin Zhao2 David Zhang1
1
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
csmuli@comp.polyu.edu.hk, cswmzuo@gmail.com, shuhanggu@gmail.com, dbzhao@hit.edu.cn
csdzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Lossy image compression is generally formulated as a
joint rate-distortion optimization problem to learn encoder,
quantizer, and decoder. Due to the non-differentiable quantizer and discrete entropy estimation, it is very challenging to develop a convolutional network (CNN)-based image compression system. In this paper, motivated by that
the local information content is spatially variant in an image, we suggest that: (i) the bit rate of the different parts of
the image is adapted to local content, and (ii) the contentaware bit rate is allocated under the guidance of a contentweighted importance map. The sum of the importance map
can thus serve as a continuous alternative of discrete entropy estimation to control compression rate. The binarizer
is adopted to quantize the output of encoder and a proxy
function is introduced for approximating binary operation
in backward propagation to make it differentiable. The encoder, decoder, binarizer and importance map can be jointly
optimized in an end-to-end manner. And a convolutional
entropy encoder is further presented for lossless compression of importance map and binary codes. In low bit rate
image compression, experiments show that our system significantly outperforms JPEG and JPEG 2000 by structural
similarity (SSIM) index, and can produce the much better
visual result with sharp edges, rich textures, and fewer artifacts.

1. Introduction
Image compression is a fundamental problem in computer vision and image processing. With the development
and popularity of high-quality multimedia content, lossy
image compression has been becoming more and more essential in saving transmission bandwidth and hardware storage. An image compression system usually includes three
This work is supported in part by the Hong Kong RGC General Research Fund (PolyU 152212/14E), the Major State Basic Research Development Program of China (973 Program) (2015CB351804), the Huawei
HIRP fund (2017050001C2), and the NSFC Fund (61671182).

components, i.e. encoder, quantizer, and decoder, to form
the codec. The typical image encoding standards, e.g.,
JPEG [27] and JPEG 2000 [21], generally rely on handcrafted image transformation and separate optimization on
codecs, and thus are suboptimal for image compression.
Moreover, JPEG and JPEG 2000 perform poor for low
rate image compression, and may introduce visible artifacts
such as blurring, ringing, and blocking [27, 21].
Recently, deep convolutional networks (CNNs) have
achieved unprecedented success in versatile vision tasks
[12, 33, 16, 8, 31, 7, 13, 2]. As to image compression,
CNN is also expected to be more powerful than JPEG and
JPEG 2000 by considering the following reasons. First,
for image encoding and decoding, flexible nonlinear analysis and synthesis transformations can be easily deployed
by stacking multiple convolution layers. Second, it allows
to jointly optimize the nonlinear encoder and decoder in
an end-to-end manner. Several recent advances also validate the effectiveness of deep learning in image compression [25, 26, 3, 23]. However, there are still several issues
to be addressed in CNN-based image compression. In general, lossy image compression can be formulated as a joint
rate-distortion optimization to learn encoder, quantizer, and
decoder. Even the encoder and decoder can be represented
as CNNs and optimized via back-propagation, the learning with non-differentiable quantizer is still a challenging
issue. Moreover, the whole compression system aims to
jointly minimize both the compression rate and distortion,
where entropy rate should also be estimated and minimized
in learning. As a result of quantization, the entropy rate
defined on discrete codes is also a discrete function and requires continuous approximation.
In this paper, we present a novel CNN-based image compression framework to address the issues raised by quantization and entropy rate estimation. The existing deep learning based compression models [25, 26, 3] allocate the same
number of codes for each spatial position, and the discrete
code used for decoder has the same length with the encoder output. That is, the length of the discrete code is
13214

