Efficient Subpixel Refinement with Symbolic Linear Predictors
Vincent Lui
Jonathon Geeves
Winston Yii
Tom Drummond
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering
Monash University, Victoria, Australia
[firstname].[lastname]@monash.edu

Abstract
We present an efficient subpixel refinement method using
a learning-based approach called Linear Predictors. Two
key ideas are shown in this paper. Firstly, we present a
novel technique, called Symbolic Linear Predictors, which
makes the learning step efficient for subpixel refinement.
This makes our approach feasible for online applications
without compromising accuracy, while taking advantage of
the run-time efficiency of learning based approaches. Secondly, we show how Linear Predictors can be used to predict the expected alignment error, allowing us to use only
the best keypoints in resource constrained applications. We
show the efficiency and accuracy of our method through extensive experiments.

1. Introduction
A small but important step for accurate 3D reconstructions in robotic applications such as visual SLAM is subpixel refinement. One of the first steps in a conventional
visual SLAM pipeline involves the extraction of salient keypoints, followed by the formation of point correspondences.
As keypoint extraction methods [8, 14] are usually accurate
up to only one pixel, the goal of subpixel refinement is to
refine the position of these keypoints in order to improve
the quality of the final 3D reconstruction.
Energy minimization methods [13, 7, 16, 1, 3] have been
the de-facto method for performing subpixel refinement.
These can be divided into variants of the Lucas-Kanade
(LK) algorithm, or the efficient second-order minimization
(ESM) algorithm. Among them, the inverse compositional
variant of the LK algorithm (IC-LK) [13], along with the
ESM algorithm [3] are preferred due to their computational
efficiency. The IC-LK method is efficient as the Jacobian
can be pre-computed and re-used during subsequent iterations, while the ESM method has a high convergence rate.
Besides energy-based methods, learning-based approaches [4, 11, 19, 20, 21] have been studied extensively in
the broader context of template matching, with subpixel re-

finement being one of its applications. In a pre-computation
step, a set of synthetic warps is applied to a template patch,
and the resulting change in pixel intensities is measured.
A Linear Predictor, which predicts the change in pixel intensities to the corresponding update in warp parameters is
then learned. Once learned, warp updates can be obtained
via simple matrix-vector multiplications, making it computationally cheaper compared to energy-based methods.
However, the pre-computation step is usually computationally expensive. Thus, learning-based approaches have
so far only been used for a single large image patch consisting of a sub-sampled grid of points. Holzer et al. [10] proposed methods to make the pre-computation step more efficient. However, the computational savings obtained from
this method do not translate well to the problem of subpixel
refinement. Further, in an image, an additional challenge is
that there are typically hundreds of keypoints of interest.
In this paper, we present an approach which makes the
learning step efficient for subpixel refinement. We propose
to divide the learning step into two stages. Firstly, we perform a once-off step which learns a symbolic representation
of the Linear Predictor. Once learned, it can be re-used multiple times for different image patches. Our approach is very
efficient for small image patches, thus making it suitable for
subpixel refinement. We envision our approach being used
in situations where Linear Predictors for multiple keypoints
are learned efficiently in the background process of a realtime application such as visual odometry (VO) or SLAM.
Further, we propose an error measure which allows the expected error in the warp parameters of an image patch to be
predicted. This allows us to prioritize image patches that
are expected to exhibit smaller alignment errors, especially
when an image consists of hundreds of keypoints.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: We first
formally define the problem of subpixel refinement in Sec 2.
In order to make the paper self-contained, we briefly review
the IC-LK and ESM methods in Sec 3, followed by Linear
Predictors in Sec 4. We describe our proposed Symbolic
Linear Predictors in Sec. 5 and show experimental results
in Sec 6.

8165

