Total Capture: A 3D Deformation Model for Tracking Faces, Hands, and Bodies∗
Hanbyul Joo1
Tomas Simon1,2
Yaser Sheikh1,2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh
hanbyulj@cs.cmu.edu, {tomas.simon, yaser.sheikh}@fb.com

Figure 1: Reconstructing total body motion by Adam. This paper presents a 3D human model capable of concurrently
tracking the large-scale posture of the body along with the smaller details of a person’s facial expressions and hand gestures.

Abstract
We present a unified deformation model for the markerless capture of human movement at multiple scales, including facial expressions, body motion, and hand gestures.
An initial model is generated by locally stitching together
models of the individual parts of the human body, which we
refer to as “Frank”. This model enables the full expression
of part movements, including face and hands, by a single
seamless model. We capture a dataset of people wearing
everyday clothes and optimize the Frank model to create
“Adam”: a calibrated model that shares the same skeleton
hierarchy as the initial model with a simpler parameterization. Finally, we demonstrate the use of these models for
total motion tracking in a multiview setup, simultaneously
capturing the large-scale body movements and the subtle
face and hand motion of a social group of people.

1. Introduction
Social communication is a key function of human motion [9]. We communicate tremendous amounts of information with the subtlest movements. Between a group of
interacting individuals, gestures such as a gentle shrug of
∗ Website: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ hanbyulj/totalcapture
˜

the shoulders, a quick turn of the head, or an uneasy shifting of weight from foot to foot, all transmit critical information about the attention, emotion, and intention to observers.
Notably, these social signals are usually transmitted by the
organized motion of the whole body: with facial expressions, hand gestures, and body posture. These rich signals
layer upon goal-directed activity in constructing the behavior of humans, and are therefore crucial for the machine perception of human activity.
However, there are no existing systems that can track,
without markers, the human body, face, and hands simultaneously. Current markerless motion capture systems focus at a particular scale or on a particular part. Each area
has its own preferred capture configuration: (1) torso and
limb motions are captured in a sufficiently large working
volume where people can freely move [19, 23, 47, 21]; (2)
facial motion is captured at close range, mostly frontal, and
assuming little global head motion [7, 26, 8, 11, 54]; (3)
finger motion is also captured at very close distances from
hands, where the hand regions are dominant in the sensor
measurements [37, 52, 45, 53]. These configurations make
it difficult to concurrently analyze the full spectrum of social signalling.
To overcome this sensing challenge, we present a novel
generative body deformation model that has the ability to
express the motion of each principal body part. In particu-

8320

