SketchMate: Deep Hashing for Million-Scale Human Sketch Retrieval
Peng Xu1,2

Yongye Huang1 Tongtong Yuan1 Kaiyue Pang2 Yi-Zhe Song2 Tao Xiang2
Timothy M. Hospedales3 Zhanyu Ma1∗ Jun Guo1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
SketchX, Queen Mary University of London, UK 3 The University of Edinburgh, UK
{peng.xu, yongye, yuantt, mazhanyu, guojun}@bupt.edu.cn
{p.xu, kaiyue.pang, yizhe.song, t.xiang}@qmul.ac.uk t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a deep hashing framework for sketch retrieval that, for the first time, works on a multi-million scale
human sketch dataset. Leveraging on this large dataset,
we explore a few sketch-specific traits that were otherwise
under-studied in prior literature. Instead of following the
conventional sketch recognition task, we introduce the novel
problem of sketch hashing retrieval which is not only more
challenging, but also offers a better testbed for large-scale
sketch analysis, since: (i) more fine-grained sketch feature
learning is required to accommodate the large variations in
style and abstraction, and (ii) a compact binary code needs
to be learned at the same time to enable efficient retrieval.
Key to our network design is the embedding of unique characteristics of human sketch, where (i) a two-branch CNNRNN architecture is adapted to explore the temporal ordering of strokes, and (ii) a novel hashing loss is specifically
designed to accommodate both the temporal and abstract
traits of sketches. By working with a 3.8M sketch dataset,
we show that state-of-the-art hashing models specifically
engineered for static images fail to perform well on temporal sketch data. Our network on the other hand not only
offers the best retrieval performance on various code sizes,
but also yields the best generalization performance under
a zero-shot setting and when re-purposed for sketch recognition. Such superior performances effectively demonstrate
the benefit of our sketch-specific design.

1. Introduction
Sketches are different to photos. They exhibit a highlevel of abstraction yet are surprisingly illustrative. With
just a few strokes, they are able to encode an appropriate level of semanticness that depicts objects and communicate stories (e.g., ancient cave drawings). Such unique
∗ Corresponding author.

characteristics of sketches, together with the prevalence of
touchscreen devices, to a large extent drove the recent surge
of sketch research. Problems studied so far range from
sketch recognition [3, 11, 33], sketch-based image retrieval
(SBIR) [32, 20, 29, 31, 23, 30, 22, 10], to sketch synthesis [12].
Despite great strides made, a major obstacle facing all
sketch research is the lack of freely available sketch data.
Compared with photos where million-scale datasets had
been readily accessible for almost a decade (e.g., ImageNet
[2]), all aforementioned research worked with sub-million
level crowd-sourced sketch datasets (20k for TU-Berlin [3]
and 75k for Sketchy [20]). These datasets served as key enablers for the community, though have very recently started
to bottleneck the progress of sketch research – sketch recognition performance had already gone far beyond humanlevel [33] on TU-Berlin [3], and steadily approaching human performance [18] for the problem of SBIR on Sketchy
[20].
In particular, two unique traits of human sketches had
been mostly overlooked: (i) sketches are highly abstract
and iconic, whereas photos are pixel perfect depictions, (ii)
sketching is a dynamic process other than a mere collection of static pixels. Such oversights can be partially attributed to the lack of a large and diverse dataset of strokelevel human sketches, since more data samples are required
to broadly capture (i) the substantial variances on visual abstraction, and (ii) the highly complex temporal stroke configurations – an apple might look like an apple once drawn
(though more abstract than photos), there is more than one
way of drawing it. The seminal work of [33] on sketch
recognition tackled these problems to some extent yet were
limited in that (i) sketches are treated as static pixelmaps,
where deep architecture for feature learning is limited to
variants of photo CNNs, and (ii) temporal ordering information is modeled coarsely by temporally segmenting one
sketch into three separate pixelmaps, which are then encoded using a multi-branch CNN. The very recent work of

8090

