A Low Power, High Throughput, Fully Event-Based Stereo System
Alexander Andreopoulos∗, Hirak J. Kashyap∗,† , Tapan K. Nayak, Arnon Amir, and Myron D. Flickner
IBM Research

Abstract
We introduce a stereo correspondence system implemented fully on event-based digital hardware, using a fully
graph-based non von-Neumann computation model, where
no frames, arrays, or any other such data-structures are
used. This is the first time that an end-to-end stereo pipeline
from image acquisition and rectification, multi-scale spatiotemporal stereo correspondence, winner-take-all, to disparity regularization is implemented fully on event-based hardware. Using a cluster of TrueNorth neurosynaptic processors, we demonstrate their ability to process bilateral
event-based inputs streamed live by Dynamic Vision Sensors (DVS), at up to 2,000 disparity maps per second, producing high fidelity disparities which are in turn used to reconstruct, at low power, the depth of events produced from
rapidly changing scenes. Experiments on real-world sequences demonstrate the ability of the system to take full advantage of the asynchronous and sparse nature of DVS sensors for low power depth reconstruction, in environments
where conventional frame-based cameras connected to synchronous processors would be inefficient for rapidly moving objects. System evaluation on event-based sequences
demonstrates a ∼ 200 × improvement in terms of power
per pixel per disparity map compared to the closest stateof-the-art, and maximum latencies of up to 11ms from spike
injection to disparity map ejection.

1. Introduction
Sparsity and parallel asynchronous computation are two
key principles of information processing in the brain. They
allow to solve complex tasks using a tiny fraction of the energy consumed by stored-program computers [64]. While
the successful artificial neural networks may not operate the
same way as the brain, both of them utilize highly parallel
and hierarchical architectures that gradually abstract input
data to more meaningful concepts [8, 51, 16]. However,
event-based computation has not been equally adopted [4].
∗ equal contribution. † Work done as an intern at IBM Research - Almaden. Cognitive Anteater Robotics Lab (CARL), University of California, Irvine

Another barrier for sparse computation are traditional sensors, such as frame-based cameras, which provide regular
inputs. For autonomous vehicles, drones, and satellites, energy consumption is a challenge [6]. Event-based processing dramatically reduces power consumption by computing
only what is new while omitting unchanged input parts.
Recently developed event-based cameras such as Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) [37, 10] and ATIS [50], inspired by the biological retina, encode pixel illumination
changes as events. These sensors solve two major drawbacks of frame-based cameras. First, temporal resolution
of frame-based applications is limited by the camera frame
rate, usually 30 frames per second. Event-based cameras
can generate events at microsecond resolution. Second,
consecutive frames in videos are usually highly redundant,
which waste downstream data transfer, computing resources
and power. Since events are sparse, event-based cameras
lead to better downstream resource usage. Moreover, eventbased cameras have high dynamic range (∼ 100 dB), which
is useful for real world variations in lighting conditions.
To achieve the low energy and high temporal resolution
benefits of event-based inputs, computations must be performed asynchronously. To benefit from sparse and asynchronous computation, neuromorphic processors have been
developed [44, 24, 30, 9, 56]. These processors represent
input events as spikes and process them in parallel using
a large neuron population. They are stimulus-driven and
the propagation delay of an event through the neuron layers
is usually a few milliseconds, suitable for many real-time
applications. For example, the TrueNorth neuromorphic
chip [44] has been used for high throughput Convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [22], character recognition [53],
optic flow [11], saliency [3], and gesture recognition [2].
Depth perception is an important task for autonomous
mobile agents to navigate in the real world. The speed and
low power requirements of these applications can be effectively met using event-based sensors. Event-based stereo
provides additional advantages over other depth estimation
methods that increase accuracy and save energy, such as
high temporal resolution, high dynamic range, and robustness to interference with other agents.
Several methods have been proposed to solve event-

7532

