DoubleFusion: Real-time Capture of Human Performances with Inner Body
Shapes from a Single Depth Sensor
Tao Yu1,2 , Zerong Zheng1 , Kaiwen Guo1,3 , Jianhui Zhao2 , Qionghai Dai1 ,
Hao Li4 , Gerard Pons-Moll5 , Yebin Liu1,6
1

Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Beihang University, Beijing, China 3 Google Inc
4
University of Southern California / USC Institute for Creative Technologies
5
Max-Planck-Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
6
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)

Abstract
We propose DoubleFusion, a new real-time system that
combines volumetric dynamic reconstruction with datadriven template fitting to simultaneously reconstruct detailed geometry, non-rigid motion and the inner human
body shape from a single depth camera. One of the key
contributions of this method is a double layer representation consisting of a complete parametric body shape inside,
and a gradually fused outer surface layer. A pre-defined
node graph on the body surface parameterizes the nonrigid deformations near the body, and a free-form dynamically changing graph parameterizes the outer surface layer
far from the body, which allows more general reconstruction. We further propose a joint motion tracking method
based on the double layer representation to enable robust
and fast motion tracking performance. Moreover, the inner body shape is optimized online and forced to fit inside
the outer surface layer. Overall, our method enables increasingly denoised, detailed and complete surface reconstructions, fast motion tracking performance and plausible
inner body shape reconstruction in real-time. In particular,
experiments show improved fast motion tracking and loop
closure performance on more challenging scenarios.

1. Introduction
Human performance capture has been a challenging research topic in computer vision and computer graphics for
decades. The goal is to reconstruct a temporally coherent
representation of the dynamically deforming surface of human characters from videos. Although array based methods [21, 12, 5, 6, 41, 22, 27, 11, 16, 30] using multiple
video or depth cameras are well studied and have achieved
high quality results, the expensive camera-array setups and

Figure 1: Our system and the real-time reconstructed results.

controlled studios limit its application to a few technical
experts. As depth cameras are increasingly popular in the
consumer space (iPhoneX, Google Tango, etc.), the recent
trend focuses on using more and more practical setups like
a single depth camera [45, 13, 3]. In particular, by combining non-rigid surface tracking and volumetric depth integration, DynamicFusion like approaches [28, 15, 14, 34]
allow real-time dynamic scene reconstruction using a single depth camera without the requirement of pre-scanned
model templates. Such systems are low cost, easy to set up
and promising for popularization; however, they are still restricted to controlled slow motions. The challenges are occlusions (single view), computational resources (real-time),
loop closure and no pre-scanned template model.
BodyFusion [43] is the most recent work in the direction
of single-view real-time dynamic reconstruction; It shows
that regularizing non-rigid deformations with a skeleton is
beneficial to capture human performances. However, since
the human joints are too sparse and it only uses the gradually fused surface for tracking, it fails during fast motions,
especially when the surface is not yet complete. Moreover,
17287

