Fast End-to-End Trainable Guided Filter
∗

Huikai Wu1, 2
Shuai Zheng3
Junge Zhang1, 2
Kaiqi Huang1, 2, 4
1
CRIPAC & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
eBay Research
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
1

{huikai.wu, jgzhang, kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, 3 shuzheng@ebay.com

Abstract
Image processing and pixel-wise dense prediction have
been advanced by harnessing the capabilities of deep learning. One central issue of deep learning is the limited capacity to handle joint upsampling. We present a deep learning
building block for joint upsampling, namely guided filtering
layer. This layer aims at efficiently generating the highresolution output given the corresponding low-resolution
one and a high-resolution guidance map. The proposed
layer is composed of a guided filter, which is reformulated
as a fully differentiable block. To this end, we show that a
guided filter can be expressed as a group of spatial varying
linear transformation matrices. This layer could be integrated with the convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
jointly optimized through end-to-end training. To further
take advantage of end-to-end training, we plug in a trainable transformation function that generates task-specific
guidance maps. By integrating the CNNs and the proposed
layer, we form deep guided filtering networks. The proposed
networks are evaluated on five advanced image processing
tasks. Experiments on MIT-Adobe FiveK Dataset demonstrate that the proposed approach runs 10-100× faster and
achieves the state-of-the-art performance. We also show
that the proposed guided filtering layer helps to improve
the performance of multiple pixel-wise dense prediction
tasks. The code is available at https://github.com/
wuhuikai/DeepGuidedFilter.

1. Introduction
Research in image processing and pixel-wise dense prediction enables a variety of applications. For example, image processing techniques enable smooth an image while
preserving the edges [39, 41, 43], enhance the details of an
image [13, 36], transfer style from a reference image [3, 4],
∗ Work conducted while the author at the University of Oxford.

Figure 1: Example results of the deep guided filtering
networks. The top row shows the input images, and the
bottom row includes the results in full-resolution. We show
the results of image retouching, multiscale detail manipulation, non-local dehazing, saliency object detection, and
depth estimation from a single image in each column. Best
viewed in color.

dehaze the photos [5, 20, 14, 15], and even retouch the images for beautification [6]. In Computer Vision, the pixelwise dense prediction techniques not only address the problem of segmenting an image into semantic parts [22, 35, 11],
but also help to estimate depth from a single image [34], and
detect the most salient object in an image [32, 29]. Some of
the approaches [18, 10, 9] in these applications have been
further advanced by deep learning techniques. One of the
central issues is the limited capacity of deep learning techniques to handle the joint up-sampling.
The computational demand and running time of an algorithm are critically important to the user experience in
these applications. However, existing techniques usually
take large amount of computational cost, especially on highresolution images. In image processing tasks, one wellknown approach to accelerating an algorithm follows a
coarse-to-fine fashion, which firstly down-samples the im-

1838

