A Weighted Sparse Sampling and Smoothing Frame Transition Approach for
Semantic Fast-Forward First-Person Videos
Michel Silva

Washington Ramos
Joao Ferreira
Felipe Chamone
Erickson R. Nascimento
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Brazil

Mario Campos

Abstract

)

...

-

...

(

...

...

di ∈ R446

Weighted
Sampling

(

W ∈ Rn x n

)

Smoothing
Transitions

(α⋆)

Dropped
frame
...

1 https://www.verlab.dcc.ufmg.br/semantic-hyperlapse/cvpr2018/

Frame
Descriptor

...
...
...
...
...

By 2019, the online video might be responsible for more
than 80% of global Internet traffic [1]. Not only are internet users watching more online video, but they are also
recording themselves and producing a growing number of
videos for sharing their day-to-day life routine. The ubiquity of inexpensive shoot video devices and the lower costs
of producing and storing videos are giving unprecedented
freedom to the people to create increasingly long-running
first-person videos. On the other hand, such freedom might
lead the user to create a final long-running and boring video,
once most everyday activities do not merit recording.
A central challenge is to selective highlight the meaningful parts of the videos without losing the whole message

α∈R

...

1. Introduction

n

Frame
2
2
α⋆= min n ||v - D α|| + λα ||W g ⊙ α||

...

Thanks to the advances in the technology of low-cost digital cameras and the popularity of the self-recording culture, the amount of visual data on the Internet is going to
the opposite side of the available time and patience of the
users. Thus, most of the uploaded videos are doomed to be
forgotten and unwatched in a computer folder or website.
In this work, we address the problem of creating smooth
fast-forward videos without losing the relevant content.
We present a new adaptive frame selection formulated as
a weighted minimum reconstruction problem, which combined with a smoothing frame transition method accelerates first-person videos emphasizing the relevant segments
and avoids visual discontinuities. The experiments show
that our method is able to fast-forward videos to retain as
much relevant information and smoothness as the state-ofthe-art techniques in less time. We also present a new 80hour multimodal (RGB-D, IMU, and GPS) dataset of firstperson videos with annotations for recorder profile, frame
scene, activities, interaction, and attention1 .

Semantic

{michelms, washington.ramos, joaoklock, cadar, mario, erickson}@dcc.ufmg.br

Figure 1. The fast-forward methodology. A weighted sampling
combined with a smoothing transition step is applied to tackle the
abrupt camera movements. The activation vector indicates which
frames compose the fast-forward video. A smoothing step is applied to the transitions between the selected frames.

that the video should convey. Although video summarization techniques [4, 14] provide quick access to videos’ information, they only return segmented clips or single images of the relevant moments. By not including the very
last and the following frames of a clip, the summarization
might lose the clip context [20]. Hyperlapse techniques
yield quick access to the meaningful parts and also preserve
the whole video context by fast-forwarding the videos applying an adaptive frame selection [9, 7, 22]. Despite the
Hyperlapse techniques being able to address the shake effects of fast-forwarding first-person videos, handling every
frame equally important is a major weakness of these techniques. In a lengthy stream recorded using the always-on
mode, some portions of the videos are undoubtedly more
relevant than others.
Most recently, methods on fast-forward videos emphasizing relevant content have emerged as promising and effective approaches to deal with the tasks of visual smoothness and semantic highlighting of first-person videos. The
relevant information is emphasized by playing faster the
12383

