A Closer Look at Spatiotemporal Convolutions for Action Recognition
Du Tran1 , Heng Wang1 , Lorenzo Torresani1,2 , Jamie Ray1 , Yann LeCun1 , Manohar Paluri1
1
2
Facebook Research
Dartmouth College
{trandu,hengwang,torresani,jamieray,yann,mano}@fb.com

Abstract
In this paper we discuss several forms of spatiotemporal
convolutions for video analysis and study their effects on
action recognition. Our motivation stems from the observation that 2D CNNs applied to individual frames of the video
have remained solid performers in action recognition. In
this work we empirically demonstrate the accuracy advantages of 3D CNNs over 2D CNNs within the framework of
residual learning. Furthermore, we show that factorizing
the 3D convolutional filters into separate spatial and temporal components yields significantly gains in accuracy. Our
empirical study leads to the design of a new spatiotemporal
convolutional block “R(2+1)D” which produces CNNs that
achieve results comparable or superior to the state-of-theart on Sports-1M, Kinetics, UCF101, and HMDB51.

1. Introduction
Since the introduction of AlexNet [19], deep learning
has galvanized the field of still-image recognition with a
steady sequence of remarkable advances driven by insightful design innovations, such as smaller spatial filters [30],
multi-scale convolutions [34], residual learning [13], and
dense connections [14]. Conversely, it may be argued that
the video domain has not yet witnessed its “AlexNet moment.” While a deep network (I3D [4]) does currently hold
the best results in action recognition, the margin of improvement over the best hand-crafted approach (iDT [38]) is not
as impressive as in the case of image recognition. Furthermore, an image-based 2D CNN (ResNet-152 [25]) operating on individual frames of the video achieves performance
remarkably close to the state-of-the-art on the challenging
Sports-1M benchmark. This result is both surprising and
frustrating, given that 2D CNNs are unable to model temporal information and motion patterns, which one would
deem to be critical aspects for video analysis. Based on
such results, one may postulate that temporal reasoning is
not essential for accurate action recognition, because of
the strong action class information already contained in the
static frames of a sequence.

In this work, we challenge this view and revisit the role
of temporal reasoning in action recognition by means of 3D
CNNs, i.e., networks that perform 3D convolutions over the
spatiotemporal video volume. While 3D CNNs have been
widely explored in the setting of action recognition [15, 35,
36, 4], here we reconsider them within the framework of
residual learning, which has been shown to be a powerful
tool in the field of still-image recognition. We demonstrate
that 3D ResNets significantly outperform 2D ResNets for
the same depth when trained and evaluated on large-scale,
challenging action recognition benchmarks such as Sports1M [16] and Kinetics [17].
Inspired by these results, we introduce two new forms
of spatiotemporal convolution that can be viewed as middle grounds between the extremes of 2D (spatial convolution) and full 3D. The first formulation is named mixed convolution (MC) and consists in employing 3D convolutions
only in the early layers of the network, with 2D convolutions in the top layers. The rationale behind this design is
that motion modeling is a low/mid-level operation that can
be implemented via 3D convolutions in the early layers of
a network, and spatial reasoning over these mid-level motion features (implemented by 2D convolutions in the top
layers) leads to accurate action recognition. We show that
MC ResNets yield roughly a 3-4% gain in clip-level accuracy over 2D ResNets of comparable capacity and they
match the performance of 3D ResNets, which have 3 times
as many parameters. The second spatiotemporal variant is
a “(2+1)D” convolutional block, which explicitly factorizes
3D convolution into two separate and successive operations,
a 2D spatial convolution and a 1D temporal convolution.
What do we gain from such a decomposition? The first
advantage is an additional nonlinear rectification between
these two operations. This effectively doubles the number
of nonlinearities compared to a network using full 3D convolutions for the same number of parameters, thus rendering
the model capable of representing more complex functions.
The second potential benefit is that the decomposition facilitates the optimization, yielding in practice both a lower
training loss and a lower testing loss. In other words we find
that, compared to full 3D filters where appearance and dy16450

