SoS-RSC: A Sum-of-Squares Polynomial Approach to Robustifying Subspace
Clustering Algorithms∗
Mario Sznaier and Octavia Camps
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 02115
{msznaier,camps}@coe.neu.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of subspace clustering in the presence of outliers. Typically, this scenario is
handled through a regularized optimization, whose computational complexity scales polynomially with the size of the
data. Further, the regularization terms need to be manually tuned to achieve optimal performance. To circumvent these difficulties, in this paper we propose an outlier
removal algorithm based on evaluating a suitable sum-ofsquares polynomial, computed directly from the data. This
algorithm only requires performing two singular value decompositions of fixed size, and provides certificates on the
probability of misclassifying outliers as inliers.

1. Introduction
Many problems involve fitting piecewise models to a
given set of points (Fig.1), often in the presence of outliers. Examples include motion segmentation [22], video
segmentation [20], image compression [8], face recognition
[1], and system identification [15]. Due to its importance, a
substantial research effort has been devoted to this problem,
leading to many algorithms, that can be roughly classified
into statistical, algebraic and self-representation based.
RANdom SAmple Consensus (RANSAC) [5] type methods use a sampling based approach to find, at each iteration,
a subspace that fits as many data points as possible. These
points are then removed from the dataset and the process is
repeated, until a given threshold on the percentage of inliers
is exceeded. While in principle these methods can correctly
cluster noisy data, even in the presence of outliers, they may
require a large number of iterations to do so.
Algebraic methods such as Generalized Principal Com∗ This work was supported in part by NSF grants IIS–1318145, ECCS–

1404163, CMMI–1638234 and CNS–1646121; AFOSR grant FA9550-151-0392; and the Alert DHS Center of Excellence under Award Number
2013-ST-061-ED0001.

Figure 1: Many practical applications involve fitting linear subspaces to sample data. Images from Coil-100, Extended Yale B,
Caltech 256, Hopkins155, and MNIST datasets were used in our
experiments.

ponent Analysis (GPCA) [16] and its variants exploit subspace arrangements properties, reducing the problem to estimating a multivariate polynomial from noisy measurements of its zeros. Once this polynomial has been found,
the parameters of the subspaces can be recovered via polynomial differentiation. While GPCA works well with clean
data, its performance degrades quickly with the noise level.
This drawback has motivated the approaches in [19] and
[3] where the original data is “cleaned” by solving a polynomial optimization. Although these methods can handle
substantial noise levels and outlier percentages, their main
drawback is their computational complexity.
An alternative to algebraic approaches are methods that
exploit the self-expressiveness of subspaces. In most of
these approaches, the goal becomes finding a clustering
that renders a suitably defined affinity matrix, typically
obtained by solving a sparsification or rank minimization problem, block-diagonal. Examples of these techniques include Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) [4], Robust PCA (RPCA) [2], Low Rank Representation (LRR)
[13], Fixed Rank Representation (FRR) [14] and Robust
Subspace Clustering (RSC) [20]. These methods work well
in the presence of noise and offer theoretical recovery guarantees. On the other hand, handling outliers requires augmenting the objective function with additional regulariza-

8033

