Anatomical Priors in Convolutional Networks for
Unsupervised Biomedical Segmentation
Adrian V. Dalca
MIT and MGH

John Guttag
MIT

Mert R. Sabuncu
Cornell University

adalca@mit.edu

guttag@mit.edu

msabuncu@cornell.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of segmenting a biomedical image into anatomical regions of interest. We specifically address the frequent scenario where we have no paired training data that contains images and their manual segmentations. Instead, we employ unpaired segmentation images
that we use to build an anatomical prior. Critically these
segmentations can be derived from imaging data from a different dataset and imaging modality than the current task.
We introduce a generative probabilistic model that employs
the learned prior through a convolutional neural network
to compute segmentations in an unsupervised setting. We
conducted an empirical analysis of the proposed approach
in the context of structural brain MRI segmentation, using a
multi-study dataset of more than 14,000 scans. Our results
show that an anatomical prior enables fast unsupervised
segmentation which is typically not possible using standard convolutional networks. The integration of anatomical priors can facilitate CNN-based anatomical segmentation in a range of novel clinical problems, where few or
no annotations are available and thus standard networks
are not trainable. The code, model definitions and model
weights are freely available at http://github.com/
adalca/neuron.

1. Introduction
Biomedical image segmentation plays a crucial role in
many applications, such as population analysis, disease progression modelling, or treatment planning. Convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), a class of deep learning methods,
have recently been employed to derive powerful biomedical
segmentation algorithms, showing promise of overcoming
limitations in previous methods [3, 4, 29, 34]. However,
CNN-based approaches most often depend on (large-scale)
training data, particularly in the form of image scans paired
with segmentations. These annotations are often costly and
challenging to obtain because they require the tedious effort

of a trained expert, taking several expert hours per scan.

1.1. Contributions
To our knowledge, there has not been a theoretically rigorous effort to integrate rich probabilistic anatomical priors
with a CNN-based segmentation model in a computationally effective manner. We introduce a generative model for
biomedical segmentation that employs an anatomical prior.
We describe a principled theoretical derivation that follows
directly from our generative model. We demonstrate that
this yields intuitive cost functions and simpler models. We
use an auto-encoding variational CNN to characterize the
anatomical prior, and an encoder-decoder CNN to provide
fast segmentation of medical images in unsupervised settings.
We demonstrate the method in an unsupervised biomedical image segmentation setting where paired annotations are
not available. Our proposed strategy is general and computationally efficient, provides a natural framework for sampling possible subject-specific segmentations of a scan, and
provides uncertainty estimates for these segmentations.

2. Related Work
2.1. Segmentation Convolutional Neural Networks
CNN-based segmentation approaches generally rely on
fully convolutional architectures applied to image data.
They extract hierarchical and multi-resolution features that
are in turn combined to compute a semantic segmentation [23, 29, 31, 34].
A popular discriminative segmentation architecture, Unet [29], involves a convolutional encoder or downsampling network, followed by a convolutional decoder or upsampling network, and skip-connections between layers.
The encoder captures relevant features of the input image
at different resolutions. The decoder then synthesizes a
high-resolution segmentation, using the skip connections to
achieve voxel-level precision. While the exact architecture
of these networks, such as the number of layers and levels,
size of convolution kernels, or application of batch normal19290

