Learning to Segment Every Thing
Ronghang Hu1,2,∗
1

Piotr Dollár2

BAIR, UC Berkeley

Kaiming He2
2

Trevor Darrell1

Ross Girshick2

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
kitchen 0.54
oven 0.51

Abstract

refrigerator 0.54

stove 0.56

Most methods for object instance segmentation require
all training examples to be labeled with segmentation
masks. This requirement makes it expensive to annotate new
categories and has restricted instance segmentation models
to ∼100 well-annotated classes. The goal of this paper is to
propose a new partially supervised training paradigm, together with a novel weight transfer function, that enables
training instance segmentation models on a large set of categories all of which have box annotations, but only a small
fraction of which have mask annotations. These contributions allow us to train Mask R-CNN to detect and segment
3000 visual concepts using box annotations from the Visual
Genome dataset and mask annotations from the 80 classes
in the COCO dataset. We evaluate our approach in a controlled study on the COCO dataset. This work is a first
step towards instance segmentation models that have broad
comprehension of the visual world.

1. Introduction
Object detectors have become significantly more accurate (e.g., [10, 34]) and gained important new capabilities.
One of the most exciting is the ability to predict a foreground segmentation mask for each detected object (e.g.,
[15]), a task called instance segmentation. In practice, typical instance segmentation systems are restricted to a narrow
slice of the vast visual world that includes only around 100
object categories.
A principle reason for this limitation is that state-of-theart instance segmentation algorithms require strong supervision and such supervision may be limited and expensive
to collect for new categories [23]. By comparison, bounding box annotations are more abundant and less expensive
[4]. This fact raises a question: Is it possible to train highquality instance segmentation models without complete instance segmentation annotations for all categories? With
this motivation, our paper introduces a new partially supervised instance segmentation task and proposes a novel
transfer learning method to address it.
∗ Work done during an internship at FAIR.

burner 0.52

handle 0.74
pot 0.74
bottle 0.56

knob knob
0.83 0.57
shelf 0.61
knob 0.70
knob 0.76
knob 0.71
knob 0.68
handle 0.51

shelf 0.73

door 0.55

jar 0.55

Figure 1. We explore training instance segmentation models
with partial supervision: a subset of classes (green boxes) have
instance mask annotations during training; the remaining classes
(red boxes) have only bounding box annotations. This image
shows output from our model trained for 3000 classes from Visual
Genome, using mask annotations from only 80 classes in COCO.

We formulate the partially supervised instance segmentation task as follows: (1) given a set of categories of interest, a small subset has instance mask annotations, while
the other categories have only bounding box annotations;
(2) the instance segmentation algorithm should utilize this
data to fit a model that can segment instances of all object
categories in the set of interest. Since the training data is a
mixture of strongly annotated examples (those with masks)
and weakly annotated examples (those with only boxes), we
refer to the task as partially supervised.
The main benefit of partially supervised vs. weaklysupervised training (c.f . [18]) is it allows us to build a largescale instance segmentation model by exploiting both types
of existing datasets: those with bounding box annotations
over a large number of classes, such as Visual Genome
[20], and those with instance mask annotations over a small
number of classes, such as COCO [23]. As we will show,
this enables us to scale state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods to thousands of categories, a capability that is
critical for their deployment in real world uses.
To address partially supervised instance segmentation,
we propose a novel transfer learning approach built on
Mask R-CNN [15]. Mask R-CNN is well-suited to our

4233

