Defocus Blur Detection via Multi-Stream Bottom-Top-Bottom Fully
Convolutional Network
Wenda Zhao1 , Fan Zhao2 , Dong Wang1∗, Huchuan Lu1
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{zhaowenda, wdice, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, zhaofan@dicp.ac.cn

Abstract
Defocus blur detection (DBD) is the separation of infocus and out-of-focus regions in an image. This process
has been paid considerable attention because of its remarkable potential applications. Accurate differentiation of homogeneous regions and detection of low-contrast focal regions, as well as suppression of background clutter, are
challenges associated with DBD. To address these issues,
we propose a multi-stream bottom-top-bottom fully convolutional network (BTBNet), which is the first attempt to develop an end-to-end deep network for DBD. First, we develop a fully convolutional BTBNet to integrate low-level
cues and high-level semantic information. Then, considering that the degree of defocus blur is sensitive to scales,
we propose multi-stream BTBNets that handle input images
with different scales to improve the performance of DBD.
Finally, we design a fusion and recurrent reconstruction
network to recurrently refine the preceding blur detection
maps. To promote further study and evaluation of the DBD
models, we construct a new database of 500 challenging images and their pixel-wise defocus blur annotations. Experimental results on the existing and our new datasets demonstrate that the proposed method achieves significantly better
performance than other state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Defocus blur is caused by a wide aperture that prevents
light rays converging when the scene point is not at the
camera’s focus distance. This effect is extremely common
in images captured using optical imaging systems. Defocus blur detection (DBD) is performed to separate blurred
and non-blurred regions for a given image. Accurate detection of blurred or non-blurred regions is important and
practical in many applications, including salient object detection [10], blur region segmentation [12], defocus magni∗ Corresponding Author

(a) Source

(b) MRRs

(c) GT

(d) DBDF

(e) DHCF

(f) Ours

Figure 1. A challenging example for defocus blur detection (DBD). (a)-(f): source image, magnified rectangular regions (MRRs),
ground truth (GT), DBDF [20], DHCF [17], and our DBD map.

fication [2], image restoration [34], to name a few.
Based on the adopted image features, the DBD methods can be generally divided into two categories: methods
based on hand-crafted features; and methods based on deep
learning features. The former one exploits low-level defocus blur cues, such as gradient and frequency. Gradientbased methods [18, 16, 36, 38, 23, 15] are motivated by the
fact that blur directly suppresses image gradients. Thus, the
gradient distribution in a clear region tends to include more
heavy-tail components. From the perspective of frequency [17, 27, 20, 35, 28, 37], blur attenuates high frequency
components. These methods are often effective in simple
DBD scenarios, however, they cannot well handle the following challenging cases.
First, low-level defocus blur cues are difficult to use in
differentiating homogeneous regions where the in-focus smooth regions and blurred smooth regions do not contain
structural information (e.g., edges and textures). Examples
are shown in the orange rectangular regions of Figure 1
(a) and the enlarged regions are illustrated in Figure 1 (b).

3080

