Geometry-Aware Network for Non-Rigid Shape Prediction from a Single View
A. Pumarola1

A. Agudo1
L. Porzi2
A. Sanfeliu1
V. Lepetit3
F. Moreno-Noguer1
1
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
2
Mapillary Research, Graz, Austria
3
Laboratoire Bordelais de Recherche en Informatique, Université de Bordeaux, France

Abstract
We propose a method for predicting the 3D shape of a
deformable surface from a single view. By contrast with
previous approaches, we do not need a pre-registered template of the surface, and our method is robust to the lack
of texture and partial occlusions. At the core of our approach is a geometry-aware deep architecture that tackles
the problem as usually done in analytic solutions: first perform 2D detection of the mesh and then estimate a 3D shape
that is geometrically consistent with the image. We train
this architecture in an end-to-end manner using a large
dataset of synthetic renderings of shapes under different levels of deformation, material properties, textures and lighting conditions. We evaluate our approach on a test split of
this dataset and available real benchmarks, consistently improving state-of-the-art solutions with a significantly lower
computational time.

1. Introduction
Motivated by the current success of deep learning methods for estimating a depth map from a single image of a
scene [18, 19, 20], in this paper we tackle the related problem of estimating the underlying parametric model defining
the shape of a non-rigid surface from a single image. This
problem has been traditionally addressed in the context of
the Shape-from-Template (SfT) paradigm [9], requiring a
reference template image of the surface for which the 3D
geometry is known, and a set of 3D-to-2D point correspondences or a mapping between this template and the input
image. This approach, however, may be difficult to hold in
practice, specially when considering low-textured surfaces.
In this work we relax previous assumptions and present
a learning-based approach that allows for globally non-rigid
surface reconstruction from a single image without relying
on point correspondences, and which in particular, shows
robustness to situations rarely addressed previously: lack of
surface texture and large occlusions. Our model is based on
a fully differentiable Deep Neural Network that estimates

a 3D shape from a single image in an end-to-end manner,
and builds upon three branches that enforce geometry consistency of the solution.
More exactly, as illustrated in Fig. 1, a first branch of
the proposed architecture (the ‘2D Detection Branch’) is responsible for localizing the mesh onto the image, and for
fitting a 2D grid to it. The 2D vertices of this grid are
then lifted to 3D by the ‘Depth Branch’, a regressor that
combines the 2D detector confidence maps and the input
image features. Finally, a ‘Shape Branch’ is responsible
for recovering the full shape while ensuring that the estimated 3D coordinates correctly re-project onto the image.
During training, this branch also incorporates a novel fullydifferentiable layer that performs a Procrustes transformation and aligns the estimated 3D mesh with the ground
truth one. This branch is important as it was proven important to perform Procrustes alignment in previous approaches
for adapting to datasets with different reference frames and
metrics. It also favors convergence of the learning process.
Since there is no dataset large enough to train datahungry deep learning algorithms such as ours, we have created our own using a rendering tool. We have synthesized
128,000 photo-realistic pairs input 2D-image/3D-shape accounting for different levels of deformations, amount and
type of texture, material properties, viewpoints, lighting
conditions and occlusion. Figure 3-Top shows some examples. Evaluation on a test split of this dataset demonstrates
remarkable improvement of our network compared to stateof-the-art SfT techniques, which typically rely on known
3D-to-2D correspondences, especially under strong occlusions and poorly-textured surfaces. Furthermore, our model
learned with synthetic data can be easily fine-tuned to real
sequences, using just a few additional real training samples.
Results on the CVLab sequences [48] with a bending paper
and a deforming t-shirt again clearly show that our method
outperforms existing approaches.
In summary, our main contributions are: 1) the first—
to the best of our knowledge—fully-differentiable model
for non-rigid surface reconstruction from a single image
that does not require initialization, accurate knowledge of
14681

