Efficient Optimization for Rank-based Loss Functions
Pritish Mohapatra∗
IIIT Hyderabad
C.V. Jawahar
IIIT Hyderabad

Michal Rolı́nek∗
MPI Tübingen

Vladimir Kolmogorov
IST Austria

Abstract
The accuracy of information retrieval systems is often
measured using complex loss functions such as the average precision (AP) or the normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG). Given a set of positive and negative
samples, the parameters of a retrieval system can be estimated by minimizing these loss functions. However, the
non-differentiability and non-decomposability of these loss
functions does not allow for simple gradient based optimization algorithms. This issue is generally circumvented
by either optimizing a structured hinge-loss upper bound to
the loss function or by using asymptotic methods like the
direct-loss minimization framework. Yet, the high computational complexity of loss-augmented inference, which is
necessary for both the frameworks, prohibits its use in large
training data sets. To alleviate this deficiency, we present
a novel quicksort flavored algorithm for a large class of
non-decomposable loss functions. We provide a complete
characterization of the loss functions that are amenable
to our algorithm, and show that it includes both AP and
NDCG based loss functions. Furthermore, we prove that
no comparison based algorithm can improve upon the computational complexity of our approach asymptotically. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in the context
of optimizing the structured hinge loss upper bound of AP
and NDCG loss for learning models for a variety of vision
tasks. We show that our approach provides significantly better results than simpler decomposable loss functions, while
requiring a comparable training time.

1. Introduction
Information retrieval systems require us to rank a set of
samples according to their relevance to a query. The risk of
the predicted ranking is measured by a user-specified loss
∗ The first two authors contributed equally and can be reached at pritish.mohapatra@research.iiit.ac.in, michal.rolinek@tuebingen.mpg.de respectively.

M. Pawan Kumar
University of Oxford, Alan Turing Institute

function. Several intuitive loss functions have been proposed in the literature. These include simple decomposable losses (that is, loss functions that decompose over each
training sample) such as 0-1 loss [16, 20] and the area under
the ROC curve [1, 11], as well as the more complex nondecomposable losses (that is, loss functions that depend on
the entire training data set) such as the average precision
(AP) [5, 27] and the normalized discounted cumulative gain
(NDCG) [6].
When learning a retrieval system, one can use a training objective that is agnostic to the risk, such as in the
case of LambdaMART [4]. In this work, we focus on approaches that explicitly take into account the loss function
used to measure the risk. Such approaches can use any one
of the many machine learning frameworks such as structured support vector machines (SSVM) [24, 25], deep neural networks [23], decision forests [14], or boosting [21].
To estimate the parameters of the framework, they employ
a training objective that is closely related to the empirical
risk computed over a large training data set. Specifically,
it is common practice to employ either a structured hinge
upper bound to the loss function [6, 27], or an asymptotic
alternative such as direct loss minimization [10, 22].
The feasibility of both the structured hinge loss and the
direct loss minimization approach depends on the computational efficiency of the loss-augmented inference procedure. When the loss function is decomposable, the lossaugmented inference problem can be solved efficiently by
independently considering each training sample. However,
for non-decomposable loss functions, it presents a hard
computational challenge. For example, given a training data
set with P positive (relevant to the query) and N negative
(not relevant to the query) samples, the best known algorithms for loss-augmented inference for AP and NDCG loss
functions have a complexity of O(P N + N log N ) [6, 27].
Since the number of negative samples N can be very large
in practice, this prohibits their use on large data sets.
In order to address the computational challenge of nondecomposable loss functions such as those based on AP and
13693

