Learning 3D Shape Completion from Laser Scan Data with Weak Supervision
David Stutz1,2
Andreas Geiger1,3
1
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems and University of Tübingen
2
Computer Vision and Multimodal Computing, Max-Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken
3
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zürich
david.stutz@mpi-inf.mpg.de,andreas.geiger@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
3D shape completion from partial point clouds is a fundamental problem in computer vision and computer graphics. Recent approaches can be characterized as either datadriven or learning-based. Data-driven approaches rely on
a shape model whose parameters are optimized to fit the observations. Learning-based approaches, in contrast, avoid
the expensive optimization step and instead directly predict the complete shape from the incomplete observations
using deep neural networks. However, full supervision is
required which is often not available in practice. In this
work, we propose a weakly-supervised learning-based approach to 3D shape completion which neither requires slow
optimization nor direct supervision. While we also learn a
shape prior on synthetic data, we amortize, i.e., learn, maximum likelihood fitting using deep neural networks resulting
in efficient shape completion without sacrificing accuracy.
Tackling 3D shape completion of cars on ShapeNet [5] and
KITTI [18], we demonstrate that the proposed amortized
maximum likelihood approach is able to compete with a
fully supervised baseline and a state-of-the-art data-driven
approach while being significantly faster. On ModelNet
[49], we additionally show that the approach is able to generalize to other object categories as well.

1. Introduction
3D shape perception is a long-standing problem both in
human [35, 36] and computer vision [17]. In both disciplines, a large body of work focuses on 3D reconstruction,
e.g., reconstructing objects or scenes from one or multiple views, which is an inherently ill-posed inverse problem where many configurations of shape, color, texture and
lighting may result in the very same image [17]. Both human and computer vision are related through insights regarding the cues and constraints used by humans to perceive 3D shapes. Motivated by results from human vision [35, 36], these priors are usually built into 3D recon-

Figure 1: Illustration of the 3D Shape Completion Problem. Top: Given a 3D bounding box and an incomplete
point cloud (left, red), our goal is to predict the complete
shape of the object (right, beige). Bottom: Shape completion results on a street scene from KITTI [18]. Learning
shape completion on real-world data is challenging due to
sparse / noisy observations and missing ground truth.

struction pipelines through explicit assumptions. Recently,
however – leveraging the success of deep learning – researchers started to learn shape models from data. Predominantly generative models have been used to learn how
to generate, manipulate and reason about 3D shapes, e.g.,
[4, 20, 41, 48, 49], thereby offering many interesting possibilities for a wide variety of problems.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of inferring and
completing 3D shapes based on sparse and noisy 3D point
observations as illustrated in Fig. 1. This problem occurs
when only a single view of an individual object is provided or large parts of the object are occluded as, e.g.,
in autonomous driving applications. Existing approaches
to shape completion can be roughly categorized into datadriven and learning-based methods. The former usually
rely on learned shape priors and formulate shape comple-

1955

