Inferring Light Fields from Shadows
Manel Baradad1

Vickie Ye1

William T. Freeman1,2
1

Adam B. Yedidia1

Gregory W. Wornell1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Frédo Durand1
Antonio Torralba1

2

Google Research

{mbaradad,vye16,adamy,fredo,billf,gww}@mit.edu, torralba@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We present a method for inferring a 4D light field of a
hidden scene from 2D shadows cast by a known occluder
on a diffuse wall. We do this by determining how light
naturally reflected off surfaces in the hidden scene interacts
with the occluder. By modeling the light transport as a
linear system, and incorporating prior knowledge about
light field structures, we can invert the system to recover
the hidden scene. We demonstrate results of our inference
method across simulations and experiments with different
types of occluders. For instance, using the shadow cast by
a real house plant, we are able to recover low resolution
light fields with different levels of texture and parallax
complexity. We provide two experimental results: a human
subject and two planar elements at different depths.

1. Introduction
Imagine you are peering into a room through an open
doorway, and all you can see is a white wall and an object
placed just in front of it. Although you cannot see the rest
of the room directly, the object is casting complex shadows
on the wall (see Fig. 1). What information can be deduced
from the patterns these shadows make? Is recovering a 2D
picture of the room possible? What about depth recovery?
The problem of imaging scenes that are not within direct
line of sight has a wide range of applications, including
search-and-rescue, anti-terrorism and transportation [2].
However, this problem is very challenging. Previous
approaches to non-line-of-sight (NLoS) imaging have used
time-of-flight (ToF) cameras or shadows cast by ambient
light to count objects in the hidden scene [28], or to
reconstruct approximate low-dimensional images [3, 23].
In this paper, we attempt a far more ambitious class of
reconstructions: estimating the 4D light field produced by
what remains hidden. The recovered light field would allow
us to view the hidden scene from multiple perspectives and

Figure 1: Example scenario. An observer peers partially
into a room, and she is only able to see two things: a plant
and the shadow it casts on the wall. If the observer can fully
characterize the geometry of the plant, what can she learn
about the rest of the room by analyzing the shadow?
thereby recover parallax information that can tell us about
the hidden scene’s geometry.
Previous NLoS imaging methods that rely on secondary
reflections from a naturally illuminated hidden scene use
the known imaging conditions to approximate a transfer
matrix—a linear relationship between all elements in the
scene to observations on the visible reflector. They
then invert this transfer matrix while simultaneously
incorporating prior knowledge about likely scene structure,
yielding a transformation that takes these observations as
input and returns a reconstruction of the scene.
Our approach is also modeled on these principles, but
prior knowledge plays an even more important role. An
image of the white wall only provides a 2D array of
observations. If we are going to reconstruct a 4D array
of light-field samples from a vastly smaller number of
observations, we must rely much more heavily on our
16267

