Eliminating Background-bias for Robust Person Re-identiﬁcation
Maoqing Tian1 , Shuai Yi1 , Hongsheng Li2 , Shihua Li3 ,
Xuesen Zhang1 , Jianping Shi1 , Junjie Yan1 , Xiaogang Wang2
1
SenseTime Research, 2 Chinese University of Hong Kong, 3 Shenzhen Municipal Public Security Bureau
tianmaoqing@sensetime.com, yishuai@sensetime.com, jasonlee@szga.gov.cn

Dissimilar
Background

Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation is an important topic in intelligent surveillance and computer vision. It aims to accurately
measure visual similarities between person images for determining whether two images correspond to the same person. State-of-the-art methods mainly utilize deep learning
based approaches for learning visual features for describing person appearances. However, we observe that existing deep learning models are biased to capture too much
relevance between background appearances of person images. We design a series of experiments with newly created datasets to validate the influence of background information. To solve the background bias problem, we propose a person-region guided pooling deep neural network
based on human parsing maps to learn more discriminative
person-part features, and propose to augment training data
with person images with random background. Extensive experiments demonstrate the robustness and effectiveness of
our proposed method. 1 2

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation aims to identify a person of interest from a large gallery image database collected from
different cameras, when given a probe image of the person.
Person re-identiﬁcation is conducted by estimating the visual similarities between person images. According to the
similarities between a probe image and gallery images, the
gallery images can be ranked in the descending order of the
similarities as re-identiﬁcation results. Such a task has extensive applications in intelligent surveillance. For instance,
1 S. Yi and H. Li are the corresponding authors.
2 This work is supported in part by SenseTime Group Limited, in
part by the Shenzhen Municipal Public Security Bureau, in part by the
General Research Fund through the Research Grants Council of Hong
Kong under Grants CUHK14213616, CUHK14206114, CUHK14205615,
CUHK419412, CUHK14203015, CUHK14239816, CUHK14207814,
CUHK14208417, CUHK14202217 in part by the Hong Kong Innovation
and Technology Support Programme Grant ITS/121/15FX, and in part by
the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2014M552339.

Similar
Background

Figure 1. One example to show the background bias in person reidentiﬁcation. We rank all the gallery pictures by the distance between probe picture ascending and list them from left to right. (a).
The probe pictures. (b). The same person from the same camera. (c).The different person from the same camera having similar
background with probe pictures. (d). The same person from different camera which has bigger distance than (c) because of the
background bias.

it can be used to search criminal suspects or missing persons from a large surveillance camera network efﬁciently
and effectively. In recent years, the performance of person
re-identiﬁcation has been improved signiﬁcantly because of
the emergence of deep learning techniques and more advanced computational hardware.
Deep learning based approaches were proposed to learn
feature representations for describing persons’ visual differences. The similarities between person images can then be
efﬁciently calculated as the distances between their visual
features. However, there remain challenges that existing
methods fail to investigate (see Figure 1).
Firstly, the inﬂuence of background (context) regions of
person images is mostly ignored by existing methods. Person images for re-identiﬁcation algorithms are usually obtained by cropping at person detection bounding boxes. Existing methods generally treat the whole person images as
individual data samples and therefore all pixels in each image have equal inﬂuence. However, in our experiments, we
observed that, for a large person image database consisting
of person images with different backgrounds, treating all
pixels in images equally would bias the learning algorithms
to generate high similarities between images with similar

5794

