Single-Shot Object Detection with Enriched Semantics
Zhishuai Zhang1 Siyuan Qiao1 Cihang Xie1 Wei Shen1,2 Bo Wang3 Alan L. Yuille1
Johns Hopkins University1 Shanghai University2 Hikvision Research3
zhshuai.zhang@gmail.com

siyuan.qiao@jhu.edu

cihangxie306@gmail.com

wei.shen@t.shu.edu.cn

wangbo.yunze@gmail.com

alan.yuille@jhu.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel single shot object detection network
named Detection with Enriched Semantics (DES). Our motivation is to enrich the semantics of object detection features within a typical deep detector, by a semantic segmentation branch and a global activation module. The
segmentation branch is supervised by weak segmentation
ground-truth, i.e., no extra annotation is required. In conjunction with that, we employ a global activation module which learns relationship between channels and object
classes in a self-supervised manner. Comprehensive experimental results on both PASCAL VOC and MS COCO detection datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. In particular, with a VGG16 based DES, we
achieve an mAP of 81.7 on VOC2007 test and an mAP of
32.8 on COCO test-dev with an inference speed of 31.5
milliseconds per image on a Titan Xp GPU. With a lower
resolution version, we achieve an mAP of 79.7 on VOC2007
with an inference speed of 13.0 milliseconds per image.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of deep neural networks, computer
vision has been improved significantly in many aspects
such as image classification [11, 13, 15, 24, 27], object detection [3, 17, 20, 21, 25], and segmentation [2, 10, 18].
Among them, object detection is a fundamental task which
has already been extensively studied. Currently there are
mainly two series of object detection frameworks: the
two-stage frameworks such as Faster-RCNN [21] and RFCN [3] which extract proposals, followed by per-proposal
classification and regression; and the one-stage frameworks
such as YOLO [20] and SSD [17], which apply object classifiers and regressors in a dense manner without objectnessbased pruning. Both of them do classification and regression on a set of pre-computed anchors.
Previous single shot object detectors, such as SSD, use
multiple convolutional layers to detect objects with different sizes and aspect ratios. SSD uses a backbone network

(e.g., VGG16) to generate a low level detection feature map.
Based on that, several layers of object detection feature
maps are built, learning semantic information in a hierarchal manner. Smaller objects are detected by lower layers
while larger objects are detected by higher layers. However,
the low level features usually only capture basic visual patterns without strong semantic information. This may cause
two problems: small objects may not be detected well, and
the quality of high level features is also damaged by the imperfect low level features.
In this paper, we aim to address the problem discussed
above, by designing a novel single shot detection network,
named Detection with Enriched Semantics (DES), which
consists of two branches, a detection branch and a segmentation branch. The detection branch is a typical single shot
detector, which takes VGG16 as its backbone, and detect
objects with multiple object detection feature maps in different layers. This is shown in the upper part of Figure 1.
The segmentation branch is used to augment the low
level detection feature map with strong semantic information. It takes the low level detection feature map as input,
to learn semantic segmentation supervised by bounding-box
level segmentation ground-truth. Then it augments the low
level detection features with its semantic meaningful features, as shown in the left lower part of Figure 1.
Figure 2 gives an illustration of this semantic augmentation process. After the original low level features (B) are
activated by segmentation features (C), the augmented low
level features (D) can capture both the basic visual pattern
as well as the semantic information of the object. This can
be considered as an attention process, where each channel
of the original low level feature map is activated by a semantically meaningful attention map, to combine both basic
visual pattern and semantically meaningful knowledge.
In addition to the segmentation branch attached to the
low level detection feature map, we also employ a global
activation module for higher level detection feature maps.
It consists of several global activation blocks, as shown in
the right lower corner of Figure 1. The global activation
block can prune out the location information, and learn the

5813

