Decoupled Networks
Weiyang Liu1* , Zhen Liu1* , Zhiding Yu2 , Bo Dai1 , Rongmei Lin3 , Yisen Wang1,4 , James M. Rehg1 , Le Song1,5
1

Georgia Institute of Technology

2

NVIDIA

3

Emory University

4

Tsinghua University

5

Ant Financial

Abstract
Intra-Class Variation

Inner product-based convolution has been a central component of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and the
key to learning visual representations. Inspired by the
observation that CNN-learned features are naturally decoupled with the norm of features corresponding to the
intra-class variation and the angle corresponding to the semantic difference, we propose a generic decoupled learning framework which models the intra-class variation and
semantic difference independently. Specifically, we first
reparametrize the inner product to a decoupled form and
then generalize it to the decoupled convolution operator
which serves as the building block of our decoupled networks. We present several effective instances of the decoupled convolution operator. Each decoupled operator is
well motivated and has an intuitive geometric interpretation. Based on these decoupled operators, we further propose to directly learn the operator from data. Extensive
experiments show that such decoupled reparameterization
renders significant performance gain with easier convergence and stronger robustness.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have pushed the boundaries on a wide variety of vision tasks, including object
recognition [20, 21, 4], object detection [2, 19, 18], semantic segmentation [15], etc. A significant portion of recent studies on CNNs focused on increasing network depth
and representation ability via improved architectures such
as shortcut connections [4, 7] and multi-branch convolution [21, 25]. Despite these advances, understanding how
convolution naturally leads to discriminative representation
and good generalization remains an interesting problem.
Current CNNs often encode the similarity between a
patch x and a kernel w via inner product. The formulation of inner product hw, xi = w⊤ x couples the semantic difference (i.e., inter-class variation) and the intra-class
variation in one unified measure. As a result, when the inner product between two samples is large, one can not tell
* Equal contributions.

Email:{wyliu,liuzhen1994}@gatech.edu

Origin (0,0)

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Semantic/label Difference

Figure 1: CNN learned features are naturally decoupled. These 2D features
are output directly from the CNN by setting the feature dimension as 2.

whether the two samples have large semantic/label difference or have large intra-class variation. In order to better
study the properties of CNN representation and further improve existing frameworks, we propose to explicitly decouple semantic difference and intra-class variation1 . Specifically, we reparametrize the inner product with the norms
and the angle, i.e., kwk2 kxk2 cos(θ(w,x) ). Our direct intuition comes from the the observation in Fig. 1 where angle
accounts for semantic/label difference and feature norm accounts for intra-class variation. The larger the feature norm,
the more confident the prediction. Such naturally decoupled
phenomenon inspires us to propose the decoupled convolution operators. We hope that decoupling norm and angle in
inner product can better model the intra-class variation and
the semantic difference in deep networks.
On top of the idea to decouple the norm and the angle
in an inner product, we propose a novel decoupled network (DCNet) by generalizing traditional inner productbased convolution operators (kwkkxk cos(θ(w,x) )) to decoupled operators. To this end, we define such operator as multiplication of a function of norms h(kwk, kxk)
and a function of angle g(θ(w,x) ). The decoupled operator provides a generic framework to better model the intraclass variation and the semantic difference, and the original
CNNs are equivalent to setting h(kwk, kxk) as kwkkxk
1 Although the concepts of semantic difference and intra-class variation
often refer to classification, they are extended to convolutions in this paper. Specifically, semantic difference means the pattern similarity between
local patch x and kernel w, while intra-class variation refers to the energy
of local patch x and kernel w.

2771

