Learning Strict Identity Mappings in Deep Residual Networks
Xin Yu1

Zhiding Yu2 Srikumar Ramalingam1
1
University of Utah 2 NVIDIA

{xiny,srikumar}@cs.utah.com, zhidingy@nvidia.com

Abstract
A family of super deep networks, referred to as residual
networks or ResNet [14], achieved record-beating performance in various visual tasks such as image recognition,
object detection, and semantic segmentation. The ability to
train very deep networks naturally pushed the researchers
to use enormous resources to achieve the best performance.
Consequently, in many applications super deep residual
networks were employed for just a marginal improvement
in performance. In this paper, we propose ǫ-ResNet that allows us to automatically discard redundant layers, which
produces responses that are smaller than a threshold ǫ,
without any loss in performance. The ǫ-ResNet architecture can be achieved using a few additional rectified linear
units in the original ResNet. Our method does not use any
additional variables nor numerous trials like other hyperparameter optimization techniques. The layer selection is
achieved using a single training process and the evaluation
is performed on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN, and ImageNet datasets. In some instances, we achieve about 80%
reduction in the number of parameters.

1. Introduction
The basic idea behind ǫ-ResNet is shown in Fig. 1 where
ǫ-ResNet is trained on the CIFAR100 dataset [22]. In particular, we show a 752-layer network with each residual block
having 2 convolution layers and the “pre-activation” setting
following [15]. During the training, we automatically identify the layers that can be pruned or discarded without any
loss (or with marginal loss) in the performance. We achieve
this by modifying the standard residual network with a few
additional rectified linear units that automatically discards
residual blocks whose responses are below a threshold. In
this particular instance shown, we achieve a compression
ratio of around 3.2 (original network size / reduced network
size).
Recent advances in representation learning have demonstrated the powerful role played by deep residual learning [14]. As a result, ResNet has pushed the boundaries

Figure 1. We show a very deep ǫ-residual network with 752 layers
for training CIFAR-100 [22]. During training, ǫ-ResNet identifies
the layers that can be discarded with marginal or no loss in performance. The red lines indicate the layers that can be pruned, and the
blue lines show the layers that need to be used. In this particular
instance, we achieve a compression ratio of 3.2 (original number
of layers / reduced number of layers). The validation errors of the
original and the reduced networks are given by 24.8% and 23.8%,
respectively.

of a wide variety of vision tasks significantly, including but
are not limited to general object recognition [14, 48], object detection [34, 7, 35], face recognition [27], segmentation [5, 47, 52] and semantic boundary detection [50].
More recently, He et al. [15] proposed an improved design
of residual unit, where identity mappings are constructed
by viewing the activation functions as “pre-activation” of
the weight layers, in contrast to the conventional “postactivation” manner. This further led to considerably improved performance on very deep network architectures,
such as a 1001-layer ResNet.
The remarkable success of ResNet leads to some obvious questions: What makes it work better than earlier architectures? One advantage with ResNet is its ability to
handle vanishing/exploding gradients. However, the success could not be attributed only to this since many prior
methods have already handled this with normalized initialization [24, 10, 13]. Another key contributing factor is the
depth, which has been proven to be extremely beneficial
in model expressiveness [12, 29, 38]. It was observed that
training very deep neural networks is not a straightforward
14432

