What do Deep Networks Like to See?
Sebastian Palacio∗ Joachim Folz∗ Jörn Hees Federico Raue Damian Borth
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)
TU Kaiserslautern
first.last@dfki.de

encoder
(fixed)

We propose a novel way to measure and understand convolutional neural networks by quantifying the amount of input signal they let in. To do this, an autoencoder (AE) was
fine-tuned on gradients from a pre-trained classifier with
fixed parameters. We compared the reconstructed samples
from AEs that were fine-tuned on a set of image classifiers
(AlexNet, VGG16, ResNet-50, and Inception v3) and found
substantial differences. The AE learns which aspects of the
input space to preserve and which ones to ignore, based on
the information encoded in the backpropagated gradients.
Measuring the changes in accuracy when the signal of one
classifier is used by a second one, a relation of total order
emerges. This order depends directly on each classifier’s input signal but it does not correlate with classification accuracy or network size. Further evidence of this phenomenon
is provided by measuring the normalized mutual information between original images and auto-encoded reconstructions from different fine-tuned AEs. These findings break
new ground in the area of neural network understanding,
opening a new way to reason, debug, and interpret their results. We present four concrete examples in the literature
where observations can now be explained in terms of the
input signal that a model uses.

1. Introduction
Diagnostics for Deep Neural Networks often rely on
measurements taken at the end of the processing pipeline.
Pinpointing issues with a network’s architecture, learning
process, and capacity typically depends on metrics based
on the evolution of the loss function or on performance measurements like top-k accuracy. For example, to establish the
presence of overfitting in a network, divergence of training
and validation losses is considered as a good indicator. Under these circumstances, there are general guidelines to follow like early stopping, loss regularization, acquiring more
∗ Authors contributed equally

decoder
(fine-tuned)

classifier
(fixed)
“Rough Collie”

Abstract

Andreas Dengel

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method and model. A pretrained AE is fine-tuned with gradients flowing through a pretrained image classifier whose parameters are fixed. After finetuning the combined network, images reconstructed by the AE
preserve more information required by the classifier.

data or reducing the number of parameters in the model [3].
Although these strategies are indeed effective against variance, they do not provide detailed insights on why the network failed to generalize in the first place. To further understand the transformation of input samples into predictions,
strategies have been proposed to look at the internal signals
of networks [35, 25]. These provide insightful properties,
but they serve a descriptive purpose rather than a predictive
one.
Recently, Zhang et al. [36] pointed out that our current
understanding of how networks learn general features is incomplete and requires a different angle. We propose a way
to study neural networks based on quantifying the information contained in input samples that classification networks
rely on. In general, a deep convolutional neural network
(DCNN) can be modeled as a function y = f (x, θ ) where
both the properties of the output y and parameters θ have
been widely studied. In contrast, we introduce a novel way
to examine the properties of the input x and, more precisely,
the amount of signal that the network itself takes in from x.
Intuitively a convolution operation with kernel size k and
striding s covers the entire input spatially as long as s ≤ k.
In other words, such operations incorporate the complete
input space. In this work, we investigate how influential the
input space is, not from the perspective of individual samples but rather of the model as a whole. We found that, in
practice, information from input samples that image clas-

3108

