MegaDepth: Learning Single-View Depth Prediction from Internet Photos
Zhengqi Li
Noah Snavely
Department of Computer Science & Cornell Tech, Cornell University

Abstract
Single-view depth prediction is a fundamental problem
in computer vision. Recently, deep learning methods have
led to significant progress, but such methods are limited by
the available training data. Current datasets based on 3D
sensors have key limitations, including indoor-only images
(NYU), small numbers of training examples (Make3D), and
sparse sampling (KITTI). We propose to use multi-view Internet photo collections, a virtually unlimited data source,
to generate training data via modern structure-from-motion
and multi-view stereo (MVS) methods, and present a large
depth dataset called MegaDepth based on this idea. Data
derived from MVS comes with its own challenges, including noise and unreconstructable objects. We address these
challenges with new data cleaning methods, as well as automatically augmenting our data with ordinal depth relations
generated using semantic segmentation. We validate the use
of large amounts of Internet data by showing that models
trained on MegaDepth exhibit strong generalization—not
only to novel scenes, but also to other diverse datasets including Make3D, KITTI, and DIW, even when no images
from those datasets are seen during training.1

(a) Internet photo of Colosseum

(b) Image from Make3D

(c) Our single-view depth prediction (d) Our single-view depth prediction

(e) Image from KITTI

(f) Our single-view depth prediction

1. Introduction
Predicting 3D shape from a single image is an important
capability of visual reasoning, with applications in robotics,
graphics, and other vision tasks such as intrinsic images.
While single-view depth estimation is a challenging, underconstrained problem, deep learning methods have recently driven significant progress. Such methods thrive when
trained with large amounts of data. Unfortunately, fully general training data in the form of (RGB image, depth map)
pairs is difficult to collect. Commodity RGB-D sensors
such as Kinect have been widely used for this purpose [34],
but are limited to indoor use. Laser scanners have enabled
important datasets such as Make3D [29] and KITTI [25],
but such devices are cumbersome to operate (in the case
of industrial scanners), or produce sparse depth maps (in
1 Project website: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/projects/

megadepth/

Figure 1: We use large Internet image collections, combined
with 3D reconstruction and semantic labeling methods, to
generate large amounts of training data for single-view depth
prediction. (a), (b), (e): Example input RGB images. (c),
(d), (f): Depth maps predicted by our MegaDepth-trained
CNN (blue=near, red=far). For these results, the network
was not trained on Make3D and KITTI data.

the case of LIDAR). Moreover, both Make3D and KITTI
are collected in specific scenarios (a university campus, and
atop a car, respectively). Training data can also be generated
through crowdsourcing, but this approach has so far been
limited to gathering sparse ordinal relationships or surface
normals [12, 4, 5].
In this paper, we explore the use of a nearly unlimited
source of data for this problem: images from the Internet
from overlapping viewpoints, from which structure-from-

2041

