Exploit the Unknown Gradually: One-Shot Video-Based Person
Re-Identification by Stepwise Learning

1

Yu Wu1,2 , Yutian Lin2 , Xuanyi Dong2 , Yan Yan2 , Wanli Ouyang3 , Yi Yang1,2∗
SUSTech-UTS Joint Centre of CIS, Southern China University of Science and Technology
2
University of Technology Sydney 3 The University of Sydney
yu.wu-3@student.uts.edu.au; yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
We focus on the one-shot learning for video-based
person re-Identification (re-ID). Unlabeled tracklets for
the person re-ID tasks can be easily obtained by preprocessing, such as pedestrian detection and tracking. In
this paper, we propose an approach to exploiting unlabeled tracklets by gradually but steadily improving the discriminative capability of the Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) feature representation via stepwise learning. We first
initialize a CNN model using one labeled tracklet for each
identity. Then we update the CNN model by the following
two steps iteratively: 1. sample a few candidates with most
reliable pseudo labels from unlabeled tracklets; 2. update
the CNN model according to the selected data. Instead
of the static sampling strategy applied in existing works,
we propose a progressive sampling method to increase the
number of the selected pseudo-labeled candidates step by
step. We systematically investigate the way how we should
select pseudo-labeled tracklets into the training set to make
the best use of them. Notably, the rank-1 accuracy of our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art method by 21.46
points (absolute, i.e., 62.67% vs. 41.21%) on the MARS
dataset, and 16.53 points on the DukeMTMC-VideoReID
dataset1 .

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims at spotting the
person-of-interest from different cameras. In recent years,
person re-ID on the large-scale video data, such as surveillance videos, has attracted significant attention [10, 20, 28,
32, 35]. Most proposed approaches rely on the fully annotated data, i.e., the identity labels of all the tracklets from
multiple cross-view cameras. However, it is impractical
to annotate very large-scale surveillance videos due to the
∗ Corresponding author.
1 The code is publicly available at: https://yu-wu.net

Initialization:
one-shot tracklet

Iteration 1: add easy
samples

Iteration 2: add hard
samples

Figure 1. An illustration of the unlabeled data sampling procedure
in the feature space. The hollow point and solid point denote the
labeled tracklet and unlabeled tracklet, respectively. The pseudo
label of each unlabeled tracklet is assigned by its nearest labeled
neighbor (indicated by the colored line). Different colors represent
different identities. Samples in the shade will be incorporated into
training. We adopt the easy and reliable pseudo-labeled tracklets
for updating at the beginning and difficult ones in subsequence.

dramatically increasing cost. Therefore, semi-supervised
methods [21, 34] are of particular interest. This work
mainly focuses on the one-shot setting, in which only one
tracklet is labeled for each identity.
The key challenge for the one-shot video-based person
re-ID is the label estimation for the abundant unlabeled
tracklets [7, 34]. A typical approach is to generate the
pseudo labels for the unlabeled data at first. The initial labeled data and some selected pseudo-labeled data are considered as an enlarged training set. Lastly, this new training
set is adopted to train the re-ID model.
Most existing methods employ a static strategy to determine the quantity of selected pseudo-labeled data for further training. For example, Fan et al. [7] and Ye et al. [34]
compare the prediction confidences of pseudo-labeled samples with a pre-defined threshold. The samples with higher
confidence over the fixed threshold are then selected for the
subsequent training. During iterations, these algorithms se-

5177

