Photographic Text-to-Image Synthesis
with a Hierarchically-nested Adversarial Network
Zizhao Zhang∗ , Yuanpu Xie∗ , Lin Yang
University of Florida
∗

equal contribution

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method to deal with the
challenging task of generating photographic images conditioned on semantic image descriptions. Our method introduces accompanying hierarchical-nested adversarial objectives inside the network hierarchies, which regularize
mid-level representations and assist generator training to
capture the complex image statistics. We present an extensile single-stream generator architecture to better adapt
the jointed discriminators and push generated images up to
high resolutions. We adopt a multi-purpose adversarial loss
to encourage more effective image and text information usage in order to improve the semantic consistency and image
fidelity simultaneously. Furthermore, we introduce a new
visual-semantic similarity measure to evaluate the semantic
consistency of generated images. With extensive experimental validation on three public datasets, our method significantly improves previous state of the arts on all datasets
over different evaluation metrics.

Generator

256x256
64x64

“A small sized bird that
has a little grey belly
and red organe eyes”

Hierarchically-nested
Discriminators

This little bird has a white breast and belly, with a gray
crown and black secondaries.

1. Introduction
Photographic text-to-image synthesis is a significant
problem in generative model research [33], which aims to
learn a mapping from a semantic text space to a complex
RGB image space. This task requires the generated images to be not only realistic but also semantically consistent,
i.e., the generated images should preserve specific object
sketches and semantic details described in text.
Recently, Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have
become the main solution to this task. Reed et al. [33] address this task through a GAN based framework. But this
method only generates 642 images and can barely generate vivid object details. Based on this method, StackGAN
[46] proposes to stack another low-to-high resolution GAN
to generate 2562 images. But this method requires training
two separate GANs. Later on, [7] proposes to bypass the
difficulty of learning mappings from text to RGB images

512x512

128x128

Sample 1

Sample 2

Figure 1: Top: Overview of our hierarchically-nested adversarial network, which produces side output images with
growing resolutions. Each side output is associated with a
discriminator. Bottom: Two test sample results where finegrained details are highlighted.
and treat it as a pixel-to-pixel translation problem [14]. It
works by re-rendering an arbitrary-style 1282 training image conditioned on a targeting description. However, its
high-resolution synthesis capability is unclear. At present,
training a generative model to map from a low-dimensional
text space to a high-resolution image space in a fully endto-end manner still remains unsolved.
This paper pays attention to two major difficulties for
text-to-image synthesis with GANs. The first is balancing the convergence between generators and discriminators
16199

