Unsupervised Domain Adaptation with Similarity Learning
Pedro O. Pinheiro
Element AI
Montreal, QC, Canada
pedro@elementai.com

Abstract
The objective of unsupervised domain adaptation is to
µ
leverage
µ features from a labeled source domain and learn
a classifier for an unlabeled target domain, with a similar but different data distribution. Most deep learning approaches to domain adaptation consist of two steps: (i)
learn features that preserve a low risk on labeled samples
(source domain)
and (ii) make the features from both doµ
mains to be as indistinguishable as possible, so that a classifier trained on the source can also be applied on the target domain. In general, the classifiers
µ in step (i) consist
of fully-connected layers applied directly on the indistinguishable features learned in (ii). In this paper, we propose a different way to do the classification, using similarity
learning. The proposed method learns a pairwise similarity
function in which classification can be performed by computing similarity between prototype representations of each
category. The domain-invariant features and the categorical prototype representations are learned jointly and in an
end-to-end fashion. At inference time, images from the target domain are compared to the prototypes and the label
associated with the one that best matches the image is outputed. The approach is simple, scalable and effective. We
show that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance
in different unsupervised domain adaptation scenarios.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) [32] based
methods achieve excellent results in large-scale supervised
learning problems, where a lot of labeled data exists [30,
27]. Moreover, these features are quite general and can be
used in a variety of vision problems, such as image captioning [58], object detection [33] and segmentation [26].
However, direct transfer of features from different domains do not work very well in practice, as the data distributions of domains might change. In computer vision, this
problem is sometimes referred to as domain shift [52]. The
most commonly used approach to transfer learned features

µ3

µ1

µ2
f (xti )

µ4

Figure 1: Illustrative example of our similarity-based classifier. A query target-domain image representation is compared to a set of prototypes, one per category, computed
from source-domain images. The label of the most similar
prototype is assigned to the test image.

is to further modify them through a process called “finetuning”. In this case, the features are adapted by training
the network with labeled samples from the new data distribution. In many cases, however, acquiring labeled data can
be expensive.
Unsupervised Domain Adaption deals with the domain
shift problem. We are interested in learning representations
that are invariant to domains with different data distributions. In this scenario, the machine has access to a labeled
dataset (called source domain) and an unlabeled one (with a
similar but different data distribution, called target domain),
and the objective is to correctly infer the labels on the latter.
Most current approaches are based on deep learning methods and consist of two steps: (i) learn features that preserve
a low risk on labeled samples (source domain) and (ii) make
the features from both domains to be as indistinguishable as
possible, so that a classifier trained on the source can also
18004

