ScanComplete: Large-Scale Scene Completion and
Semantic Segmentation for 3D Scans
Angela Dai1,3,5 Daniel Ritchie2 Martin Bokeloh3 Scott Reed4 Jürgen Sturm3 Matthias Nießner5
1
Stanford University 2 Brown University 3 Google 4 DeepMind 5 Technical University of Munich

3D scans of indoor environments suffer from sensor occlusions, leaving 3D reconstructions with highly incomplete 3D
geometry (left). We propose a novel data-driven approach based on fully-convolutional neural networks that transforms
incomplete signed distance functions (SDFs) into complete meshes at unprecedented spatial extents (middle). In addition
to scene completion, our approach infers semantic class labels even for previously missing geometry (right). Our approach
outperforms existing approaches both in terms of completion and semantic labeling accuracy by a significant margin.

Abstract
We introduce ScanComplete, a novel data-driven approach for taking an incomplete 3D scan of a scene as input
and predicting a complete 3D model along with per-voxel
semantic labels. The key contribution of our method is its
ability to handle large scenes with varying spatial extent,
managing the cubic growth in data size as scene size increases. To this end, we devise a fully-convolutional generative 3D CNN model whose filter kernels are invariant to
the overall scene size. The model can be trained on scene
subvolumes but deployed on arbitrarily large scenes at test
time. In addition, we propose a coarse-to-fine inference
strategy in order to produce high-resolution output while
also leveraging large input context sizes. In an extensive
series of experiments, we carefully evaluate different model
design choices, considering both deterministic and probabilistic models for completion and semantic inference. Our
results show that we outperform other methods not only in
the size of the environments handled and processing efficiency, but also with regard to completion quality and semantic segmentation performance by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
With the wide availability of commodity RGB-D sensors such as Microsoft Kinect, Intel RealSense, and Google
Tango, 3D reconstruction of indoor spaces has gained momentum [21, 10, 23, 41, 5]. 3D reconstructions can help create content for graphics applications, and virtual and augmented reality applications rely on obtaining high-quality
3D models from the surrounding environments. Although
significant progress has been made in tracking accuracy and
efficient data structures for scanning large spaces, the resulting reconstructed 3D model quality remains unsatisfactory.
One fundamental limitation in quality is that, in general,
one can only obtain partial and incomplete reconstructions
of a given scene, as scans suffer from occlusions and the
physical limitations of range sensors. In practice, even with
careful scanning by human experts, it is virtually impossible to scan a room without holes in the reconstruction.
Holes are both aesthetically unpleasing and can lead to severe problems in downstream processing, such as 3D printing or scene editing, as it is unclear whether certain areas of
the scan represent free space or occupied space. Traditional
approaches, such as Laplacian hole filling [35, 20, 43] or
Poisson Surface reconstruction [12, 13] can fill small holes.
However, completing high-level scene geometry, such as
14578

