The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Perceptual Metric
Richard Zhang1 Phillip Isola12 Alexei A. Efros1
1
UC Berkeley 2 OpenAI

Eli Shechtman3 Oliver Wang3
3
Adobe Research

{rich.zhang, isola, efros}@eecs.berkeley.edu

{elishe,owang}@adobe.com

Patch 0

Reference

Patch 1

Patch 0

Reference

Patch 1

Patch 0

Reference

Patch 1

Humans
L2/PSNR, SSIM, FSIM
Random Networks
Unsupervised Networks
Self-Supervised Networks
Supervised Networks

Figure 1: Which patch (left or right) is “closer” to the middle patch in these examples? In each case, the traditional metrics (L2/PSNR, SSIM, FSIM) disagree with human judgments. But deep networks, even across architectures
(Squeezenet [20], AlexNet [27], VGG [51]) and supervision type (supervised [46], self-supervised [13, 40, 42, 63], and
even unsupervised [26]), provide an emergent embedding which agrees surprisingly well with humans. We further calibrate existing deep embeddings on a large-scale database of perceptual judgments; models and data can be found at
https://www.github.com/richzhang/PerceptualSimilarity.

Abstract
While it is nearly effortless for humans to quickly assess
the perceptual similarity between two images, the underlying processes are thought to be quite complex. Despite
this, the most widely used perceptual metrics today, such
as PSNR and SSIM, are simple, shallow functions, and fail
to account for many nuances of human perception. Recently, the deep learning community has found that features
of the VGG network trained on ImageNet classification has
been remarkably useful as a training loss for image synthesis. But how perceptual are these so-called “perceptual losses”? What elements are critical for their success?
To answer these questions, we introduce a new dataset of
human perceptual similarity judgments. We systematically
evaluate deep features across different architectures and
tasks and compare them with classic metrics. We find that
deep features outperform all previous metrics by large margins on our dataset. More surprisingly, this result is not restricted to ImageNet-trained VGG features, but holds across
different deep architectures and levels of supervision (supervised, self-supervised, or even unsupervised). Our results suggest that perceptual similarity is an emergent property shared across deep visual representations.

1. Motivation
The ability to compare data items is perhaps the most
fundamental operation underlying all of computing. In

many areas of computer science it does not pose much difficulty: one can use Hamming distance to compare binary
patterns, edit distance to compare text files, Euclidean distance to compare vectors, etc. The unique challenge of computer vision is that even this seemingly simple task of comparing visual patterns remains a wide-open problem. Not
only are visual patterns very high-dimensional and highly
correlated, but, the very notion of visual similarity is often
subjective, aiming to mimic human visual perception. For
instance, in image compression, the goal is for the compressed image to be indistinguishable from the original by
a human observer, irrespective of the fact that their pixel
representations might be very different.
Classic per-pixel measures, such as ℓ2 Euclidean distance, commonly used for regression problems, or the related Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), are insufficient
for assessing structured outputs such as images, as they assume pixel-wise independence. A well-known example is
that blurring causes large perceptual but small ℓ2 change.
What we would really like is a “perceptual distance,”
which measures how similar are two images in a way
that coincides with human judgment. This problem has
been a longstanding goal, and there have been numerous
perceptually motivated distance metrics proposed, such as
SSIM [57], MSSIM [59], FSIM [61], and HDR-VDP [34].
However, constructing a perceptual metric is challenging, because human judgments of similarity (1) depend on
high-order image structure [57], (2) are context-dependent
1586

