From Lifestyle Vlogs to Everyday Interactions
David F. Fouhey, Wei-cheng Kuo, Alexei A. Efros, Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley
Explicit Data Gathering

Abstract
Getting out of bed

A major stumbling block to progress in understanding
basic human interactions, such as getting out of bed or
opening a refrigerator, is lack of good training data. Most
past efforts have gathered this data explicitly: starting with
a laundry list of action labels, and then querying search
engines for videos tagged with each label. In this work,
we do the reverse and search implicitly: we start with a
large collection of interaction-rich video data and then annotate and analyze it. We use Internet Lifestyle Vlogs as the
source of surprisingly large and diverse interaction data.
We show that by collecting the data first, we are able to
achieve greater scale and far greater diversity in terms of
actions and actors. Additionally, our data exposes biases
built into common explicitly gathered data. We make sense
of our data by analyzing the central component of interaction – hands. We benchmark two tasks: identifying semantic
object contact at the video level and non-semantic contact
state at the frame level. We additionally demonstrate future
prediction of hands.

Opening fridge
…

Jumping into pool

Implicit Data Gathering
My daily routine

…

Figure 1. Past work aimed at gathering everyday interaction data
has been explicit, directly searching for a predetermined list of categories. Unfortunately, direct search does not work for everyday
interactions like getting out of bed or opening a refrigerator since
they are rarely tagged. Effort has thus focused on things which are
tagged, often unusual events. We present implicit gathering as an
alternative: everday interactions exist buried in other data; we can
search for data that contains them and mine them. We demonstrate
this by finding a new 14-day/114K video/10.7K uploader dataset
of everyday interaction occuring naturally.

1. Introduction
The lack of large amounts of good training data has long
been a bottleneck for understanding everyday interactions.
Past attempts to find this data have been largely unsuccessful: there are large action recognition datasets but not
for everyday interaction [38, 21], and laboriously obtained
datasets [35, 23, 43, 11] which depict everyday interaction,
but in which people are hired to act out each datapoint.
The problem is that past methods have taken the approach of explicit data gathering – starting with a predetermined taxonomy, they attempt to directly find examples of each category. Along the way, they have fallen victim to dataset bias [40] in the form of a discrepancy between
the world of reality and the world of tagged things. This
discrepancy dooms attempts to explicitly search for examples of everyday interactions (“opening a microwave”, for
instance, yields few good results Try it!) because there are
few reasons to tag these videos. Accordingly, most video
efforts have focused on actions that can be found directly

in the world of tagged things (e.g., high jump) as opposed
to everyday ones that are impossible to find directly (e.g.,
opening a fridge). Some researchers have identified this
problem, and have proposed the solution of collection-byacting [35, 23, 43, 11] in which people are hired to act out
a script. This moves us considerably closer towards understanding everyday interactions, but collection-by-acting is
difficult to scale and make diverse. But even if we ignore
the struggle to find data, this explicit approach is still left
with two serious bias issues, both of which we document
empirically. First, the examples we recover from the world
of tagged things tend to be atypical: Internet search results
for a concept as basic as “bedroom” (Try it!) are hopelessly
staged, taken at a particular distance, and almost always depict made beds. Second, there are glaring gaps in terms of
both missing categories and missing negatives.
This paper proposes the alternative of implicit data gathering. The intuition is that while we cannot find tagged
14991

