Improving Object Localization with Fitness NMS and Bounded IoU Loss
Lachlan Tychsen-Smith, Lars Petersson
CSIRO (Data61)
CSIRO-Synergy Building, Acton, ACT, 2601
Lachlan.Tychsen-Smith@data61.csiro.au, Lars.Petersson@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
We demonstrate that many detection methods are designed to identify only a sufficently accurate bounding box,
rather than the best available one. To address this issue
we propose a simple and fast modification to the existing
methods called Fitness NMS. This method is tested with the
DeNet model and obtains a significantly improved MAP at
greater localization accuracies without a loss in evaluation
rate, and can be used in conjunction with Soft NMS for additional improvements. Next we derive a novel bounding
box regression loss based on a set of IoU upper bounds that
better matches the goal of IoU maximization while still providing good convergence properties. Following these novelties we investigate RoI clustering schemes for improving
evaluation rates for the DeNet wide model variants and provide an analysis of localization performance at various input image dimensions. We obtain a MAP of 33.6%@79Hz
and 41.8%@5Hz for MSCOCO and a Titan X (Maxwell).
Source code available from: https://github.com/
lachlants/denet

1. Introduction
Multiclass object detection is defined as the joint task of
localizing bounding boxes of instances and classifying their
contents. In this paper, we address the problem of bounding
box localization which has become increasingly important
as the number of objects in view rises. In particular, by
identifying a better fitting bounding box, current methods
can better resolve the position, scale and number of unique
instances in view. Modern object detection methods most
often utilize a CNN [11] based bounding box regression
and classification stage followed by a Non-Max Suppression method to identify unique object instances.
Introduced in R-CNN [7], bounding box regression enables each region of interest (RoI) to estimate an updated
bounding box with the goal of better matching the nearest
true instance. Prior work has demonstrated that this task
can be improved with multiple bounding box regression

Groundtruth

IoU = 0.53

IoU = 0.83

Figure 1: MSCOCO [15] sample depicting the groundtruth
bounding box (red) and two predicted bounding boxes
(green and blue). Both predicted bounding boxes have a
sufficient overlap with the groundtruth, i.e., IoU > 0.5.
Standard detection designs do not directly discriminate between the predicted boxes, whereas Fitness NMS explicitly
directs the model to select the blue box.

stages [5], increasing the number of (or carefully selecting) RoI anchors in the region proposal network [16] [14],
and increasing the input image resolution (or using image
pyramids) [13] [14]. Alternatively, the DeNet [19] method
demonstrated enhanced precision by improving the localization of the sampling RoIs before bounding box regression. This was achieved via a novel corner-based RoI estimation method, replacing the typical region proposal network (RPN) [18] used in many other methods. This approach operates in real-time, demonstrated improved fine
object localization and has the additional benefit of not requiring user-defined anchor bounding boxes. Despite only
demonstrating our results with DeNet, we believe the novelties presented are equally applicable to other detectors.
Despite its simplicity, Non-Max Suppression (see Algorithm 1) provides highly efficient detection clustering with
the goal of identifying unique bounding box instances. Two
functions same(.) and score(.), and the user defined con16877

