A Minimalist Approach to Type-Agnostic Detection of Quadrics in Point Clouds
Tolga Birdal1,2 Benjamin Busam1,3 Nassir Navab1,4 Slobodan Ilic1,2 Peter Sturm5
1
2
Technische Universität München, Germany
Siemens AG, Munich, Germany
3
4
5
Framos AG, Munich, Germany
Johns Hopkins University, US
INRIA, France

Quadrics

Abstract
This paper proposes a segmentation-free, automatic and
efficient procedure to detect general geometric quadric
forms in point clouds, where clutter and occlusions are inevitable. Our everyday world is dominated by man-made
objects which are designed using 3D primitives (such as
planes, cones, spheres, cylinders, etc.). These objects are
also omnipresent in industrial environments. This gives rise
to the possibility of abstracting 3D scenes through primitives, thereby positions these geometric forms as an integral
part of perception and high level 3D scene understanding.
As opposed to state-of-the-art, where a tailored algorithm treats each primitive type separately, we propose to
encapsulate all types in a single robust detection procedure.
At the center of our approach lies a closed form 3D quadric
fit, operating in both primal & dual spaces and requiring
as low as 4 oriented-points. Around this fit, we design a
novel, local null-space voting strategy to reduce the 4-point
case to 3. Voting is coupled with the famous RANSAC and
makes our algorithm orders of magnitude faster than its
conventional counterparts. This is the first method capable of performing a generic cross-type multi-object primitive detection in difficult scenes. Results on synthetic and
real datasets support the validity of our method.

1. Introduction
Quadrics, or quadratic surfaces, are second order implicit representations, including geometric primitives such
as planes, spheres, cylinders, ellipsoids, cones and more.
Due to their ability to cover a wide variety of shapes, many
industrial parts and man-made objects are manufactured using quadric solids after designed with specific CAD software. As a result, our environment consists of these mathematical constructs. This prominent exposure made understanding and reverse engineering of quadrics, where a scene
is parsed into primitives, a primary concern in computer vision already in the 80s [36, 7]. While a large part of these
works address the problem of recovering quadrics from 2D
images [12], in the 3D domain, the research streams still

RGB

Depth
Clutter

Occlusions

3D Scene

Partial
Visibility

Figure 1. Our algorithm quickly detects quadric shapes in point
clouds under occlusions, partial visibility and clutter. Note that,
the algorithm has no clue whether a sphere exists or not and is
able to detect the plausible primitive using only 3D geometry.

seem to be divided into two branches: Quadric Fitting and
Primitive Detection. The former, Quadric Fitting, concerns the fitting of a general quadric to a clutter-free, potentially noisy scene [51, 49, 9]. The latter, Primitive Detection, tackles a different problem: the reconstruction of typespecific primitives from cluttered scenes [1, 2, 25]. Yet, to
this date, the task of automatic and generic quadric detection within clutter or occlusions without necessitating auxiliary preprocessing steps such as segmentation or manual intervention [39], remain to be unexplored and unsolved. This
is partially because unlike rigid 6-DoF free-form detection
& pose estimation, quadrics have 9 degrees of freedom, and
can deform into various forms. Naturally, this problem is
a harder one. Although deep neural networks can learn to
segment scenes [37, 23], or show great potential in learning the fitting function and feature extraction [13], jointly
solving the detection and surface fitting, to the best of our
knowledge, is an open challenge. Moreover, for the problem at hand, data labeling is notoriously exhaustive.
One trivial way to attack our problem would be to use
an off-the-shelf quadric fitting method in a RANSAC [18]
pipeline. Yet, there is a caveat in doing this: RANSAC re13530

