Compassionately Conservative Balanced Cuts for Image Segmentation
Nathan D. Cahill

Tyler L. Hayes Renee T. Meinhold
Rochester Institute of Technology

John F. Hamilton

{ndcsma, tlh6792, rtm9271, jfhsms}@rit.edu

Abstract
The Normalized Cut (NCut) objective function, widely
used in data clustering and image segmentation, quantiﬁes
the cost of graph partitioning in a way that biases clusters
or segments that are balanced towards having lower values than unbalanced partitionings. However, this bias is so
strong that it avoids any singleton partitions, even when vertices are very weakly connected to the rest of the graph. Motivated by the Bühler-Hein family of balanced cut costs, we
propose the family of Compassionately Conservative Balanced (CCB) Cut costs, which are indexed by a parameter
that can be used to strike a compromise between the desire to avoid too many singleton partitions and the notion
that all partitions should be balanced. We show that CCBCut minimization can be relaxed into an orthogonally constrained ℓτ -minimization problem that coincides with the
problem of computing Piecewise Flat Embeddings (PFE)
for one particular index value, and we present an algorithm
for solving the relaxed problem by iteratively minimizing a
sequence of reweighted Rayleigh quotients (IRRQ). Using
images from the BSDS500 database, we show that image
segmentation based on CCB-Cut minimization provides better accuracy with respect to ground truth and greater variability in region size than NCut-based image segmentation.

1. Introduction
The Normalized Cut (NCut) graph partitioning cost
function was ﬁrst introduced over two decades ago to tackle
the perceptual grouping problem [19, 20], and its approximate minimization via continuous relaxation into a generalized eigenvector problem has emerged as one of the fundamental techniques of data clustering [14].
The key observation that motivated the normalization of
graph cut cost functions is that when graph partitioning is
performed by minimizing the sum of the weights of edges
that are cut (the Cut cost), the resulting partitions will be
unbalanced; vertices that are weakly connected to the rest
of the graph are likely to be separated to form singleton partitions, while the rest of the graph vertices are likely to re-

 

 

(a) Toy Graph

(b) arg min Cut

(c) arg min NCut

Figure 1: (a) A graph having unit weight edges except for
the two edges with weight α/2. (b) Minimizing the Cut cost
removes the weakly-connected vertex, whereas (c) minimizing the Normalized Cut (NCut) cost yields a more ”balanced” partitioning.
main in large partitions. Normalizing the cut cost by the
degrees of each partition (NCut [19, 20]), the size of each
partition (Average Cut [18]), or the minimum of the size
of each partition and its complement (Ratio or Cheeger Cut
[7]) yield balanced partitions that have similar total degree
or size when minimized.
Is it possible that these types of normalization go too far?
Consider the example of Figure 1, in which we wish to partition the toy graph into two subgraphs. This graph (1a)
contains seven vertices and nine edges; all but two of the
edges have unit weight, and the two indicated edges have
weight α/2 for α ∈ (0, 1). Since α < 1, the degree of the
vertex sharing these two edges is guaranteed to be smaller
than the degree of any other vertex in the graph. Hence, as
shown in (1b), minimizing the Cut cost will separate that
weakly-connected vertex from the rest of the graph. Minimizing the NCut cost creates a more balanced partitioning as shown in (1c); however, this partitioning will always have a lower-cost NCut than removing the weaklyconnected vertex, even when α is inﬁnitesimally small. Perhaps the Ratio Cut (RCut) is a better choice: for this graph,
α = 2/3 is a critical value above which (1c) minimizes the
RCut cost, and below which (1b) yields the minimum. But
is there really anything special about α = 2/3?
If this graph represented an image to be segmented, one
would want to use ground-truth segmentation maps from

1683

