Hand PointNet: 3D Hand Pose Estimation using Point Sets
Liuhao Ge1 , Yujun Cai1 , Junwu Weng2 , Junsong Yuan3
1
Institute for Media Innovation, Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo
{ge0001ao, yujun001, we0001wu}@e.ntu.edu.sg, jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has shown
promising results for 3D hand pose estimation in depth images. Different from existing CNN-based hand pose estimation methods that take either 2D images or 3D volumes
as the input, our proposed Hand PointNet directly processes the 3D point cloud that models the visible surface of the
hand for pose regression. Taking the normalized point cloud
as the input, our proposed hand pose regression network
is able to capture complex hand structures and accurately regress a low dimensional representation of the 3D hand
pose. In order to further improve the accuracy of fingertips, we design a fingertip refinement network that directly
takes the neighboring points of the estimated fingertip location as input to refine the fingertip location. Experiments
on three challenging hand pose datasets show that our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a steady growth of the research in real-time 3D hand pose estimation with depth
cameras [12, 45, 38, 18, 36, 31, 8, 3, 48], since this technology can improve user experience and play an important role
in various human-computer interaction applications, especially in virtual reality and augmented reality applications.
However, due to the high dimensionality of 3D hand pose,
large variations in hand orientations, high self-similarity of
fingers and severe self-occlusion, 3D hand pose estimation
still suffers from the issues of accuracy and robustness.
With the success of deep neural networks in various
computer vision tasks and the emergence of large hand pose
datasets [38, 34, 33, 49, 48], many of the recent 3D hand
pose estimation methods are based on CNNs [38, 21, 7, 8,
9, 3, 19, 51]. Considering 2D CNNs that take 2D images
as input cannot fully utilize 3D spatial information in the
depth image, Ge et al. [8] encodes the hand depth images as
3D volumes and applies a 3D CNN for inferring 3D hand

pose. However, the time and space complexities of the 3D
CNN grow cubically with the resolution of the input 3D
volume [27]. Consequently, the 3D volume adopted in [8]
is limited to a low resolution (e.g., 323 ), which may lose
useful details of the hand. Furthermore, due to the sparsity of 3D point cloud, most of the voxels in the 3D volume are usually not occupied by any points, which not only
wastes computations of 3D convolutions, but also distracts
the neural networks from learning effective kernels to capture meaningful features of hand shapes. The approach in
[8] transforms the sparse point cloud to a dense volumetric
representation to enable effective 3D convolution. But this
transformation changes the nature of the data and makes the
data unnecessarily voluminous.
To tackle these problems, motivated by the recent works
of PointNet [23, 25] that perform 3D object classification
and segmentation on point sets directly, we aim at learning
3D hand articulations directly from the 3D point cloud instead of rasterizing the 3D points into 3D voxels. It is worth
noting that the depth image in essence is represented by a set
of unordered 3D points on the visible surface of the hand,
which is essentially 2.5D data and is not directly suitable
to be processed by 2D or 3D convolutions. Compared with
previous multi-view CNNs-based method [7] and 3D CNNbased method [8], our approach does not need to project the
point cloud into multiple 2D images or transform the sparse
point cloud into dense 3D volumes, thus can better utilize
the original point cloud in an effective and efficient way.
In this work, we propose a point cloud based hand joints
regression method for 3D hand pose estimation in single
depth images, as illustrated in Figure 1. Specifically, the
segmented hand depth image is first converted to a set of
3D points; the 3D point cloud of the hand is downsampled and normalized in an oriented bounding box to make
our method robust to various hand orientations. The hierarchical PointNet [25] takes the 3D coordinates of normalized points attached with the estimated surface normals as
the input, and outputs a low dimensional representation of
the 3D hand joint locations which are then recovered in the

8417

