DVQA: Understanding Data Visualizations via Question Answering
Kushal Kafle1,∗
Brian Price2
Scott Cohen2
Christopher Kanan1
1
2
Rochester Institute of Technology
Adobe Research
1

{kk6055, kanan}@rit.edu

2

{bprice, scohen}@adobe.com

Abstract
Bar charts are an effective way to convey numeric information, but today’s algorithms cannot parse them. Existing methods fail when faced with even minor variations
in appearance. Here, we present DVQA, a dataset that
tests many aspects of bar chart understanding in a question answering framework. Unlike visual question answering (VQA), DVQA requires processing words and answers
that are unique to a particular bar chart. State-of-the-art
VQA algorithms perform poorly on DVQA, and we propose two strong baselines that perform considerably better.
Our work will enable algorithms to automatically extract
numeric and semantic information from vast quantities of
bar charts found in scientific publications, Internet articles,
business reports, and many other areas.

1. Introduction
Data visualizations, e.g., bar charts, pie charts, and plots,
contain large amounts of information in a concise format.
These visualizations are specifically designed to communicate data to people, and are not designed to be machine
interpretable. Nevertheless, making algorithms capable to
make inferences from data visualizations has enormous
practical applications. Here, we study systems capable of
answering open-ended questions about bar charts, which we
refer to as data visualization question answering (DVQA).
DVQA would enable vast repositories of charts within scientific documents, web-pages, and business reports to be
queried automatically. Example DVQA images and questions grouped by the different tasks are shown in Fig. 1.
Besides practical benefits, DVQA can also serve as a
challenging proxy task for generalized pattern matching,
attention, and multi-step reasoning systems. Answering a
question about a chart requires multi-step attention, memory, measurement, and reasoning that poses significant challenges to the existing systems. For example, to answer the
question ‘What is the accuracy of algorithm vice on the
∗ A portion of this research was done while Kushal Kafle was an intern
at Adobe Research.

Figure 1: DVQA involves answering questions about diagrams.
We present a dataset for DVQA with bar charts that exhibit enormous variety in appearance and style. We show that VQA systems
cannot answer many DVQA questions and we describe more effective algorithms.

dataset fear?’ in Fig. 1 can require finding the appropriate
color and hatching that represents the dataset fear, finding
the group of bars that represent the algorithm vice, measuring the height of the bar based on the y-axis, and if necessary interpolating between two neighboring values.
DVQA is related to visual question answering
(VQA) [27, 5], which deals with answering openended questions about images. VQA is usually treated as
a classification problem, in which answers are categories
that are inferred using features from image-question pairs.
DVQA poses three major challenges that are overlooked
by existing VQA datasets with natural images. First, VQA
systems typically assume two fixed vocabulary dictionaries:
one for encoding words in questions and one for producing
answers. In DVQA, assuming a fixed vocabulary makes
it impossible to properly process many questions or to
generate answers unique to a bar chart, which are often
labeled with proper nouns, abbreviations, or concatenations
(e.g., ‘Jan-Apr’). Our models demonstrate two ways for
15648

