Content-Sensitive Supervoxels via Uniform Tessellations on Video Manifolds
Ran Yi, Yong-Jin Liu∗
Tsinghua University, China

Yu-Kun Lai
Cardiff University, UK

{yr16,liuyongjin}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Yukun.Lai@cs.cf.ac.uk

Abstract
Supervoxels are perceptually meaningful atomic regions
in videos, obtained by grouping voxels that exhibit coherence in both appearance and motion. In this paper,
we propose content-sensitive supervoxels (CSS), which are
regularly-shaped 3D primitive volumes that possess the following characteristic: they are typically larger and longer
in content-sparse regions (i.e., with homogeneous appearance and motion), and smaller and shorter in content-dense
regions (i.e., with high variation of appearance and/or
motion). To compute CSS, we map a video Ξ to a 3dimensional manifold M embedded in R6 , whose volume
elements give a good measure of the content density in Ξ.
We propose an efficient Lloyd-like method with a splittingmerging scheme to compute a uniform tessellation on M,
which induces the CSS in Ξ. Theoretically our method has
a good competitive ratio O(1). We also present a simple
extension of CSS to stream CSS for processing long videos
that cannot be loaded into main memory at once. We evaluate CSS, stream CSS and seven representative supervoxel
methods on four video datasets. The results show that our
method outperforms existing supervoxel methods.

1. Introduction
Supervoxels are perceptually meaningful atomic regions
obtained by grouping similar voxels (i.e., exhibiting coherence in both appearance and motion) in the spatiotemporal
domain, which over-segment a video while well preserving its structural content. Supervoxels can greatly reduce
the computational complexity and have been widely used
as a preprocessing step in many vision applications, such as
video segmentation [12, 17, 34], foreground object segmentation [13], action segmentation and recognition [14, 21],
spatiotemporal object detection [23], spatiotemporal closure in videos [15], and many others.
Depending on the size of video data, methods to compute supervoxels can be classified into off-line and stream∗ Corresponding author

ing methods. Off-line methods require the video to be short
enough such that all voxels can be loaded into the memory. On the other hand, streaming methods do not have
such a limitation on the video length, i.e., video data is accessed sequentially in blocks and the memory available to
streaming methods only needs to fit a block. Many methodologies, such as clustering, hierarchical, generative, statistical and graph partitioning methods, have been applied to
compute supervoxels; see an excellent survey in [31]. Xu
and Corso [31] further select seven representative methods,
including five off-line [8, 9, 24, 6, 12] and two streaming [32, 4] methods, to represent the state of the art.
To measure the quality of supervoxels, the following
principles are taken into consideration: (1) Feature preservation: supervoxels align well with object boundaries in
a video; (2) Spatiotemporal uniformity: in non-feature regions, supervoxels are uniform and regular in the spatiotemporal domain; (3) Performance: computing supervoxels is
time-and-space efficient and scales well with large video
data; (4) Easy to use: users simply specify the desired
number of supervoxels and should not be bothered by tuning other parameters; (5) Parsimony: the above principles
should be maintained with as few supervoxels as possible.
So far, none of existing methods satisfy all these principles. In this paper, we propose a content-sensitive approach to address the parsimony principle, and therefore,
achieve a good balance among all principles. Our method
is motivated by an important observation: the scene layouts and motions of different objects in a video usually exhibit large diversity, and thus the density of video content
often varies significantly in different parts of the video. Applying spatiotemporally uniform distribution of supervoxels
indiscriminately to the whole video often leads to undersegmentation in content-dense regions (i.e., with high variation of appearance and/or motion), and over-segmentation
in content-sparse regions (i.e., with homogeneous appearance and motion). Therefore, computing supervoxels adaptively with respect to the density of video content can
achieve the best performance (see Figure 1).
To compute content-sensitive supervoxels (CSS), we extend the image manifold concept [19, 20] to a video man-

646

