Learning a Single Convolutional Super-Resolution Network for
Multiple Degradations
1

Kai Zhang1,2,3 , Wangmeng Zuo1,∗, Lei Zhang2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
cskaizhang@gmail.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the unprecedented success
of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in single image super-resolution (SISR). However, existing CNN-based
SISR methods mostly assume that a low-resolution (LR) image is bicubicly downsampled from a high-resolution (HR)
image, thus inevitably giving rise to poor performance when
the true degradation does not follow this assumption. Moreover, they lack scalability in learning a single model to nonblindly deal with multiple degradations. To address these
issues, we propose a general framework with dimensionality stretching strategy that enables a single convolutional
super-resolution network to take two key factors of the SISR
degradation process, i.e., blur kernel and noise level, as input. Consequently, the super-resolver can handle multiple
and even spatially variant degradations, which significantly
improves the practicability. Extensive experimental results on synthetic and real LR images show that the proposed
convolutional super-resolution network not only can produce favorable results on multiple degradations but also is
computationally efficient, providing a highly effective and
scalable solution to practical SISR applications.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to recover a
high-resolution (HR) version of a low-resolution (LR) input. As a classical problem, SISR is still an active yet challenging research topic in the field of computer vision due to
its ill-poseness nature and high practical values [2]. In the
typical SISR framework, an LR image y is modeled as the
output of the following degradation process:
y = (x ⊗ k) ↓s + n,

(1)

where x⊗k represents the convolution between a blur kernel
k and a latent HR image x, ↓s is a subsequent downsampling
operation with scale factor s, and n usually is additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN) with standard deviation (noise level) σ.
∗ Corresponding author.

SISR methods can be broadly classified into three categories, i.e., interpolation-based methods, model-based optimization methods and discriminative learning methods.
Interpolation-based methods such as nearest-neighbor, bilinear and bicubic interpolators are simple and efficient but
have very limited performance. By exploiting powerful image priors (e.g., the non-local self-similarity prior [11, 32],
sparsity prior [52] and denoiser prior [4, 13, 57]), modelbased optimization methods are flexible to reconstruct relative high-quality HR images, but they usually involve a
time-consuming optimization procedure. Although the integration of convolutional neural network (CNN) denoiser
prior and model-based optimization can improve the efficiency to some extent, it still suffers from the typical drawbacks of model-based optimization methods, e.g., it is not in
an end-to-end learning manner and involves hand-designed
parameters [57]. As an alternative, discriminative learning
methods have attracted considerable attentions due to their
favorable SISR performance in terms of effectiveness and
efficiency. Notably, recent years have witnessed a dramatic
upsurge of using CNN for SISR.
In this paper, we focus on discriminative CNN methods
for SISR so as to exploit the merits of CNN, such as the fast
speed by parallel computing, high accuracy by end-to-end
training, and tremendous advances in training and designing networks [16, 18, 21, 28]. While several SISR models
based on discriminative CNN have reported impressive results, they suffer from a common drawback: their models are specialized for a single simplified degradation (e.g.,
bicubic degradation) and lack scalability to handle multiple
degradations by using a single model. Because the practical
degradation of SISR is much more complex [40, 51], the
performance of learned CNN models may deteriorate seriously when the assumed degradation deviates from the true
one, making them less effective in practical scenarios. It has
been pointed out that the blur kernel plays a vital role for the
success of SISR methods and the mismatch of blur kernels
will largely deteriorate the final SISR results [12]. However, little work has been done on how to design a CNN to
address this crucial issue.

3262

