Cross-Domain Weakly-Supervised Object Detection
through Progressive Domain Adaptation
Naoto Inoue

Ryosuke Furuta Toshihiko Yamasaki
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Kiyoharu Aizawa

{inoue, furuta, yamasaki, aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

Level of annotations
Image

Can we detect common objects in a variety of image domains without instance-level annotations? In this paper, we
present a framework for a novel task, cross-domain weakly
supervised object detection, which addresses this question.
For this paper, we have access to images with instance-level
annotations in a source domain (e.g., natural image) and
images with image-level annotations in a target domain (e.g.,
watercolor). In addition, the classes to be detected in the
target domain are all or a subset of those in the source domain. Starting from a fully supervised object detector, which
is pre-trained on the source domain, we propose a two-step
progressive domain adaptation technique by fine-tuning the
detector on two types of artificially and automatically generated samples. We test our methods on our newly collected
datasets1 containing three image domains, and achieve an
improvement of approximately 5 to 20 percentage points in
terms of mean average precision (mAP) compared to the
best-performing baselines.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a task to localize instances of particular object classes in an image. It is a fundamental task
and has advanced rapidly due to the development of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Best-performing detectors [9, 28, 22, 27, 19, 20] are fully supervised detectors (FSDs). They are highly data-hungry and typically
learned from many images with instance-level annotations.
An instance-level annotation is composed of a label (i.e., the
object class of an instance) and a bounding box (i.e., the
location of the instance).
While object detection in a natural image domain has
achieved outstanding performance, less attention has been
paid to the detection in other domains such as watercolor.
This is because it is often difficult and unrealistic to construct
1 Datasets and codes are available at https://naoto0804.
github.io/cross_domain_detection

dog chair

Instance
person

Source
domain
horse

dog person

Domain transfer (DT)
person

person

horse

horse

Pseudo-labeling (PL)
dog person

dog?

Target
domain
person?

Figure 1: Left: the situation of the cross-domain weakly
supervised object detection; Right: Our methods to generate
instance-level annotated samples in the target domain.

a large dataset with instance-level annotations in many image
domains. There are many obstacles such as lack of image
sources, copyright issues, and the cost of annotation.
We tackle a novel task, cross-domain weakly supervised
object detection. The task is described as follows: (i) instance-level annotations are available in a source domain;
(ii) only image-level annotations are available in a target domain; (iii) the classes to be detected in the target domain are
all or a subset of those in the source domain. The objective
of the task is to detect objects as accurately as possible in
the target domain under these conditions by using sufficient
instance-level annotations in the source domain and a small
number of image-level annotations in the target domain. This
assumption is reasonable as it is easier to collect image-level
annotations than instance-level annotations from existing
datasets or an image search engine.
We will describe a framework to solve the proposed task.
Starting from an FSD trained on images with instance-level
annotations in the source domain, we fine-tune the FSD in
the target domain, as this is the most straightforward and
promising approach. However, there are no instance-level
annotations available in the target domain. Instead, as shown
in Fig. 1, we present two methods to generate images with
instance-level annotations artificially and automatically, and
fine-tune the FSD on them. The first method, domain trans-

5001

