Active Fixation Control to Predict Saccade Sequences
Calden Wloka
Iuliia Kotseruba
John K. Tsotsos
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
York University, Toronto, Canada
calden, yulia k, tsotsos@cse.yorku.ca

Abstract
Visual attention is a field with a considerable history,
with eye movement control and prediction forming an important subfield. Fixation modeling in the past decades
has been largely dominated computationally by a number
of highly influential bottom-up saliency models, such as
the Itti-Koch-Niebur model. The accuracy of such models
has dramatically increased recently due to deep learning.
However, on static images the emphasis of these models
has largely been based on non-ordered prediction of fixations through a saliency map. Very few implemented models can generate temporally ordered human-like sequences
of saccades beyond an initial fixation point. Towards addressing these shortcomings we present STAR-FC, a novel
multi-saccade generator based on the integration of central
high-level and object-based saliency and peripheral lowerlevel feature-based saliency. We have evaluated our model
using the CAT2000 database, successfully predicting human patterns of fixation with equivalent accuracy and quality compared to what can be achieved by using one human
sequence to predict another.

1. Introduction
Most applications in computer vision function primarily
in a passive way; algorithms are applied to static images
or pre-recorded video sequences without control over what
visual data is acquired next. However, it has long been recognized that eye movements are an integral aspect to human vision [33], with diverse functionality ranging from the
enhanced extraction of features via microsaccadic motion
[35] through high-level strategies for optimal information
gathering [46]. It is this latter aspect which is of particular
interest to the field of computer vision; active control over
the acquisition of image data is fundamental to efficiently
developing more robust and general computer vision solutions for unconstrained environments [57, 4].
Our work presented here develops and extends the
Selective Tuning Attentive Reference model Fixation Con-

Figure 1: Two examples from the CAT2000 dataset with
overlaid fixation sequences for the first five fixation points.
The sequences predicted by our STAR-FC model are shown
in green with X’s marking the fixations, and SALICON
predictions are shown in red with O’s marking the fixation points. Human sequences (shown in blue) provided
the closest match to both models. Euclidean distances between each model and the corresponding human sequence
are noted in parentheses in the legend. Note that in both
images, STAR-FC is significantly closer to human behavior
than SALICON.
troller (STAR-FC): an explicit model of human saccadic
control [58]. In order to more easily compare with prior
efforts in fixation prediction, we concentrate on the freeviewing paradigm, but nevertheless specify our control network in a manner which provides explicit extensibility for
task-based tuning and top-down attentional control. By providing an extensive model of human fixation control which
includes a number of aspects normally neglected by the
13184

