Fine-grained Video Captioning for Sports Narrative
Huanyu Yu∗, Shuo Cheng∗, Bingbing Ni∗†, Minsi Wang, Jian Zhang, Xiaokang Yang
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science,
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmission,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
yiranyhy@163.com, acccheng94@gmail.com, nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn,
mswang1994@gmail.com, stevenash0822@sjtu.edu.cn, xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite recent emergence of video caption methods, how
to generate fine-grained video descriptions (i.e., long and
detailed commentary about individual movements of multiple subjects as well as their frequent interactions) is far
from being solved, which however has great applications
such as automatic sports narrative. To this end, this work
makes the following contributions. First, to facilitate this
novel research of fine-grained video caption, we collected a
novel dataset called Fine-grained Sports Narrative dataset
(FSN) that contains 2K sports videos with ground-truth narratives from YouTube.com. Second, we develop a novel performance evaluation metric named Fine-grained Captioning Evaluation (FCE) to cope with this novel task. Considered as an extension of the widely used METEOR, it measures not only the linguistic performance but also whether
the action details and their temporal orders are correctly
described. Third, we propose a new framework for finegrained sports narrative task. This network features three
branches: 1) a spatio-temporal entity localization and role
discovering sub-network; 2) a fine-grained action modeling
sub-network for local skeleton motion description; and 3)
a group relationship modeling sub-network to model interactions between players. We further fuse the features and
decode them into long narratives by a hierarchically recurrent structure. Extensive experiments on the FSN dataset
demonstrates the validity of the proposed framework for
fine-grained video caption.

1. Introduction
In spite of recent development of video captioning [37,
38, 42, 18, 30], how to automatically give a fine-grained
video description is seldom investigated. One good ex∗ Authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author.

Ordinary captioning :
A small group of men are seen running around a basketball
court playing a game of basketball.
Our fine-grained captioning :
A man passes the ball to his teammate. The ball handler makes
a three-point shot but fails. His teammate gets the rebound
and makes a slam dunk. The defender tries to block the ball
but does not success.

Figure 1: Fine-grained video captioning task versus conventional video captioning task. Fine-grained video caption
generates sentences with rich action details and interaction
relationships.
ample of fine-grained video description is Sports Narrative
(i.e., especially those team sports such as basketball, soccer, volleyball etc.) Figure 1 shows the difference between
conventional video captioning task and fine-grained video
description. Note that a caption model can only describe
the video from a macroscopic perspective (e.g., a group of
people who are playing basketball in the video). In contrast,
fine-grained video description is keen on a much more detailed comment about all subjects’ individual actions as well
as their mutual interactions in the video (e.g., a man passes
the ball to his teammate, and his teammate dribbles the ball
pass the defenders and gives a slam dunk).
For a video involves multiple interacting persons (e.g.,
team sports), the key task of fine-grained video description is essentially to map multiple spatio-temporal events
within the video volume, onto multiple inter-related sentences. In sports video such as basketball game, however,
this renders two challenges. First, team sports usually involves a large number of active subjects with complex relationships (e.g., teammates, opponents, defenders) as well
as rapid changes of offensive and defensive situation and

6006

