People, Penguins and Petri Dishes: Adapting Object Counting Models To New
Visual Domains And Object Types Without Forgetting
Mark Marsden1 , Kevin McGuinness1 , Suzanne Little1 , Ciara E. Keogh2 , Noel E. O’Connor1
1
Insight Centre for Data Analytics
Dublin City University, Ireland
mark.marsden@insight-centre.org {kevin.mcguinness,suzanne.little,noel.oconnor}@dcu.ie
2

Conway Institute, School of Medicine
University College Dublin, Ireland
ciara.keogh@ucdconnect.ie

Abstract
In this paper we propose a technique to adapt a convolutional neural network (CNN) based object counter to additional visual domains and object types while still preserving
the original counting function. Domain-specific normalisation and scaling operators are trained to allow the model
to adjust to the statistical distributions of the various visual
domains. The developed adaptation technique is used to
produce a singular patch-based counting regressor capable
of counting various object types including people, vehicles,
cell nuclei and wildlife. As part of this study a challenging
new cell counting dataset in the context of tissue culture
and patient diagnosis is constructed. This new collection,
referred to as the Dublin Cell Counting (DCC) dataset, is the
first of its kind to be made available to the wider computer
vision community. State-of-the-art object counting performance is achieved in both the Shanghaitech (parts A and
B) and Penguins datasets while competitive performance
is observed on the TRANCOS and Modified Bone Marrow
(MBM) datasets, all using a shared counting model.

Figure 1: Examples of the challenging images encountered
in different object counting domains.

1. Introduction
Vision-based object counting is an important analysis step
in many observational scenarios including wildlife studies,
microscopic imaging and CCTV surveillance. An accurate
object counting system can provide valuable insights such
as the congestion level of a public square (crowd counting),
the level of traffic on a motorway (vehicle counting), the
inferred migration patterns of a penguin colony (wildlife
counting) or the proliferation of cancerous cells in a patient
(cell counting). There is a common set of challenges for
vision-based object counting which limit counting accuracy
in all of these domains. These challenges include object scale

and perspective issues, visual occlusion and poor illumination. To date, these highly related counting tasks have been
tackled separately with algorithms engineered specifically
to perform object counting in a given domain. Examples of
these challenges are shown across several visual domains in
Figure 1.
Vision based object counting has been tackled using both
object detection [1, 2, 3] and count regression techniques
[4, 5, 6, 7, 8] with both types of approach having their own
specific weakness (visual occlusion and model overfitting
respectively). The utilisation of convolutional neural net-

8070

