VizWiz Grand Challenge: Answering Visual Questions from Blind People
Danna Gurari1 , Qing Li2 , Abigale J. Stangl3 , Anhong Guo4 , Chi Lin1 ,
Kristen Grauman1 , Jiebo Luo5 , and Jeffrey P. Bigham4
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 University of Science and Technology of China,
3
University of Colorado Boulder, 4 Carnegie Mellon University 5 University of Rochester

Abstract
The study of algorithms to automatically answer visual
questions currently is motivated by visual question answering (VQA) datasets constructed in artificial VQA settings.
We propose VizWiz, the first goal-oriented VQA dataset
arising from a natural VQA setting. VizWiz consists of over
31,000 visual questions originating from blind people who
each took a picture using a mobile phone and recorded a
spoken question about it, together with 10 crowdsourced
answers per visual question. VizWiz differs from the many
existing VQA datasets because (1) images are captured by
blind photographers and so are often poor quality, (2) questions are spoken and so are more conversational, and (3)
often visual questions cannot be answered. Evaluation of
modern algorithms for answering visual questions and deciding if a visual question is answerable reveals that VizWiz
is a challenging dataset. We introduce this dataset to encourage a larger community to develop more generalized
algorithms that can assist blind people.

1. Introduction
A natural application of computer vision is to assist blind
people, whether that may be to overcome their daily visual
challenges or break down their social accessibility barriers.
For example, modern object recognition tools from private
companies, such as TapTapSee [3] and CamFind [2], already empower people to snap a picture of an object and
recognize what it is as well as where it can be purchased.
Social media platforms, such as Facebook and Twitter, help
people maintain connections with friends by enabling them
to identify and tag friends in posted images as well as respond to images automatically described to them [27, 42].
A desirable next step for vision applications is to empower
a blind person to directly request in a natural manner what
(s)he would like to know about the surrounding physical
world. This idea relates to the recent explosion of interest in the visual question answering (VQA) problem, which
aims to accurately answer any question about any image.

Over the past three years, many VQA datasets have
emerged in the vision community to catalyze research on
the VQA problem [7, 8, 17, 18, 20, 21, 24, 29, 33, 40, 41,
44, 46]. Historically, progress in the research community on
a computer vision problem is typically preceded by a largescale, publicly-shared dataset [13, 26, 31, 34, 43]. However,
a limitation of available VQA datasets is that all come from
artificially created VQA settings. Moreover, none are “goal
oriented” towards the images and questions that come from
blind people. Yet, blind people arguably have been producing the big data desired to train algorithms. For nearly a
decade, blind people have been both taking pictures [4, 9]
and asking questions about the pictures they take [9, 12, 25].
Moreover, blind people often are early adopters of computer
vision tools to support their real daily needs.
We introduce the first publicly-available vision dataset
originating from blind people, which we call “VizWiz”, in
order to encourage the development of more generalized algorithms that also address the interests of blind people. Our
work builds off previous work [9] which established a mobile phone application that supported blind people to ask
over 70,000 visual questions [11] by taking a photo and
asking a question about it. We begin our work by implementing a rigorous filtering process to remove visual questions that could compromise the safety or privacy of any
individuals associated with them; e.g., blind people often
willingly share personal information with strangers to overcome personal obstacles [5]. We then crowdsource answers
to support algorithm training and evaluation. We next conduct experiments to characterize the images, questions, and
answers and uncover unique aspects differentiating VizWiz
from existing VQA datasets [7, 8, 17, 18, 20, 21, 24, 29, 33,
40, 41, 44, 46]. We finally evaluate numerous algorithms for
predicting answers [18, 23] and predicting if a visual question can be answered [28]. Our findings highlight VizWiz
is a difficult dataset for modern vision algorithms and offer
new perspectives about the VQA problem.
It is also useful to understand why VizWiz is challenging
for modern algorithms. Our findings suggest the reasons
stem from the fact VizWiz is the first vision dataset to in13608

