Fast Video Object Segmentation by Reference-Guided Mask Propagation
Seoung Wug Oh*
Yonsei University

Joon-Young Lee
Adobe Research

Kalyan Sunkavalli
Adobe Research
90

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation – separating a foreground object from a video sequence – is one of most important tasks
in video analysis and editing, and commercial applications
such as Adobe After Effects have dedicated tools for it.
However, automatic video object segmentation is far from
a solved problem, and post-production video editing often
requires significant manual interaction to achieve pleasing
results. While recent work has addressed this problem, performance is still limited in terms of either the quality or the
speed. In this paper, our goal is to develop an accurate video
object segmentation algorithm that is also fast enough to be
used in interactive settings.
Video object segmentation methods typically rely on two
important cues. Propagation-based methods [13, 37, 28,
30] mainly leverage the temporal coherence of object motion and formulate this problem as object mask propagation (i.e. pixel-level tracking) starting from a given annotated frame. These methods rely on the spatiotemporal connections between pixels, and thus can adapt to complex
deformation and movement of a target object as long as
* This work is done during an internship at Adobe Research

80

OnAVOS OSVOSS

Ours

MSK OSVOS
SegFlow

IoU (%)

We present an efficient method for the semi-supervised
video object segmentation. Our method achieves accuracy
competitive with state-of-the-art methods while running in a
fraction of time compared to others. To this end, we propose
a deep Siamese encoder-decoder network that is designed
to take advantage of mask propagation and object detection while avoiding the weaknesses of both approaches. Our
network, learned through a two-stage training process that
exploits both synthetic and real data, works robustly without any online learning or post-processing. We validate our
method on four benchmark sets that cover single and multiple object segmentation. On all the benchmark sets, our
method shows comparable accuracy while having the order of magnitude faster runtime. We also provide extensive
ablation and add-on studies to analyze and evaluate our
framework.

85

Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University

75

VPN

70
65

PLM
BVS

60
0.1

1
FPS

10

Figure 1: A comparison of the quality and the speed
of previous video object segmentation methods (DAVIS2016 benchmark). We visualize the intersection-over-union
(IoU) with respect to the frames-per-second (FPS). Note
that the FPS axis is in the log scale.

the changes in the appearance and the location are smooth.
However, these methods are vulnerable to temporal discontinuities like occlusions and rapid motion, and can suffer
from drifting once the propagation becomes unreliable.
Detection-based methods [5, 27, 45] learn the appearance of the target object from a given annotated frame, and
perform a pixel-level detection of the target object at each
frame. As they rarely depend on temporal consistency, they
are robust to occlusion and drifting. However, as their estimation is mostly based on the object appearance in an
annotated frame(s), they often fail to adapt to appearance
changes and have difficulty separating object instances with
similar appearances.
Recent approaches to this problem have utilized deep
networks. Most of these approaches heavily rely on online
learning, where a pre-trained deep network is fine-tuned on
the test video [45, 30, 40, 5, 27, 18, 21]. While online training improves segmentation accuracy by letting the network
adapt to the target object appearance, it is computationally
expensive, thus limiting its practical use (e.g. it requires several minutes of GPU-powered training for each test video).
In this paper, we present a new hybrid method for
semi-supervised video object segmentation. We construct
a Siamese encoder-decoder network that simultaneously

7376

