Lions and Tigers and Bears:
Capturing Non-Rigid, 3D, Articulated Shape from Images
Silvia Zuffi1
Angjoo Kanazawa2
Michael J. Black3
2
IMATI-CNR, Milan, Italy, University of California, Berkeley
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
silvia@mi.imati.cnr.it, kanazawa@berkeley.edu, black@tuebingen.mpg.de
1

Figure 1: Animals from Images. We generate 3D textured articulated models of animals from images. Starting from an
initial coarse shape obtained with the SMAL model [31], we refine the animal shape from multiple uncalibrated images and
varying poses and capture a detailed texture map from multiple frames. We recover detailed 3D shapes for animal species
that are in the SMAL shape space (like lions and tigers) and go beyond SMAL to capture new animals like bears.

Abstract
Animals are widespread in nature and the analysis of
their shape and motion is important in many fields and industries. Modeling 3D animal shape, however, is difficult
because the 3D scanning methods used to capture human
shape are not applicable to wild animals or natural settings.
Consequently, we propose a method to capture the detailed
3D shape of animals from images alone. The articulated
and deformable nature of animals makes this problem extremely challenging, particularly in unconstrained environments with moving and uncalibrated cameras. To make this
possible, we use a strong prior model of articulated animal
shape that we fit to the image data. We then deform the animal shape in a canonical reference pose such that it matches
image evidence when articulated and projected into multiple images. Our method extracts significantly more 3D
shape detail than previous methods and is able to model
new species, including the shape of an extinct animal, using only a few video frames. Additionally, the projected 3D
shapes are accurate enough to facilitate the extraction of a
realistic texture map from multiple frames.

1. Introduction
The study of animals is important not only for science,
but for society as a whole. We need to learn more about
animals in order to protect endangered species and to improve the quality of life for animals in captivity. We also
need to share this knowledge with new generations who will
increasingly acquire their awareness of nature from virtual
worlds. Computer vision can play an important role by providing methods for the 3D capture, modeling, and tracking
of animals. Unfortunately, few methods today support the
capture of realistic animal shapes and textures like those in
Figure 1.
In contrast, there are now mature tools for producing 3D
articulated shape models of the human body that are realistic, differentiable, and computationally efficient. Such models support human pose, shape, and motion estimation from
images and video as well as many applications of practical and commercial interest. In comparison to the human
body, very little work has focused on modeling animals.
The availability of 3D articulated shape models of animals,
however, would open up many applications. Such models
could be employed in markerless motion capture systems,
removing intrusive markers and enabling the capture of wild

3955

