Demo2Vec: Reasoning Object Affordances from Online Videos
Kuan Fang∗
Stanford University

Te-Lin Wu∗
University of Southern California

Daniel Yang
University of Southern California

kuanfang@stanford.edu

telinwu@usc.edu

danielxy@usc.edu

Silvio Savarese
Stanford University

Joseph J. Lim
University of Southern California

ssilvio@stanford.edu

limjj@usc.edu

Abstract

Humans often appeal to expert demonstrations when
learning to interact with unseen objects. Through watching the demonstration by another person, one can understand the object affordances, i.e. functionalities of different parts and possible actions that can be taken. Upon
seeing the same object in a different environment, humans
can map the learned affordances onto the object and imitate the actions they observed from the previous demonstration. To teach a robot about how humans manipulate and
interact with objects, previous methods learn this knowledge from simulated agent-object interactions [33, 23, 29],
demonstrations observed by the robot camera in the robot
workspace [22, 17] or demonstrations observed from a
third-person viewpoint [13, 14]. Different forms of object
affordances are learned from these demonstrations and used
for tasks such as imitation learning and action prediction.
However, there exists a much richer data resource of human demonstrations on object affordances which can be uti∗ indicates equal contribution, sorted in alphabetical order.

predicted affordances

Hold

1. Introduction

embedding
vector

Rotate

Watching expert demonstrations is an important way for
humans and robots to reason about affordances of unseen
objects. In this paper, we consider the problem of reasoning object affordances through the feature embedding
of demonstration videos. We design the Demo2Vec model
which learns to extract embedded vectors of demonstration
videos and predicts the interaction region and the action
label on a target image of the same object. We introduce
the Online Product Review dataset for Affordance (OPRA)
by collecting and labeling diverse YouTube product review
videos. Our Demo2Vec model outperforms various recurrent neural network baselines on the collected dataset.

demonstration video

Figure 1. Our Demo2Vec model summarizes the demonstration
video via the embedded vector. The embedded vector is used to
predict object affordances (i.e. the interaction region and the action
label) for the target image. The demonstration videos are from
online product reviews on YouTube. More examples can be found
at: https://sites.google.com/view/demo2vec/

lized from the Internet. Specifically, there is a great number
of product review videos uploaded onto YouTube and other
video-sharing websites by product manufacturers and users.
These videos cover diverse sets of object categories which
people interact with in everyday life, including kitchenware,
garage tools, consumer electronics, appliances, toys and so
on. In each video, there is usually a human demonstrator (e.g. user or salesperson) showing the functionality in
details through a sequence of actions on the product object. These videos provide large-scale, high-quality data for
teaching robots about the functionality of the products and
how people interact with them.
Given human demonstrations from these product review
videos, our goal is to learn to summarize the feature embedding of demonstration videos, and thus to predict the
interaction region and the corresponding action label on a
target image of the same object. Consider the griddle in
Fig. 1. By watching the demonstrator turning on the griddle in the product review demonstration video, we aim to
predict the action label as rotate and the heatmap centered
around the knob in the middle on the target image. This
problem is challenging for mainly two reasons: First, the
12139

