Finding beans in burgers:
Deep semantic-visual embedding with localization
Martin Engilberge1,2 , Louis Chevallier2 , Patrick Pérez2 , Matthieu Cord1
1

Sorbonne université, Paris, France 2 Technicolor, Cesson Sévigné, France
{martin.engilberge, matthieu.cord}@lip6.fr
patrick.perez@valeo.com louis.chevallier@technicolor.com

Abstract
Several works have proposed to learn a two-path neural
network that maps images and texts, respectively, to a same
shared Euclidean space where geometry captures useful semantic relationships. Such a multi-modal embedding can be
trained and used for various tasks, notably image captioning. In the present work, we introduce a new architecture
of this type, with a visual path that leverages recent spaceaware pooling mechanisms. Combined with a textual path
which is jointly trained from scratch, our semantic-visual
embedding offers a versatile model. Once trained under the
supervision of captioned images, it yields new state-of-theart performance on cross-modal retrieval. It also allows the
localization of new concepts from the embedding space into
any input image, delivering state-of-the-art result on the visual grounding of phrases.

1. Introduction
Text and image understanding is progressing fast thanks
to the ability of artificial neural nets to learn, with or without supervision, powerful distributed representations of input data. At runtime, such nets embed data into highdimensional feature spaces where semantic relationships
are geometrically captured and can be exploited to accomplish various tasks. Off-the-shelf already trained nets are
now routinely used to extract versatile deep features from
images which can be used for recognition or editing tasks,
or to turn words and sentences into vectorial representations
that can be mathematically analysed and manipulated.
Recent works have demonstrated how such deep representations of images and texts can be jointly leveraged to
build visual-semantic embeddings [11, 17, 20, 33]. The
ability to map natural images and texts in a shared representation space where geometry (distances and directions)
might be interpreted is a powerful unifying paradigm. Not

Figure 1. Concept localization with proposed semantic-visual
embedding. Not only does our deep embedding allows crossmodal retrieval with state-of-the-art performance, but it can also
associate to an image, e.g., the hamburger plate on the left, a localization heatmap for any text query, as shown with overlays for
three text examples. The circled blue dot indicates the highest peak
in the heatmap.

only does it permit to revisit visual recognition and captioning tasks, but it also opens up new usages, such as crossmodal content search or generation.
One popular approach to semantic-visual joint embedding is to connect two mono-modal paths with one or multiple fully connected layers [20, 17, 39, 10, 2]: A visual path
based on a pre-trained convolutional neural network (CNN)
and a text path based on a pre-trained recurrent neural network (RNN) operating on a given word embedding. Using
aligned text-image data, such as images with multiple captions from MS-COCO dataset [26], final mapping layers can
be trained, along with the optional fine-tuning of the two
branches. Building on this line of research, we investigate
new pooling mechanisms in the visual path. Inspired by recent work on weakly supervised object localization [45, 7],
we propose in particular to leverage selective spatial pooling with negative evidence proposed in [7] to improve visual feature extraction without resorting, e.g., to expensive
region proposal strategies. Another important benefit of the
proposed joint architecture is that, once trained, it allows
localization of arbitrary concepts within arbitrary images:
Given an image and the embedding of a text (or any point
of the embedding space), we propose a mechanism to compute a localization map, as demonstrated in Fig. 1.
13984

