MorphNet: Fast & Simple Resource-Constrained Structure Learning of Deep
Networks
Ariel Gordon∗

Elad Eban∗

Ofir Nachum†

Bo Chen∗

gariel@google.com

elade@google.com

ofirnachum@google.com

bochen@google.com

Hao Wu∗

Tien-Ju Yang ∗‡

Edward Choi ∗§

haou@google.com

tjy@mit.edu

mp2893@gatech.edu

Abstract
We present MorphNet, an approach to automate the design of neural network structures. MorphNet iteratively
shrinks and expands a network, shrinking via a resourceweighted sparsifying regularizer on activations and expanding via a uniform multiplicative factor on all layers.
In contrast to previous approaches, our method is scalable to large networks, adaptable to specific resource constraints (e.g. the number of floating-point operations per
inference), and capable of increasing the network’s performance. When applied to standard network architectures on
a wide variety of datasets, our approach discovers novel
structures in each domain, obtaining higher performance
while respecting the resource constraint.

1. Introduction
The design of deep neural networks (DNNs) has often
been more of an art than a science. Over multiple years, top
world experts have incrementally improved the accuracies
and speed at which DNNs perform their tasks, harnessing
their creativity, intuition, experience, and above all - trialand-error. Structure design in DNNs has thus become the
new feature engineering. Automating this process is an active research field that is gaining significance as DNNs become more ubiquitous in a variety of applications and platforms.
One key approach towards automated architecture search
involves sparsifying regularizers. Initially it was shown that
applying L1 regularization on weight matrices can reduce
the number of nonzero weights with little effect on the performance (e.g. accuracy or mean-average-precision) of the
DNN [30, 3]. However, as DNNs started powering more
∗ Google AI
† Google Brain
‡ Energy-efficient multimedia systems group, MIT.
§ Georgia Institute of Technology.

and more industrial applications, practical constraints such
as inference speed and power consumption became of increasing importance. Standard L1 regularization can prune
individual connections (edges) in a neural network, but this
form of sparsity is ill-suited to modern hardware accelerators and does not result in a speedup in practice. To induce
better sparsification, more recent work has designed regularizers which target neurons (a.k.a. activations) rather than
weights [18, 29, 1]. While these techniques have succeeded
in reducing the number of parameters of a network, they do
not target reduction of a particular resource (e.g., the number of floating point operations, or FLOPs, per inference).
In fact, resource specificity of sparsifying regularizers remains an under explored area.
A more recent approach to neural network architecture
design expands the scope of the problem from only shrinking a network to optimizing every aspect of the network
structure. Works using this approach [33, 28, 24, 16] rely
on an auxiliary neural network to learn the art of neural
network design from a large number of trial-and-error attempts. While these proposals have succeeded in achieving new state-of-the-art results on several datasets [24, 34],
they have done so at the cost of an exorbitant number of
trial-and-error attempts. These methods require months or
years of GPU time to obtain a single architecture, and become prohibitively expensive as the networks and datasets
grow in complexity and volume.
Given these various research directions, automatic neural network architecture design is currently effective only
under limited conditions and given knowledge of the right
tool to use. In this paper, we hope to alleviate this issue.
We present MorphNet, a simple and general technique for
resource-constrained optimization of DNN architectures.
Our technique has three advantages: (1) it is scalable
to large models and large datasets; (2) it can optimize a
DNN structure targeting a specific resource, such as FLOPs
per inference, while allowing the usage of untargeted resources, such as model size (number of parameters), to grow
11586

