OATM: Occlusion Aware Template Matching by Consensus Set Maximization
Simon Korman1,3
1
Weizmann Institute of Science

Mark Milam2
2
Northrop Grumman

Stefano Soatto1,3
3
UCLA Vision Lab

Abstract
We present a novel approach to template matching that
is efficient, can handle partial occlusions, and comes with
provable performance guarantees. A key component of
the method is a reduction that transforms the problem of
searching a nearest neighbor among N high-dimensional
vectors,
to searching neighbors among two sets of order
√
N vectors, which can be found efficiently using range
search techniques. This allows for a quadratic improvement in search complexity, and makes the method scalable
in handling large search spaces. The second contribution
is a hashing scheme based on consensus set maximization, which allows us to handle occlusions. The resulting
scheme can be seen as a randomized hypothesize-and-test
algorithm, which is equipped with guarantees regarding the
number of iterations required for obtaining an optimal solution with high probability. The predicted matching rates
are validated empirically and the algorithm shows a significant improvement over the state-of-the-art in both speed
and robustness to occlusions.

1. Introduction
Matching a template T (a small image) to a target I (a
larger image) can be trivial to impossible depending on the
relation between the two. In the classical setup, when I is a
digital image and T is a subset of it, this amounts to a search
over the set of N discrete 2D-translations, where N would
be the number of pixels in I. When T and I are images
of the same scene taken from different vantage points, their
relation can be described by a complex deformation of their
domain, depending on the shape of the underlying scene,
and of their range, depending on its reflectance and illumination. For a sufficiently small template, such deformations
can be approximated by an affine transformation of the domain (“warping”), and an affine (“contrast”) transformation
of the range . . . except for occlusions: An arbitrarily large
portion of the template, including all of it, may be occluded
and therefore have no correspondent in the target image.
This poses a fundamental problem to many low-level
tasks: To establish local correspondence (co-visibility), the
template should be large, so as to be discriminative. But

Figure 1. Instances of the occlusion experiment (Sec. 4.2) A template (overlaid in green) that is 60% occluded by random blocks is
searched for in an image. OATM shows the best results in dealing
with significant deformation and occlusion (use zoom for detail).

increasing the area increases the probability that its correspondent in the target image will be occluded, which causes
the correspondence to fail, unless occlusion phenomena are
explicitly taken into account.
In this work we model occlusions explicitly as part of a
robust template matching process where the co-visible region is assumed to undergo affine deformations of the domain and range, up to additive noise. We search for transformations that maximize consensus, that is the size of the
co-visible set, in a manner that is efficient and comes with
provable convergence guarantees.
Efficiency comes from the first contribution - a reduction method whereby the linear search of nearest neighbors
for the d-dimensional template T through N versions in the
target image is converted to a search
√ among two sets of vectors, with each set of size O( N ) (Sect. 2.2).
√ This reduces the search complexity from O(N ) to O( N ), which
is practical even for very large search spaces, such as the
discretized space of affine transformations.
For this method to work, we need a hashing scheme that
is compatible with occlusions, which we achieve by adapting the scheme of Aiger et al. [2], leading to our second
contribution: Rather than reporting close neighbors under
the Euclidean ℓ2 norm, we are interested in reporting pairs
of vectors that are compatible, up to a threshold, on a maximum (co-visibility) consensus set. Our hashing scheme is
akin to a random consensus (RANSAC-type) procedure under the ℓ∞ norm (Sect. 2.3).
Finally, our third contribution is an analysis of the algorithm (Sect. 2.4), specifically regarding guarantees on the
number of candidate hypotheses required for obtaining the
12675

