NestedNet: Learning Nested Sparse Structures in Deep Neural Networks
Eunwoo Kim
Chanho Ahn
Songhwai Oh
Department of ECE and ASRI, Seoul National University, South Korea
{kewoo15, mychahn, songhwai}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, there have been increasing demands to construct compact deep architectures to remove unnecessary
redundancy and to improve the inference speed. While
many recent works focus on reducing the redundancy by
eliminating unneeded weight parameters, it is not possible
to apply a single deep network for multiple devices with
different resources. When a new device or circumstantial
condition requires a new deep architecture, it is necessary
to construct and train a new network from scratch. In this
work, we propose a novel deep learning framework, called a
nested sparse network, which exploits an n-in-1-type nested
structure in a neural network. A nested sparse network consists of multiple levels of networks with a different sparsity
ratio associated with each level, and higher level networks
share parameters with lower level networks to enable stable nested learning. The proposed framework realizes a
resource-aware versatile architecture as the same network
can meet diverse resource requirements, i.e., anytime property. Moreover, the proposed nested network can learn different forms of knowledge in its internal networks at different levels, enabling multiple tasks using a single network,
such as coarse-to-fine hierarchical classification. In order
to train the proposed nested network, we propose efficient
weight connection learning and channel and layer scheduling strategies. We evaluate our network in multiple tasks,
including adaptive deep compression, knowledge distillation, and learning class hierarchy, and demonstrate that
nested sparse networks perform competitively, but more efficiently, compared to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have recently become a standard
architecture due to their significant performance improvement over the traditional machine learning models in a number of fields, such as image recognition [10, 13, 18], object
detection [24], image generation [7], and natural language
processing [4, 26]. The successful outcomes are derived
from the availability of massive labeled data and compu-

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of the nested sparse network
with n nested levels (n-in-1 network, n=4 here). A nested sparse
network consists of internal networks from core level (with the
sparsest parameters) to full level (with all parameters) and an internal network share its parameters with higher level networks, making a network-in-network structure. Since the nested sparse network produces multiple different outputs, it can be leveraged for
multiple tasks as well as multiple devices with different resources.

tational power to process such data. What is more, many
studies have been conducted toward very deep and dense
models [10, 13, 25, 32] to achieve further performance gain.
Despite of the success, the remarkable progress is accomplished at the expense of intensive computational and memory requirements, which can limit deep networks for a practical use, especially on mobile devices with low computing
capability. In particular, if the size of a network architecture is designed to be colossal, it may be problematic for
the network to achieve mission-critical tasks on a commercial device which requires a real-time operation.
Fortunately, it is well-known that there exists much redundancy in most of deep architectures, i.e., a few number
of network parameters represent the whole deep network in
substance [20]. This motivates many researchers to exploit
the redundancy from multiple points of view. The concept
of sparse representation is to elucidate the redundancy by
representing a network with a small number of representative parameters. Most of sparse deep networks prune connections with insignificant contributions [3, 8, 9, 23, 30, 34],

8669

