Unsupervised Textual Grounding: Linking Words to Image Concepts
Raymond A. Yeh, Minh N. Do, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{yeh17, minhdo, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Textual grounding, i.e., linking words to objects in images, is a challenging but important task for robotics and
human-computer interaction. Existing techniques benefit
from recent progress in deep learning and generally formulate the task as a supervised learning problem, selecting a bounding box from a set of possible options. To train
these deep net based approaches, access to a large-scale
datasets is required, however, constructing such a dataset
is time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, we develop a
completely unsupervised mechanism for textual grounding
using hypothesis testing as a mechanism to link words to
detected image concepts. We demonstrate our approach on
the ReferIt Game dataset and the Flickr30k data, outperforming baselines by 7.98% and 6.96% respectively.

A woman giving a
presentation about a
Chevrolet car.

Rocky spot on the left,
bottom of the picture.

Figure 1. Test set results for grounding of textual phrases from our
approach. Left: Flickr30k Entities dataset, phrase and bounding
box are color coded. Right: ReferItGame dataset. (Groundtruth
box in green and predicted box in red)

large-scale datasets that facilitate training of deep net based
systems.

1. Introduction
Textual grounding is an important task for robotics,
human-computer interaction, and assistive systems. Increasingly, we interact with computers using language, and
it won’t be long until we will guide autonomous systems
via commands such as ‘the coffee mug on the counter’ or
the ‘water bottle next to the sink.’ While it is easy for a
human to relate the nouns in those phrases to observed real
world objects, computers are challenged by the complexity
of the commands arising due to object variability and ambiguity in the description and the relations. E.g., the meaning
of the term ‘next to’ differs significantly depending on the
context.
To address those challenges, existing textual grounding
algorithms [13, 43, 52, 40] benefit significantly from the recent progress in cognitive abilities, in particular from deep
net based object detection, object classification and semantic segmentation. More specifically, for textual grounding, deep net based systems extract high-level feature abstractions from hypothesized bounding boxes and textual
queries. Both are then compared to assess their compatibility. Importantly, training of textual grounding systems such
as [13, 40] crucially relies on the availability of bounding
boxes. However, it is rather time-consuming to construct

To address this issue, we propose a completely unsupervised mechanism for textual grounding. Our approach
is based on a hypothesis testing formulation which links
words to activated image concepts such as semantic segmentations or other spatial maps. More specifically, words
are linked to image concepts if observing a word provides
a significant signal that an image concept is activated. We
establish those links during a learning task, which uses a
dataset containing words and images. During inference
we extract the linked concepts and use their spatial map
to compute a bounding box using the seminal subwindow
search algorithm by Lampert et al. [26]. Compared to existing techniques, our results are easy to interpret. But more
importantly we emphasize that the approach can be easily
combined with a supervisory signal.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the developed technique on the two benchmark datasets for textual grounding, i.e., the ReferIt Game dataset [18] and the Flickr30k
data [40]. We show some results in Fig. 1 and we will
illustrate that our approach outperforms competing unsupervised textual grounding approaches by a large margin of
7.98% and 6.96% on the ReferIt Game and the Flickr30k
dataset respectively.
16125

