Learning Less is More – 6D Camera Localization via 3D Surface Regression
Eric Brachmann and Carsten Rother
Visual Learning Lab
Heidelberg University (HCI/IWR)
http://vislearn.de

Test Frames with 3D Model Fitted (Our Results)

Abstract
Popular research areas like autonomous driving and
augmented reality have renewed the interest in image-based
camera localization. In this work, we address the task
of predicting the 6D camera pose from a single RGB image in a given 3D environment. With the advent of neural networks, previous works have either learned the entire camera localization process, or multiple components
of a camera localization pipeline. Our key contribution
is to demonstrate and explain that learning a single component of this pipeline is sufficient. This component is a
fully convolutional neural network for densely regressing
so-called scene coordinates, defining the correspondence
between the input image and the 3D scene space. The
neural network is prepended to a new end-to-end trainable
pipeline. Our system is efficient, highly accurate, robust in
training, and exhibits outstanding generalization capabilities. It exceeds state-of-the-art consistently on indoor and
outdoor datasets. Interestingly, our approach surpasses existing techniques even without utilizing a 3D model of the
scene during training, since the network is able to discover
3D scene geometry automatically, solely from single-view
constraints.

1. Introduction
Precise localization is key in many applications of computer vision, such as inserting a virtual character into the
smartphone view of your living room in a plausible way or
guiding a self-driving car through New York. While different devices, like smartphones or self-driving cars, come
with different senors, an RGB camera is often present because of its low cost and rich output. In this work, we
present a system which estimates the 6D camera pose, consisting of position and orientation, within a known 3D environment from a single RGB image.
In the last five years, we have seen an impressive leap
forward of what computer vision can achieve due to advances in machine learning. Camera localization is a par-

Estimated Camera Positions (Our Results)

Estimated Camera Positions (Competitors)

Figure 1. One-Shot RGB Camera Localization. Top: We use
our pose estimates to fit a 3D scene model to test images. Middle:
We visualize a camera trajectory by plotting camera positions as
dots and connecting consecutive frames. We show our estimates
in cyan and ground truth in green. Our results are highly accurate
with very few outliers. We trained from RGB images and ground
truth poses only, without using the 3D scene model. Bottom: Results of competing methods which are less accurate and produce
many wrong estimates. To improve the visualization, we connect
only consecutive frames within 5 meters range. Red: In the spirit
of PoseNet [11], we train a CNN to predict poses directly. Orange:
Results of DSAC [2] trained with a 3D scene model.

ticularly difficult learning problem because training data is
usually limited. Recording a dense or even regular sampling of 6D camera views for any given scene is impractical. Therefore, generalization to unseen views is a central
capability of any camera localization system.

4654

