Visual to Sound: Generating Natural Sound for Videos in the Wild
Yipin Zhou1 , Zhaowen Wang2 , Chen Fang2 , Trung Bui2 , and Tamara L. Berg1
1

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2 Adobe Research

Abstract
As two of the five traditional human senses (sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch), vision and sound are basic
sources through which humans understand the world. Often
correlated during natural events, these two modalities combine to jointly affect human perception. In this paper, we
pose the task of generating sound given visual input. Such
capabilities could help enable applications in virtual reality
(generating sound for virtual scenes automatically) or provide additional accessibility to images or videos for people
with visual impairments. As a first step in this direction, we
apply learning-based methods to generate raw waveform
samples given input video frames. We evaluate our models on a dataset of videos containing a variety of sounds
(such as ambient sounds and sounds from people/animals).
Our experiments show that the generated sounds are fairly
realistic and have good temporal synchronization with the
visual inputs.

1. Introduction
The visual and auditory senses are arguably the most
important channels through which humans perceive their
surrounding environments, and they are often entertwined.
From life-long observations of the natural world, people
are able to learn the association between vision and sound.
For instance, when seeing a flash of lightning in the sky,
one might cover their ears subconsciously, knowing that
the crack of thunder is coming next. Alternatively, hearing leaves rustling in the wind might conjure up a picture of
a peaceful forest scene.
In this paper, we explore whether computational models can learn the relationship between visuals and sound.
Models of this relationship could be fundamental for many
applications such as combining videos with automatically
generated ambient sound to enhance the experience of immersion in virtual reality; adding sound effects to videos automatically to reduce tedious manual sound editing work;
Or enabling equal accessibility by associating sound with
visual information for people with visual impairments (allowing them to “see” the world through sound). While all
of these tasks require powerful high-level inference and rea-

soning ability, in this work we take a first step toward this
goal, narrowing down the task to generating audio for video
based on the viewable content.
Specifically, we train models to directly predict raw audio signals (waveform samples) from input videos. The
models are expected to learn associations between generated sound and visual inputs for various scenes and object
interactions. Existing works [15, 4] handle sound generation given input of videos/images under experimental settings (e.g., to generate a hitting sound or where the input
videos are recorded indoor with fixed background). In our
work, we deal with generating natural sound from videos
collected in the wild.
To enable learning, we introduce a dataset that is derived from AudioSet [7]. AudioSet is a dataset collected
for audio event recognition but not ideal for our task because many of videos and audios are loosely related; the
target sound might be covered by other sounds (like music);
and the dataset contains some mis-classified videos. All of
these sources of noise tend to deter the models from learning the correct mapping from video to audio. To alleviate
these issues, we clean a subset of the data, including sounds
of humans/animals and other natural sounds, by verifying
the presence of the target objects for both videos and audios
respectively (at 2 second intervals) to make them suitable
for the generation task (Sec. 3).
Our model learns a mapping from video frames to audio using a video encoder plus sound generator structure.
For sound generation, we use a hierarchical recurrent neural network proposed by [14]. We present 3 variants to encode the visual information, which can be combined with
the sound generation network to form a complete framework (Sec. 4). To evaluate the proposed models and the
generated results, we conduct both numerical evaluations
and human experiments (Sec. 5). Please see our supplementary video to see and hear sound generation results.
The innovations introduced by our paper are: 1) We propose a new problem of generating sounds from videos in
the wild; 2) We release a dataset containing 28109 cleaned
videos (55 hours in total) spanning 10 object categories; 3)
We explore model variants for the generation architectures;
4) Numerical and human evaluations are provided as well
as an analysis of generated results.
13550

