Transferable Joint Attribute-Identity Deep Learning for
Unsupervised Person Re-Identification
Jingya Wang1
Xiatian Zhu2
Queen Mary University of London1

Shaogang Gong1
Wei Li1
2
Vision Semantics Ltd.

{jingya.wang, s.gong, w.li}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Most existing person re-identification (re-id) methods require supervised model learning from a separate large set
of pairwise labelled training data for every single camera
pair. This significantly limits their scalability and usability in real-world large scale deployments with the need for
performing re-id across many camera views. To address
this scalability problem, we develop a novel deep learning method for transferring the labelled information of an
existing dataset to a new unseen (unlabelled) target domain for person re-id without any supervised learning in
the target domain. Specifically, we introduce an Transferable Joint Attribute-Identity Deep Learning (TJ-AIDL) for
simultaneously learning an attribute-semantic and identitydiscriminative feature representation space transferrable to
any new (unseen) target domain for re-id tasks without the
need for collecting new labelled training data from the target domain (i.e. unsupervised learning in the target domain). Extensive comparative evaluations validate the superiority of this new TJ-AIDL model for unsupervised person re-id over a wide range of state-of-the-art methods
on four challenging benchmarks including VIPeR, PRID,
Market-1501, and DukeMTMC-ReID.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) aims at matching people
across non-overlapping camera views distributed at distinct
locations. Most existing re-id studies follow the supervised
learning paradigm such as optimising pairwise matching
distance metrics [23, 58, 63, 55, 60, 52, 56, 8] or deep learning methods [29, 50, 57, 48, 6, 30, 31, 5]. They assume the
availability of a large number of manually labelled matching pairs for each pair of camera views for learning a feature
representation or a matching distance function optimised
for that camera pair. However, this leads to a poor scalability in practical re-id deployments, because such scale manual labelling is not only prohibitively expensive to collect

eddy@visionsemantics.com

in the real-world as there are a quadratic number of camera
pairs, but also implausible in many cases, e.g. there may not
exist sufficient training people reappearing in every pair of
camera views. This scalability limitation severely reduces
the usability of existing supervised re-id methods.
One generic solution to large scale re-id in real-world
deployment is designing unsupervised models. While a few
unsupervised methods have been developed [13, 9, 21, 20,
34, 51, 61], they typically offer weaker re-id performances
when compared to the supervised counterparts. This makes
them less useful in practice. One main reason is that without labelled data across views, unsupervised methods lack
the necessary knowledge on how visual appearance of identical objects changes cross-views due to different view angles, background and illumination. Another solution is to
exploit simultaneously (1) unlabelled data from a target domain and (2) existing labelled datasets from some training
source domains. Specifically, the idea is to learn a feature
representation that contains some view-invariant information about people appearance learned from labelled source
data, transfer and adapt it to a target domain by using only
unlabelled target data for re-id matching in the target domain. As the target dataset has no label, this is regarded as
an unsupervised learning problem.
There are a few studies on exploiting unlabelled target
data for unsupervised re-id modelling using either identity
or attribute label, or both from source datasets [40, 59, 47].
However, they generally offer weaker re-id performance
due to either domain sensitive hand-crafted features or a
lack of an effective knowledge transfer learning algorithm
between attribute and identity discriminative features. It is
very challenging to address this cross-domain and multitask (between attribute and identity) transfer learning problem in a principled way due to three co-occurring uncertainties: (1) Source and target domains have unknown camera
viewing conditions; (2) The identity/class population between source and target domains are non-overlapping therefore presents a more challenging open-set recognition problem, as compared to the closed-set assumption made by
most existing transfer learning models [39]; (3) Joint ex-

2275

