Discovering Point Lights with Intensity Distance Fields
Edward Zhang
University of Washington
Seattle, WA

Michael F. Cohen
Facebook, Inc.
Seattle, WA

Brian Curless
University of Washington
Seattle, WA

edzhang@cs.washington.edu

mcohen1@fb.com

curless@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We introduce the light localization problem. A scene
is illuminated by a set of unobserved isotropic point
lights. Given the geometry, materials, and illuminated
appearance of the scene, the light localization problem
is to completely recover the number, positions, and intensities of the lights. We first present a scene transform that identifies likely light positions. Based on this
transform, we develop an iterative algorithm to locate
remaining lights and determine all light intensities. We
demonstrate the success of this method in a large set of
2D synthetic scenes, and show that it extends to 3D, in
both synthetic scenes and real-world scenes.

1. Introduction
Estimating the lighting in a scene has a long history
in computer vision and graphics, and is a key subproblem in many areas such as reconstruction from shading
cues (e.g. [8, 13, 33]), where inferred shape depends
heavily on the incident lighting, or augmented reality
(e.g. [4, 30]), where virtual objects must be lit consistently with the real world to appear convincing. The
majority of prior work assumes distant illumination,
where lighting incident on a surface does not vary spatially and only depends on the normal of the illuminated surface. Distant illumination, however, is insufficient to represent the lighting in many environments,
such as indoor scenes, which are commonly lit by a
small number of local light emitters.
Compared with distant illumination, inferring discrete, local lighting models introduces two new unknowns: cardinality (the number of lights) and position
(where the lights are), in addition to intensity. Estimating cardinality and position is especially difficult
when emitters cannot be directly imaged, such as when
a light is located inside an alcove near the ceiling, too
high to be seen from human height. Can we resolve the
questions of cardinality and position, even in the ideal

case? More concretely, given all the information about
the scene except the lighting (i.e. given geometry, materials, and final lit appearance), we seek to completely
recover the number of lights, their positions, and their
intensities. We call this the light localization problem.
In this paper, we introduce a method for solving
the light localization problem. Our key contributions
are: (1) a formulation of the problem for an unknown
number of local, discrete emitters; (2) a novel scene
transform that proposes multiple candidate light positions based on the reflected light in the scene; and, (3)
an iterative algorithm that uses the light proposals to
recover the full set of scene illuminants, including positions and intensities. We show that the method works
on synthetic and real-world scenes; though the solution can be inherently ambiguous (e.g., two very close
lights may be recovered as a single light), our approach
is generally able to arrive at a low-error solution.

2. Related Work
The distant illumination model introduced by [4] is
the most widely used lighting model in inverse problems. We focus our discussion on prior light estimation works that go beyond distant illumination, with
methods to estimate light cardinality and position.
Several works attempt to decompose distant illumination into the combination of a discrete number of
directional light sources. Earlier works identify occlusion boundaries, referred to as critical points, on a diffuse sphere [29, 31]. Wang and Samaras [26] examine
the regions within the boundaries, avoiding the issue of
detecting critical points, and subsequently [27] extend
this framework for arbitrary reference objects. LopezMoreno et al [16] iteratively add directional sources
based on reconstruction error. Our algorithm performs
a similar iterative light discovery process. However, we
do not rely on the presence of critical points and thus
we are more robust to missing data.
Many works relax the distant illumination assumption by extending the parameterization of each di16635

