Joint Optimization Framework for Learning with Noisy Labels
Daiki Tanaka

Daiki Ikami Toshihiko Yamasaki
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Kiyoharu Aizawa

{tanaka, ikami, yamasaki, aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) trained on large-scale
datasets have exhibited significant performance in image classification. Many large-scale datasets are collected from websites, however they tend to contain inaccurate labels that are termed as noisy labels. Training on such noisy labeled datasets causes performance
degradation because DNNs easily overfit to noisy labels.
To overcome this problem, we propose a joint optimization framework of learning DNN parameters and estimating true labels. Our framework can correct labels
during training by alternating update of network parameters and labels. We conduct experiments on the
noisy CIFAR-10 datasets and the Clothing1M dataset.
The results indicate that our approach significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
DNNs trained on large-scale datasets have achieved
impressive results on many classification problems.
Generally, accurate labels are necessary to effectively
train DNNs. However, many datasets are constructed
by crawling images and labels from websites and often
contain incorrect noisy labels (e.g., YFCC100M [17],
Clothing1M [21]). This study addresses the following
question: how can we effectively train DNNs on noisy
labeled datasets without manually cleaning the data?
The prominent issue in training DNNs on noisy labeled datasets is that DNNs can learn or memorize,
any training dataset, and this implies that DNNs are
subject to total overfitting on noisy data.
To address this problem, commonly used regularization techniques including dropout and early stopping
are helpful. However, these methods do not guarantee
optimization because they prevent the networks from
reducing the training loss. Another method involves
using prior knowledge, such as the confusion matrix
between clean and noisy labels, which typically cannot
be used in real settings.

Figure 1. The concept of our joint optimization framework.
Noisy labels are reassigned to the probability output by
CNNs. Network parameters and labels are alternatively
updated for each epoch.

Consequently, we need a new framework of optimization. In this study, we propose an optimization
framework for learning on a noisy labeled dataset. We
propose optimizing the labels themselves as opposed
to treating the noisy labels as fixed. The joint optimization of network parameters and the noisy labels
corrects inaccurate labels and simultaneously improves
the performance of the classifier. Fig. 1 shows the concept of our proposal. The main contributions are as
follows.
1. We propose a joint optimization framework for
learning on noisy labeled datasets. Our optimization problem has two optimization network parameters and class labels that are optimized by an alternating strategy.
2. We observe that a DNN trained on noisy labeled
datasets does not memorize noisy labels and maintains high performance for clean data under a high
learning rate. This reinforces the findings of Arpit
et al. [1] that suggest that DNNs first learns simple
patterns and subsequently memorize noisy data.
3. We evaluate the performance on synthetic and
real noisy datasets. We demonstrate state-of-theart performance on the noisy CIFAR-10 dataset
and a comparable performance on the Clothing1M
dataset [21].

5552

