Fast Monte-Carlo Localization on Aerial Vehicles using
Approximate Continuous Belief Representations
Aditya Dhawale∗

Kumar Shaurya Shankar∗

Abstract
Size, weight, and power constrained platforms impose constraints on computational resources that introduce
unique challenges in implementing localization algorithms.
We present a framework to perform fast localization on such
platforms enabled by the compressive capabilities of Gaussian Mixture Model representations of point cloud data.
Given raw structural data from a depth sensor and pitch
and roll estimates from an on-board attitude reference system, a multi-hypothesis particle filter localizes the vehicle
by exploiting the likelihood of the data originating from the
mixture model. We demonstrate analysis of this likelihood
in the vicinity of the ground truth pose and detail its utilization in a particle filter-based vehicle localization strategy,
and later present results of real-time implementations on a
desktop system and an off-the-shelf embedded platform that
outperform localization results from running a state-of-theart algorithm on the same environment.

1. Introduction
For an agent lost in a known environment, much of the
cost of localization can be offset by precomputing measures
of what the sensor is expected to see; localization can then
be cast as the much simpler problem of a search through
these pre-existing “hallucinated” views. However, exhaustively considering all possible views incurs a prohibitive
cost that increases exponentially with both the dimensionality of the state space and the size of the environment. Further, naı̈ve pre-rendering approaches can be susceptible to
errors caused by perceptual aliasing due to slight variations
in the environment appearance or by regions that are not
feature rich, such as blank walls [1].
In this paper we present a framework enabling rapid
computation of sensor data likelihood via an environment
representation that is both high-fidelity and memory efficient. The framework models a depth camera observation as
being sampled from the environment representation with a
∗ Contributed equally to this work. Authors are with The Robotics
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA.
{adityand, kshaurya, nmichael}@cmu.edu

Nathan Michael

likelihood measure that varies smoothly about the true camera pose. We thus exploit the dramatically reduced storage
complexity of the representation and the local spatial regularity of a fast-to-compute likelihood function to re-cast the
pose estimation problem as that of Monte-Carlo localization [25].
Similar in spirit to our choice of representation, [8] map
the world with a succinct, albeit restrictive parameterization
of using only dominant planes. Our choice of representation
however, does not have any such restrictions. Likewise, [2]
is similar in its restriction of representation to a structured
world consisting of planes and edges and only localizes in
2D. Approaches such as NDT occupancy maps [5, 16, 23],
unlike the representation used in this work, learn independent distributions over each discretized cell leading to a
lower fidelity representation at the cell boundaries [6, 21].
Further, for fast pointcloud alignment they require precomputation of the incoming data for comparison with a
stored model, known as Distribution-to-Distribution (D2D)
registration. The more accurate Point-to-Distribution (P2D)
registration approaches, however, are not as real-time viable [5, 14], and are less so for our purpose. In [4] the
authors represent each point in the reference scan of a 2D
sonar scan as an isotropic Gaussian distribution and iteratively compute the 2D transformation that maximizes the
likelihood of all points in the target scan. Our approach, on
the other hand, represents clusters of points in the reference
scan as individual anisotropic Gaussian components and is
not restricted to transformations of small magnitude.
Closest in terms of our choice of implementation framework, [9] propose a particle filter based real-time RGB-D
pose estimation approach and [3] present a real-time localization approach on a fixed-winged aircraft during aggressive flights with a laser scanner and an IMU. The latter work implicitly exploits much more restricted dynamics of a fixed wing aircraft within its process model and
further, both these approaches use the OctoMap [12] representation to provide correction updates within their filter
estimates. Note that the memory footprint of an OctoMap is
much greater than that of our choice of representation. For
instance, memory consumption for an OctoMap of dataset
D3 (Sec. 4.1) with 0.1 m resolution is 872 KB while the

5851

