Deep Layer Aggregation
Fisher Yu

Dequan Wang

Evan Shelhamer

Trevor Darrell

UC Berkeley

Abstract
Visual recognition requires rich representations that span
levels from low to high, scales from small to large, and
resolutions from fine to coarse. Even with the depth of features in a convolutional network, a layer in isolation is not
enough: compounding and aggregating these representations improves inference of what and where. Architectural
efforts are exploring many dimensions for network backbones, designing deeper or wider architectures, but how to
best aggregate layers and blocks across a network deserves
further attention. Although skip connections have been incorporated to combine layers, these connections have been
“shallow” themselves, and only fuse by simple, one-step operations. We augment standard architectures with deeper
aggregation to better fuse information across layers. Our
deep layer aggregation structures iteratively and hierarchically merge the feature hierarchy to make networks with
better accuracy and fewer parameters. Experiments across
architectures and tasks show that deep layer aggregation
improves recognition and resolution compared to existing
branching and merging schemes.

1. Introduction
Representation learning and transfer learning now permeate computer vision as engines of recognition. The simple fundamentals of compositionality and differentiability
give rise to an astonishing variety of deep architectures
[23, 39, 37, 16, 47]. The rise of convolutional networks
as the backbone of many visual tasks, ready for different
purposes with the right task extensions and data [14, 35, 42],
has made architecture search a central driver in sustaining
progress. The ever-increasing size and scope of networks
now directs effort into devising design patterns of modules
and connectivity patterns that can be assembled systematically. This has yielded networks that are deeper and wider,
but what about more closely connected?
More nonlinearity, greater capacity, and larger receptive
fields generally improve accuracy but can be problematic
for optimization and computation. To overcome these bar-

Dense Connections

Feature Pyramids

+
Deep Layer Aggregation

Figure 1: Deep layer aggregation unifies semantic and spatial fusion to better capture what and where. Our aggregation
architectures encompass and extend densely connected networks and feature pyramid networks with hierarchical and
iterative skip connections that deepen the representation and
refine resolution.

riers, different blocks or modules have been incorporated
to balance and temper these quantities, such as bottlenecks
for dimensionality reduction [29, 39, 17] or residual, gated,
and concatenative connections for feature and gradient propagation [17, 38, 19]. Networks designed according to these
schemes have 100+ and even 1000+ layers.
Nevertheless, further exploration is needed on how to
connect these layers and modules. Layered networks from
LeNet [26] through AlexNet [23] to ResNet [17] stack layers and modules in sequence. Layerwise accuracy comparisons [11, 48, 35], transferability analysis [44], and representation visualization [48, 46] show that deeper layers extract
more semantic and more global features, but these signs do
not prove that the last layer is the ultimate representation
for any task. In fact, skip connections have proven effective
for classification and regression [19, 4] and more structured
tasks [15, 35, 30]. Aggregation, like depth and width, is a
critical dimension of architecture.
In this work, we investigate how to aggregate layers to
better fuse semantic and spatial information for recognition
and localization. Extending the “shallow” skip connections
of current approaches, our aggregation architectures incor12403

