Improved Fusion of Visual and Language Representations
by Dense Symmetric Co-Attention for Visual Question Answering
Duy-Kien Nguyen1 and Takayuki Okatani1,2
1
Tohoku University 2 RIKEN Center for AIP
{kien, okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract
A key solution to visual question answering (VQA) exists
in how to fuse visual and language features extracted from
an input image and question. We show that an attention
mechanism that enables dense, bi-directional interactions
between the two modalities contributes to boost accuracy
of prediction of answers. Specifically, we present a simple architecture that is fully symmetric between visual and
language representations, in which each question word attends on image regions and each image region attends on
question words. It can be stacked to form a hierarchy for
multi-step interactions between an image-question pair. We
show through experiments that the proposed architecture
achieves a new state-of-the-art on VQA and VQA 2.0 despite its small size. We also present qualitative evaluation,
demonstrating how the proposed attention mechanism can
generate reasonable attention maps on images and questions, which leads to the correct answer prediction.

1. Introduction
There has been a significant progress in the study of visual question answering (VQA) over a short period of time
since its introduction, showing rapid boost of performance
for common benchmark datasets. This progress has been
mainly brought about by two lines of research, the development of better attention mechanisms and the improvement in fusion of features extracted from an input image
and question.
Since introduced by Bahdanau et al. [3], attention has
been playing an important role in solutions of various problems of artificial intelligence ranging from tasks using single modality (e.g., language, speech, and vision) to multimodal tasks. For VQA, attention on image regions generated from the input question was first introduced [28]
and then several extensions have been proposed [17, 31, 4].
Meanwhile, researchers have proposed several methods for

feature fusion [5, 14, 32], where the aim is to obtain better fused representation of image and question pairs. These
studies updated the state-of-the-art for common benchmark
datasets at the time of each publication.
We observe that these two lines of research have been independently conducted so far. This is particularly the case
with the studies of feature fusion methods, where attention
is considered to be optional, even though the best performance is achieved with it. However, we think that they are
rather two different approaches towards the same goal. In
particular, we argue that a better attention mechanism leads
to a better fused representation of image-question pairs.
Motivated by this, we propose a novel co-attention
mechanism for improved fusion of visual and language representations. Given representations of an image and a question, it first generates an attention map on image regions
for each question word and an attention map on question
words for each image region. It then performs computation
of attended features, concatenation of multimodal representations, and their transformation by a single layer network
with ReLU and a residual connection. These computations are encapsulated into a composite network that we call
dense co-attention layer, since it considers every interaction
between any image region and any question word. The layer
has fully symmetric architecture between the two modalities, and can be stacked to form a hierarchy that enables
multi-step interactions between the image-question pair.
Starting from initial representations of an input image
and question, each dense co-attention layer in the layer
stack updates the representations, which are inputted to the
next layer. Its final output are then fed to a layer for answer prediction. We use additional attention mechanisms in
the initial feature extraction as well as the answer prediction
layer. We call the entire network including all these components the dense coattention network (DCN). We show
the effectiveness of DCNs by several experimental results;
they achieve the new state-of-the-art for VQA 1.0 and 2.0
datasets.

6087

