Single View Stereo Matching
Yue Luo1 ∗ Jimmy Ren1 ∗ Mude Lin1 Jiahao Pang1 Wenxiu Sun1 Hongsheng Li2 Liang Lin1,3
1

SenseTime Research
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Sun Yat-sen University, China
1
{luoyue,rensijie,linmude,pangjiahao,sunwenxiu,linliang}@sensetime.com
2
hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Previous monocular depth estimation methods take a
single view and directly regress the expected results.
Though recent advances are made by applying geometrically inspired loss functions during training, the inference
procedure does not explicitly impose any geometrical constraint. Therefore these models purely rely on the quality
of data and the effectiveness of learning to generalize. This
either leads to suboptimal results or the demand of huge
amount of expensive ground truth labelled data to generate
reasonable results. In this paper, we show for the first time
that the monocular depth estimation problem can be reformulated as two sub-problems, a view synthesis procedure
followed by stereo matching, with two intriguing properties,
namely i) geometrical constraints can be explicitly imposed
during inference; ii) demand on labelled depth data can be
greatly alleviated. We show that the whole pipeline can still
be trained in an end-to-end fashion and this new formulation plays a critical role in advancing the performance.
The resulting model outperforms all the previous monocular
depth estimation methods as well as the stereo block matching method in the challenging KITTI dataset by only using a
small number of real training data. The model also generalizes well to other monocular depth estimation benchmarks.
We also discuss the implications and the advantages of solving monocular depth estimation using stereo methods.1

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is one of the fundamental problems in
computer vision. It finds important applications in a large
number of areas such as robotics, augmented reality, 3D reconstruction and self-driving car, etc. This problem is heav∗ Indicates equal contribution.
1 Code is publicly available at https://github.com/lawy623/
SVS.

Synthesized right image

Left image

Abstract

View Synthesis
Network

Predicted depth

Stereo Matching
Network

Figure 1: Pipeline of our approach on monocular depth estimation. We decompose the task into two parts: view synthesis and stereo matching. Both networks enforce the geometric reasoning capacity. With this new formulation, our
approach is able to achieve state-of-the-art performance.
ily studied in the literature and is mainly tackled with two
types of technical methodologies namely active stereo vision such as structured light [33], time-of-flight [40], and
passive stereo vision including stereo matching[17, 25],
structure from motion [35], photometric stereo [5] and
depth cue fusion [31], etc. Among passive stereo vision
methods, stereo matching is arguably the most widely applicable technique because it is accurate and it poses little assumption to the sensors and the imaging procedure. Recent
advances in this field show that the quality of stereo matching can be significantly improved by deep models trained
with synthetic data and finetuned with limited amount real
data [26, 28].
On the other hand, the applicability of monocular depth
estimation is greatly limited by its accuracy though the single camera setting is much more preferred in practice in
order to avoid calibration errors and synchronization problems occur to the stereo camera setting. Estimating depth
from a single view is difficult because it is an ill-posed
and geometrically ambiguous problem. Advancement of
monocular depth estimation has recently been made by deep
learning methods [4, 19, 20, 23] . However, comparing
to the mentioned passive stereo vision methods which are

155

