Unsupervised Training for 3D Morphable Model Regression
Kyle Genova1,2 Forrester Cole2 Aaron Maschinot2 Aaron Sarna2 Daniel Vlasic2 William T. Freeman2,3
1

Princeton University

2

Google Research

3

MIT CSAIL

Abstract
We present a method for training a regression network
from image pixels to 3D morphable model coordinates using only unlabeled photographs. The training loss is based
on features from a facial recognition network, computed onthe-fly by rendering the predicted faces with a differentiable
renderer. To make training from features feasible and avoid
network fooling effects, we introduce three objectives: a
batch distribution loss that encourages the output distribution to match the distribution of the morphable model, a
loopback loss that ensures the network can correctly reinterpret its own output, and a multi-view identity loss that
compares the features of the predicted 3D face and the input photograph from multiple viewing angles. We train a regression network using these objectives, a set of unlabeled
photographs, and the morphable model itself, and demonstrate state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
A 3D morphable face model (3DMM) [3] provides a
smooth, low-dimensional “face space” spanning the range
of human appearance. Finding the coordinates of a person
in this space from a single image of that person is a common task for applications such as 3D avatar creation, facial animation transfer, and video editing (e.g. [2, 7, 28]).
The conventional approach is to search the space through
inverse rendering, which generates a face that matches the
photograph by optimizing shape, texture, pose, and lighting
parameters [13]. This approach requires a complex, nonlinear optimization that can be difficult to solve in practice.
Recent work has demonstrated fast, robust fitting by regressing from image pixels to morphable model coordinates
using a neural network [20, 21, 29, 27]. The major issue
with the regression approach is the lack of ground-truth 3D
face data for training. Scans of face geometry and texture
are difficult to acquire, both because of expense and privacy
considerations. Previous approaches have explored synthesizing training pairs of image and morphable model coordinates in a preprocess [20, 21, 29], or training an image-

Figure 1. Neutral 3D faces computed from input photographs using our regression network. We map features from a facial recognition network [24] into identity parameters for the Basel 2017
Morphable Face Model [8].

to-image autoencoder with a fixed, morphable-model-based
decoder and an image-based loss [27].
This paper presents a method for training a regression
network that removes both the need for supervised training data and the reliance on inverse rendering to reproduce
image pixels. Instead, the network learns to minimize a
loss based on the facial identity features produced by a face
recognition network such as VGG-Face [16] or Google’s
FaceNet [24]. These features are robust to pose, expression,
lighting, and even non-photorealistic inputs. We exploit this
18377

