HATS: Histograms of Averaged Time Surfaces for Robust
Event-based Object Classification
Amos Sironi1∗, Manuele Brambilla1 , Nicolas Bourdis1 , Xavier Lagorce1 , Ryad Benosman1,2,3
1
PROPHESEE, Paris, France 2 Institut de la Vision, UPMC , Paris, France
3
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center / Carnegie Mellon University
{asironi, mbrambilla, nbourdis, xlagorce}@prophesee.ai ryad.benosman@upmc.fr

Abstract

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on the problem of object classification using the output of a neuromorphic asynchronous
event-based camera [15, 14, 53]. Event-based cameras offer a novel path to Computer Vision by introducing a fundamentally new representation of visual scenes, with a drive
towards real-time and low-power algorithms.
Contrary to standard frame-based cameras, which rely
∗ This work was supported in part by the EU H2020 ULPEC project
(grant agreement number 732642)

...
eventi
event
... i+1
40

35

30

y (pixels)

Event-based cameras have recently drawn the attention
of the Computer Vision community thanks to their advantages in terms of high temporal resolution, low power consumption and high dynamic range, compared to traditional
frame-based cameras. These properties make event-based
cameras an ideal choice for autonomous vehicles, robot
navigation or UAV vision, among others. However, the
accuracy of event-based object classification algorithms,
which is of crucial importance for any reliable system working in real-world conditions, is still far behind their framebased counterparts. Two main reasons for this performance
gap are: 1. The lack of effective low-level representations
and architectures for event-based object classification and
2. The absence of large real-world event-based datasets. In
this paper we address both problems. First, we introduce
a novel event-based feature representation together with a
new machine learning architecture. Compared to previous
approaches, we use local memory units to efficiently leverage past temporal information and build a robust eventbased representation. Second, we release the first large
real-world event-based dataset for object classification. We
compare our method to the state-of-the-art with extensive
experiments, showing better classification performance and
real-time computation.

25

20

15

10

5

0
100

50

t (ms)

0 80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

x (pixels)

Figure 1: Pixels of an event-based camera asynchronously
generate events as soon as a contrast change is detected in
their field of view. As a consequence, the output of an eventbased camera can be extremely sparse and with time resolution of order of microseconds. Because of the asynchronous
nature of the data and the high resolution of the temporal
component of the events, compared to the spatial one, standard Computer Vision methods can not be directly applied.
Top: An event-based camera (left) recording a natural scene
(right). Bottom: Visualization of the events stream generated by a moving object. ON and OFF events (Sec. 2) are
represented by yellow and cyan dots respectively. This figure, as most of the figures in this paper, is best seen in color.
on a pre-defined acquisition rate, in event-based cameras,
individual pixels asynchronously emit events when they observe a sufficient change of the local illuminance intensity
(Figure 1). This new principle leads to significant reduction
of memory usage and of power consumption and the information contained in standard videos of hundreds megabytes
can be naturally compressed in an event stream of few
hundreds kilobytes [36, 52, 63]. Additionally, the time

1731

