Texture Mapping for 3D Reconstruction with RGB-D Sensor
Yanping Fu1

Qingan Yan2
Long Yang3
Jie Liao1
Chunxia Xiao1
1
School of Computer, Wuhan University, China
2
JD.com
3
College of Information Engineering, Northwest A&F University, China

{ypfu,liaojie,cxxiao}@whu.edu.cn, qingan.yan@jd.com, yl@nwsuaf.edu.cn

Abstract
Acquiring realistic texture details for 3D models is important in 3D reconstruction. However, the existence of geometric errors, caused by noisy RGB-D sensor data, always
makes the color images cannot be accurately aligned onto reconstructed 3D models. In this paper, we propose a
global-to-local correction strategy to obtain more desired
texture mapping results. Our algorithm first adaptively selects an optimal image for each face of the 3D model,
which can effectively remove blurring and ghost artifacts
produced by multiple image blending. We then adopt a nonrigid global-to-local correction step to reduce the seaming
effect between textures. This can effectively compensate for
the texture and the geometric misalignment caused by camera pose drift and geometric errors. We evaluate the proposed algorithm in a range of complex scenes and demonstrate its effective performance in generating seamless high
fidelity textures for 3D models.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of RGB-D sensors, 3D reconstruction has made significant progress in recent years. While
both small-scale objects and large-scale scenes can be modeled with impressive geometric details [10, 17, 26, 27, 28],
the recovered texture fidelity for 3D models is still less satisfactory [7, 13, 22].
Why does texture mapping technology lag so behind 3D
modeling? The reasons are fourfold: 1) Due to the noise
of depth data, reconstructed 3D models always accompany geometric errors and distortions. 2) In camera trajectory
estimation, the pose residual would be gradually accumulated and lead to camera drift. 3) The timestamp between
captured depth frame and color frame is not completely synchronized. 4) RGB-D sensors are usually in low resolution,
and the color image is also vulnerable to light and motion
conditions. All of the challenges above contribute to the
produce of misalignments between geometric models and

corresponding images and lead to undesired mapping results.
While projective mapping methods [21, 23] can reduce blurring and ghosting artifacts caused by multi-image
blending, the texture bleeding is unavoidable on the boundary of different views, due to geometric registration errors
and camera trajectory drift. Zhou and Koltun [30] propose an optimization framework using local image warping,
which can compensate for geometric misalignments. However, this method needs to subdivide the mesh model, which
will greatly increases the amount of data and limit its application scope. Furthermore, the weighted average strategy
which is usually adopted in multi-image blending is sensitive to the light change and motion blur cased by fast camera
movement.
To overcome the challenges, in this paper we propose a
novel texture mapping method which performs a global-tolocal non-rigid correction optimization. First, we choose an
optimal image for each face to avoid the artificial effects
in multi-image blending. In the global optimization step,
we use a unified color consistency and geometry consistency optimization to rectify the camera pose of each texture
block from different views. Then in the local optimization
step, we find an additional transformation for boundary vertices of the block to refine the texture coordinate drift caused
by geometric errors. Finally, we adopt the texture atlases to
map the texture onto desired 3D model.
We validate the effectiveness of the proposed method in a
range of complex scenes and show high fidelity textures. In
contrast to the method [30], our method is much faster and
needs much less triangle information. The texture blurring
artifacts are also greatly eliminated. As compared to [23],
our method can effectively reduce the seam inconsistency
between face boundaries and is tolerant of geometric misalignments.

2. Related Work
Texture mapping is an important step for acquiring realistic 3D models [11, 16, 26, 29]. In this section, we revisit

4645

