Tags2Parts: Discovering Semantic Regions from Shape Tags
Sanjeev Muralikrishnan1
1

Vladimir G. Kim2

IIT Bombay

Abstract
We propose a novel method for discovering shape regions that strongly correlate with user-prescribed tags.
For example, given a collection of chairs tagged as either “has armrest” or “lacks armrest”, our system correctly highlights the armrest regions as the main distinctive parts between the two chair types. To obtain
point-wise predictions from shape-wise tags we develop
a novel neural network architecture that is trained with
tag classification loss, but is designed to rely on segmentation to predict the tag. Our network is inspired by UNet, but we replicate shallow U structures several times
with new skip connections and pooling layers, and call
the resulting architecture WU-Net. We test our method
on segmentation benchmarks and show that even with
weak supervision of whole shape tags, our method can
infer meaningful semantic regions, without ever observing shape segmentations. Further, once trained, the
model can process shapes for which the tag is entirely
unknown. As a bonus, our architecture is directly operational under full supervision and performs strongly on
standard benchmarks. We validate our method through
experiments with many variant architectures and prior
baselines, and demonstrate several applications.

1. Introduction
Online repositories contain millions of 3D shapes,
providing rich data for data-driven 3D analysis and
synthesis [26]. While these repositories often provide
tags, textual descriptions, and soft categorization to facilitate text-based search, these labels are typically provided for the entire shape, and not at the region level.
Many applications require finer shape understanding,
e.g. parts and their labels are essential for assemblybased modeling interfaces. While one can obtain these
labels by training a strongly supervised segmentation
model [6], this level of supervision requires substantially more involved annotation interfaces and human
effort, making it infeasible for massive and growing online repositories. Existing methods for discovering semantic regions without explicit supervision are typi-

2

Siddhartha Chaudhuri1,2

Adobe Research

cally guided by geometric cues (e.g. [5]), but they are
prone to failure by being tailored to specific notions of
parts, implicitly encoded by algorithm design.
Weakly- or semi-supervised methods have been proposed as a compromise between supervised and unsupervised techniques. For example, Yi et al. [27]
leverage scene graph metadata in existing repositories,
which provide some segments and labels for a small
subset of shapes. This metadata is very sparse and specific to computer graphics models. In contrast, tags for
entire shapes are abundant, often accompany scanned
shapes, and are easy to crowdsource at scale.
In this work we propose a novel method for discovering regions from shape tags without explicit regionwise labeling or prior segmentation. For example, in a
collection of shapes tagged as “has armrest” and “does
not have armrest”, we are able to identify the armrest
components of the chairs in the former category (Figure 1). Further, once trained, our method can process
shapes for which the tag is entirely unknown.
Our main challenge is that the weak supervisory signal (whole object tag) is different from the target output (point-wise labels). To address this, we use a neural network that jointly performs classification and segmentation, and train it for whole object tagging while
relying on point-wise labels to infer the tags.
In particular, we propose a novel neural network
architecture with skip connections, which we call
WU-Net (Figure 2), inspired by the U-Net [16] architecture for strongly-supervised image segmentation.
We make two key modifications. First, to regularize the network and improve localization of segments
we replicate the ‘U’ structure thrice (‘WU’) and add
skip connections both within and across them. Second,
since the network is originally designed for stronglysupervised segmentation, we add two layers for tag
classification from a hidden segmentation layer: average pooling followed by max pooling. Average pooling
encourages coherence, forcing the network to train for
segments that help tag classification. This network architecture is our main technical contribution.

2926

