Deep Depth Completion of a Single RGB-D Image
Yinda Zhang
Princeton University

Thomas Funkhouser
Princeton University

Abstract
The goal of our work is to complete the depth channel of
an RGB-D image. Commodity-grade depth cameras often
fail to sense depth for shiny, bright, transparent, and distant
surfaces. To address this problem, we train a deep network
that takes an RGB image as input and predicts dense surface normals and occlusion boundaries. Those predictions
are then combined with raw depth observations provided by
the RGB-D camera to solve for depths for all pixels, including those missing in the original observation. This method
was chosen over others (e.g., inpainting depths directly) as
the result of extensive experiments with a new depth completion benchmark dataset, where holes are filled in training
data through the rendering of surface reconstructions created from multiview RGB-D scans. Experiments with different network inputs, depth representations, loss functions,
optimization methods, inpainting methods, and deep depth
estimation networks show that our proposed approach provides better depth completions than these alternatives.

1. Introduction
Depth sensing has become pervasive in applications
as diverse as autonomous driving, augmented reality, and
scene reconstruction. Despite recent advances in depth
sensing technology, commodity-level RGB-D cameras like
Microsoft Kinect, Intel RealSense, and Google Tango still
produce depth images with missing data when surfaces are
too glossy, bright, thin, close, or far from the camera. These
problems appear when rooms are large, surfaces are shiny,
and strong lighting is abundant – e.g., in museums, hospitals, classrooms, stores, etc. Even in homes, depth images
often are missing more than 50% of the pixels (Figure 1).
The goal of our work is to complete the depth channel of
an RGB-D image captured with a commodity camera (i.e.,
fill all the holes). Though depth inpainting has received a
lot of attention over the past two decades [64], it has generally been addressed with hand-tuned methods that fill holes
by extrapolating boundary surfaces [46] or with Markovian
image synthesis [13]. Newer methods have been proposed
to estimate depth de novo from color using deep networks

Sensor Depth

Color Image

Surface Normal Depth Completion

Figure 1. Depth Completion. We fill in large missing areas in
the depth channel of an RGB-D image by predicting normals from
color and then solving for completed depths.

[16]. However, they have not been used for depth completion, which has its own unique challenges:
Training data: Large-scale training sets are not readily
available for captured RGB-D images paired with ”completed” depth images (e.g., where ground-truth depth is provided for holes). As a result, most methods for depth estimation are trained and evaluated only for pixels that are
captured by commodity RGB-D cameras [59]. From this
data, they can at-best learn to reproduce observed depths,
but not complete depths that are unobserved, which have
significantly different characteristics. To address this issue,
we introduce a new dataset with 105,432 RGB-D images
aligned with completed depth images computed from largescale surface reconstructions in 72 real-world environments.
Depth representation: The obvious approach to address
our problem is to use the new dataset as supervision to train
a fully convolutional network to regress depth directly from
RGB-D. However, that approach does not work very well,
especially for large holes like the one shown in the bottom
row of Figure 1. Estimating absolute depths from a monocular color image is difficult even for people [48]. Rather,
we train the network to predict only local differential properties of depth (surface normals and occlusion boundaries),
which are much easier to estimate [31]. We then solve for
the absolute depths with a global optimization.
Deep network design: There is no previous work on studying how best to design and train an end-to-end deep network
for completing depth images from RGB-D inputs. At first
glance, it seems straight-forward to extend previous net1175

