Latent RANSAC
Simon Korman
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

Roee Litman
General Motors, Israel

Abstract
We present a method that can evaluate a RANSAC hypothesis in constant time, i.e. independent of the size of
the data. A key observation here is that correct hypotheses
are tightly clustered together in the latent parameter domain. In a manner similar to the generalized Hough transform we seek to find this cluster, only that we need as few
as two votes for a successful detection. Rapidly locating
such pairs of similar hypotheses is made possible by adapting the recent ”Random Grids” range-search technique. We
only perform the usual (costly) hypothesis verification stage
upon the discovery of a close pair of hypotheses. We show
that this event rarely happens for incorrect hypotheses, enabling a significant speedup of the RANSAC pipeline.
The suggested approach is applied and tested on three
robust estimation problems: camera localization, 3D rigid
alignment and 2D-homography estimation. We perform rigorous testing on both synthetic and real datasets, demonstrating an improvement in efficiency without a compromise in accuracy. Furthermore, we achieve state-of-the-art
3D alignment results on the challenging “Redwood” loopclosure challenge.

1. Introduction
Despite the recent success of (deep-) learning based
methods in computer vision, numerous applications still use
“old-fashioned” robust estimation methods for model fitting, such as RANSAC [20]. This is especially true for
problems of a strong geometric nature such as image alignment, camera localization and 3D reconstruction. Robust
estimation methods of these types largely follow the “hypothesize and test” paradigm which has strong roots in
statistics, and are highly attractive due to their ability to fit
a model to data that is highly corrupted with outliers. Additionally, they have been successfully applied to many problems in computer vision and robotics achieving real time
performance.
As an example, in the field of image (or shape) alignment, novel features and descriptors have been introduced
to facilitate matching, including ones that are learned. How-

Figure 1. 3D alignment result of two methods on a pair of fragments from the “Redwood” dataset [12]. Our method (right) produces a correct alignment, even though the putative matches contain a mere 2% of inliers, which is very challenging. On the left,
we see a failure case of the method from [45], even though it manages to increase inlier rate up to 7%. Runtimes for this example
are 74ms for our method, and 163ms for [45]. Table 4 shows representative examples for the other problems we handle - PnP and
2D-Homography estimation.

ever, once these features are matched, for a parametric
model to be fitted, robust estimation methods like RANSAC
are used to cope with corrupted sets of putative matches.
Geometric models that are commonly amenable to such
a robust estimation process include: 2D-homography, camera localization, the essential and fundamental matrices that
describe epipolar constraints between images, rigid 3D motion and more.

1.1. Background and prior art
Consensus maximization has proven a useful robust estimation approach to solving a wide variety of fitting and
alignment problems in computer vision.
Research in this field can be broadly divided into global
and local optimization methods. Global methods [34, 44,
10, 8] use different strategies to explore the entire solution space enjoy the advantage of having a deterministic
nature. Our method, however, belongs to the family of local methods which are typically extremely fast randomized
algorithms, potentially equipped with probabilistic success
guarantees.
While the proposed method is presented in the context
of RANSAC, it is closely related-to and inspired-by other
works in the field, such as Hough voting. We cover these
topics briefly.
16693

