Multi-view Harmonized Bilinear Network for 3D Object Recognition
Tan Yu1 , Jingjing Meng2 , Junsong Yuan2
1
Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University
2
Department of CSE, State University of New York at Buffalo
tyu008@ntu.edu.sg, {jmeng2,jsyuan}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
View-based methods have achieved considerable success
in 3D object recognition tasks. Different from existing viewbased methods pooling the view-wise features, we tackle
this problem from the perspective of patches-to-patches similarity measurement. By exploiting the relationship between
polynomial kernel and bilinear pooling, we obtain an effective 3D object representation by aggregating local convolutional features through bilinear pooling. Meanwhile,
we harmonize different components inherited in the bilinear feature to obtain a more discriminative representation.
To achieve an end-to-end trainable framework, we incorporate the harmonized bilinear pooling as a layer of a network, constituting the proposed Multi-view Harmonized Bilinear Network (MHBN). Systematic experiments conducted
on two public benchmark datasets demonstrate the efficacy
of the proposed methods in 3D object recognition.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the success of deep learning in 2D images,
the community has also attempted to exploit the convolutional neural networks for 3D object recognition [34, 29,
22, 24, 15, 1, 18, 27, 23, 25, 16]. These approaches can
be coarsely classfied into three categories according to their
input: 1) view-based methods [29, 1, 15, 32], 2) volumebased methods [34, 22, 24, 18, 2, 27] and 3) pointset-based
methods [23, 16, 25]. View-based methods project 3D objects into multiple 2D views, then the classification is conducted using the features from 2D CNNs. Volume-based
approaches apply 3D convolutional neural network directly
on voxelized shapes while pointset-based methods directly
take unordered point sets as input. Among the three categories, the view-based methods generally outperform the
other two. Even though one volume-based work, VRN Ensemble [2] outperforms existing view-based methods, its
excellent performance is mainly attributed to the model ensemble and a more advanced base model.
In spite of that the view-base methods [29, 1, 15, 32]

Figure 1. The architecture of the proposed Multi-view Harmonized
Bilinear Network (MHBN).

have already achieved good performance in 3D object
recognition, there are still some drawbacks existing in current methods. Multi-view CNN (MVCNN) [29] max-pools
the view-wise feature into a global feature as the representation of the 3D object. But for each neural node, the maxpooling operation only retains the maximal activation from
one specific view whereas the non-maximal elements are
ignored, causing the loss of visual information. To enable
each view to contribute to the final representation, an alternative solution is to replace max-pooling by sum-pooling.
However, the experiments in [29] shows that the performance of sum-pooling is even worse than max-pooling and
there is no explanation about the worse performance of
sum-pooling. Below we investigate the reason.
We define A as a 3D object and {Ai }ni=1 as features of n
projected views. In the same manner, we define another 3D
object B and {Bj }nj=1 . Through sum-pooling, descriptors
Pn
of
i=1 Ai and B =
Pntwo objects are obtained by A =
B
.
We
evaluate
the
discriminative
power of sumj=1 j
pooled features through similarity measurement:
sim(A, B) = hA, Bi =

n
n X
X
i=1 j=1

hAi , Bj i,

(1)

where h·, ·i denotes the inner-product operation of two vectors. It is easy to observe from above equation that, the
similarity between two sum-pooled global features will be
equal to the summation of similarities of every matching
pair (Ai , Bj ). Nevertheless, as shown in Figure 2 (a), only
4321
186

