Cross-modal Deep Variational Hand Pose Estimation
Adrian Spurr, Jie Song, Seonwook Park, Otmar Hilliges
ETH Zurich
{spurra,jsong,spark,otmarh}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
The human hand moves in complex and highdimensional ways, making estimation of 3D hand pose configurations from images alone a challenging task. In this
work we propose a method to learn a statistical hand model
represented by a cross-modal trained latent space via a generative deep neural network. We derive an objective function from the variational lower bound of the VAE framework and jointly optimize the resulting cross-modal KLdivergence and the posterior reconstruction objective, naturally admitting a training regime that leads to a coherent
latent space across multiple modalities such as RGB images, 2D keypoint detections or 3D hand configurations.
Additionally, it grants a straightforward way of using semisupervision. This latent space can be directly used to estimate 3D hand poses from RGB images, outperforming the
state-of-the art in different settings. Furthermore, we show
that our proposed method can be used without changes
on depth images and performs comparably to specialized
methods. Finally, the model is fully generative and can
synthesize consistent pairs of hand configurations across
modalities. We evaluate our method on both RGB and depth
datasets and analyze the latent space qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Hands are of central importance to humans in manipulating the physical world and in communicating with each
other. Recovering the spatial configuration of hands from
natural images therefore has many important applications
in AR/VR, robotics, rehabilitation and HCI. Much work exists that tracks articulated hands in streams of depth images,
or that estimates hand pose [15, 16, 27, 35] from individual depth frames. However, estimating the full 3D hand
pose from monocular RGB images only is a more challenging task due to the manual dexterity, symmetries and selfsimilarities of human hands as well as difficulties stemming
from occlusions, varying lighting conditions and lack of accurate scale estimates. Compared to depth images the RGB
case is less well studied.

Figure 1: Cross-modal latent space. t-SNE visualization
of 500 input samples of different modalities in the latent
space. Embeddings of RGB images are shown in blue, embeddings of 3D joint configurations in green. Hand poses
are decoded samples drawn from the latent space. Embedding does not cluster by modality, showing that there is a
unified latent space. The posterior across different modalities can be estimated by sampling from this manifold.

Recent work relying solely on RGB images [38] proposes a deep learning architecture that decomposes the task
into several substeps, demonstrating initial feasibility and
providing a public dataset for comparison. The proposed
architecture is specifically designed for the monocular case
and splits the task into hand and 2D keypoint detection followed by a 2D-3D lifting step but incorporates no explicit
hand model. Our work is also concerned with the estimation
of 3D joint-angle configurations of human hands from RGB
images but learns a cross-modal, statistical hand model.
This is attained via learning of a latent representation that
embeds sample points from multiple data sources such as
2D keypoints, images and 3D hand poses. Samples from
this latent space can then be reconstructed by independent
decoders to produce consistent and physically plausible 2D
or 3D joint predictions and even RGB images.
Findings from bio-mechanics suggest that while articulated hands have many degrees-of-freedom, only few are

89

