Deep Diffeomorphic Transformer Networks
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen
Technical University of Denmark

Oren Freifeld
Ben-Gurion University

Søren Hauberg
Technical University of Denmark

nsde@dtu.dk

orenfr@cs.bgu.ac.il

sohau@dtu.dk

Abstract
Spatial Transformer layers allow neural networks, at
least in principle, to be invariant to large spatial transformations in image data. The model has, however, seen
limited uptake as most practical implementations support
only transformations that are too restricted, e.g. affine or
homographic maps, and/or destructive maps, such as thin
plate splines. We investigate the use of flexible diffeomorphic image transformations within such networks and
demonstrate that significant performance gains can be attained over currently-used models. The learned transformations are found to be both simple and intuitive, thereby
providing insights into individual problem domains. With
the proposed framework, a standard convolutional neural
network matches state-of-the-art results on face verification
with only two extra lines of simple TensorFlow code.

1. Introduction
Models that are invariant to spatial transformations of the
input are essential when designing accurate and robust image classifiers; e.g., we want models that can separate objects’ shape and appearance from their position and pose.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [33] achieve some
invariance and produce state-of-the-art results in, e.g., classification [26, 44, 52], localization [47, 55], and segmentation [36, 43]. This is partially achieved by the translation
invariance of the convolutional layers and partially by the
(local) spatial invariance in the max-pooling layers.
Current CNN architectures, however, typically employ
small pooling regions (e.g., 2 × 2 or 3 × 3 pixels), thereby
limiting their invariance to large transformations of the input data. To counter this, Jaderberg et al. [27] introduced
the Spatial Transformer (ST) layer which explicitly allows
for spatial manipulation of data within the network. Via a
regression network, the ST-layer learns an input-dependent
transformation such that together with the subsequent layers
the overall network achieves optimal performance. Models with an ST-layer have either increased classification accuracy [25, 42] or maintained the same performance level

Original
Accuracy: 0.78

Affine
Accuracy: 0.84

Diffeomorphic
Accuracy: 0.87
Affine+Diffeomorphic
Accuracy: 0.89

Figure 1: The spatial transformer layer improves performance of deep neural networks for face verification. By
learning an affine transformation, the network can “zoom
in” on the subjects face; when learning a flexible transformation (proposed), the network here stretches an oval face
to become square. This significantly improves performance.

with a simpler network [11]. We argue that the potential
of the ST-layer has yet to be fully utilized. Particularly,
while in theory the ST-layer allows for any parametrized
family of differentiable transformations, only certain types
of maps – affine, homographies, or thin plate splines (TPS)
– appear in most practical implementations [25, 35, 42].
We note that affine maps and homographies are of limited expressiveness and that the former, together with TPS,
might also be destructive and are intrinsically prone to divergent optimization. We propose, instead, to use an efficient and highly-expressive family of diffeomorphisms (i.e.
differentiable invertible maps with a differentiable inverse)
and demonstrate that this significantly improves regression
and classification results on diverse tasks, while being more
robust during training. The examples in Fig. 1 show that
the affine model allows the network only to “zoom in” on
the face, while the proposed models (“Diffeomorphic” and
“Affine+Diffeomorphic”) further stretch the face to become
almost square. This intuitive “squarification” suffices to
make standard CNNs match state-of-the-art performance.
14403

