Multimodal Explanations: Justifying Decisions and Pointing to the Evidence
Dong Huk Park1 , Lisa Anne Hendricks1 , Zeynep Akata2,3 , Anna Rohrbach1,3 ,
Bernt Schiele3 , Trevor Darrell1 , and Marcus Rohrbach4
1

EECS, UC Berkeley, 2 University of Amsterdam, 3 MPI for Informatics, 4 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Deep models that are both effective and explainable are
desirable in many settings; prior explainable models have
been unimodal, offering either image-based visualization of
attention weights or text-based generation of post-hoc justifications. We propose a multimodal approach to explanation, and argue that the two modalities provide complementary explanatory strengths. We collect two new datasets to
define and evaluate this task, and propose a novel model
which can provide joint textual rationale generation and attention visualization. Our datasets define visual and textual justifications of a classification decision for activity
recognition tasks (ACT-X) and for visual question answering tasks (VQA-X). We quantitatively show that training
with the textual explanations not only yields better textual
justification models, but also better localizes the evidence
that supports the decision. We also qualitatively show cases
where visual explanation is more insightful than textual explanation, and vice versa, supporting our thesis that multimodal explanation models offer significant benefits over
unimodal approaches.

1. Introduction
Explaining decisions is an integral part of human communication, understanding, and learning, and humans naturally provide both deictic (pointing) and textual modalities in a typical explanation. We aim to build deep learning models that also are able to explain their decisions with
similar fluency in both visual and textual modalities. Previous machine learning methods for explanation were able to
provide a text-only explanation conditioned on an image in
context of a task, or were able to visualize active intermediate units in a deep network performing a task, but were
unable to provide explanatory text grounded in an image.
We propose a new model which can jointly generate visual and textual explanations, using an attention mask to
localize salient regions when generating textual rationales.
We argue that to train effective models, measure the quality

Q: Is this a healthy meal?

Textual Justification Visual Pointing

A: No

...because it
is a hot dog
with a lot of
toppings.

A: Yes

...because it
contains a
variety of
vegetables on
the table.

Figure 1: For a given question and an image, our Pointing
and Justification Explanation (PJ-X) model predicts the answer and multimodal explanations which both point to the
visual evidence for a decision and provide textual justifications. We show that considering multimodal explanations
results in better explanations as visual and textual components complement each other.
of the generated explanations, compare with other methods,
and understand when methods will generalize, it is important to have access to ground truth human explanations. Unfortunately, there is a dearth of datasets which include examples of how humans justify specific decisions. Thus, we
collect two new datasets, ACT-X and VQA-X, which allow
us to train and evaluate our novel model, which we call the
Pointing and Justification Explanation (PJ-X) model. PJ-X
is explicitly multimodal: it incorporates an explanatory attention step, which allows our model to both visually point
to the evidence and justify a model decision with text.
To illustrate the utility of multimodal explanations, consider Figure 1. In both examples, the question “Is this a
healthy meal?” is asked, and the PJ-X model correctly answers either “no” or “yes” depending on the visual input.
To justify why the image is not healthy, the generated textual justification mentions the kinds of unhealthy food in the
image (“hot dog” and “toppings”). In addition to mentioning the unhealthy food, our model is able to point to the hot
dog in the image. Likewise, to justify why the image on the
right is healthy, the textual explanation mentions “vegetables”. The PJ-X model then points to the vegetables, which
18779

