SplineCNN: Fast Geometric Deep Learning with Continuous B-Spline Kernels
Matthias Fey∗ , Jan Eric Lenssen∗ , Frank Weichert, Heinrich Müller
Department of Computer Graphics
TU Dortmund University
{matthias.fey,janeric.lenssen}@udo.edu

∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
We present Spline-based Convolutional Neural Networks
(SplineCNNs), a variant of deep neural networks for irregular structured and geometric input, e.g., graphs or meshes.
Our main contribution is a novel convolution operator
based on B-splines, that makes the computation time independent from the kernel size due to the local support property of the B-spline basis functions. As a result, we obtain
a generalization of the traditional CNN convolution operator by using continuous kernel functions parametrized by
a fixed number of trainable weights. In contrast to related
approaches that filter in the spectral domain, the proposed
method aggregates features purely in the spatial domain.
In addition, SplineCNN allows entire end-to-end training
of deep architectures, using only the geometric structure as
input, instead of handcrafted feature descriptors.
For validation, we apply our method on tasks from the
fields of image graph classification, shape correspondence
and graph node classification, and show that it outperforms
or pars state-of-the-art approaches while being significantly faster and having favorable properties like domainindependence. Our source code is available on GitHub1 .

1. Introduction
Most achievements obtained by deep learning methods
over the last years heavily rely on properties of the convolution operation in convolutional neural networks [14]: local connectivity, weight sharing and shift invariance. Since
those layers are defined on inputs with a grid-like structure,
they are not trivially portable to non-Euclidean domains
like discrete manifolds, or (embedded) graphs. However,
a large amount of data in practical tasks naturally comes
in the form of such irregular structures, e.g. graph data or
meshes. Transferring the high performance of traditional
convolutional neural networks to this kind of data holds the
potential for large improvements in several relevant tasks.
1 https://github.com/rusty1s/pytorch_geometric

(a) Filtering of graphs

(b) Filtering of meshes

Figure 1: Examples for spatial aggregation in geometric
deep learning with trainable, continuous kernel functions,
showing methods for (a) image graph representations and
(b) meshes.

Recently, a set of methods brought together under the
term geometric deep learning [3] emerged, which aim to
achieve this transfer by defining convolution operations for
deep neural networks that can handle irregular input data.
Existing work in this field can loosely be divided into two
different subsets: the spectral and the spatial filtering approaches. The former is based on spectral graph theory [5],
where eigenvalues of a graph’s Laplacian matrix are interpreted as frequencies of node signals [22]. They are filtered
in the spectral domain, analogously to Fourier domain filtering of traditional signals. The latter subset, the spatial approaches, perform convolution in local Euclidean neighborhoods w.r.t. local positional relations between points, represented for example as polar, spherical or Cartesian coordinates, as shown as examples in Figure 1.
Contribution. We present Spline-based Convolutional
Neural Networks (SplineCNNs), a variant of deep neural
networks for irregular structured data. The main contribution is a trainable, spatial, continuous convolution kernel
that leverages properties of B-spline bases to efficiently filter geometric input of arbitrary dimensionality. We show

869

