Fast and Robust Estimation for Unit-Norm Constrained Linear Fitting Problems
Daiki Ikami

Toshihiko Yamasaki
Kiyoharu Aizawa
The University of Tokyo, Japan

{ikami, yamasaki, aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Inlier
Outlier
Smallest eigenvector
Second-smmalest eigenvector

M-estimator using iteratively reweighted least squares
(IRLS) is one of the best-known methods for robust estimation. However, IRLS is ineffective for robust unit-norm
constrained linear fitting (UCLF) problems, such as fundamental matrix estimation because of a poor initial solution.
We overcome this problem by developing a novel objective
function and its optimization, named iteratively reweighted
eigenvalues minimization (IREM). IREM is guaranteed to
decrease the objective function and achieves fast convergence and high robustness. In robust fundamental matrix estimation, IREM performs approximately 5-500 times
faster than random sampling consensus (RANSAC) while
preserving comparable or superior robustness.

(a) A point-set of λ1 ≪ λ2

(b) A point-set of λ1 ∼ λ2

(c) Add a single outlier for Fig. 1(a). (d) Add a single outlier for Fig. 1(b).

1. Introduction
The robust estimation of unit-norm constrained linear fitting (UCLF) problem can be formulated as
n
X
2
min
p(ri ) s.t. ri = a⊤
(1)
i x, kxk2 = 1,
x

i

where p(r) is a robust loss function. This formulation is
often used in cases such as conic estimation [24] and fundamental matrix estimation [11].
M-estimation using the iteratively reweighted least
squares (IRLS) algorithm [12] is one of the most popular
techniques in robust linear regression. Although we can use
this technique for the robust UCLF problem, it is ineffective
because of a poor least squares (LS) solution, which is used
as the initial solution for IRLS.
We will demonstrate why the initial LS solution is such
a poor solution to the UCLF problem. Consider the robust
plane fitting problem, which can be formulated as Eq. (1)1 .
The plane fitting results by LS are shown in Fig. 1. The
LS solution in Fig. 1(d) is too distant from the solution of
= [xi , yi , zi , 1]⊤ be the x-, y-, and z-coordinate values of
data points and let x = [a, b, c, d]⊤ be the plane parameters, with the data
points on the plane satisfying a⊤
i x = axi +byi +czi +d = 0. Therefore,
robust plane fitting can be formulated as Eq. (1)
1 Let a

i

Fig 1: LS plane fitting for different point-sets with different λ, where λj is the jth eigenvalue of the point-set matrix
A in ascending order. Circles and stars denote inliers and
outliers, respectively. The blue planes denote the smallest
eigenvector of the matrix A, which minimize the quadratic
loss of the distances. The red planes are given by the
second-smallest eigenvector, which minimize the quadratic
loss under the orthogonality to the smallest eigenvector. The
LS solution is good for an initial solution of IRLS in the
case of Fig. 1(c); however, this does not apply to the case
shown in Fig. 1(d). Instead, the red plane is an appropriate
initial solution for robust estimation.
robust estimation. In addition, UCLF is a nonconvex optimization problem that has multiple local minima; therefore,
existing iterative methods starting from a poor initial solution frequently become trapped in a poor local minimum.
In this study, we propose a novel approximate objective
function of the M-estimator to overcome the poor initial solution problem by utilizing a hidden good initial solution,
as in the red plane of Fig. 1(d). Our approximate objective
function can be minimized by a convergence-guaranteed
algorithm, named iteratively reweighted eigenvalues minimization (IREM). IREM is not guaranteed to find the global
optimal solution because of the nonconvexity of the opti18147

