Analytic Expressions for Probabilistic Moments of PL-DNN with Gaussian Input
Adel Bibi∗, Modar Alfadly∗, and Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
{adel.bibi,modar.alfadly,bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
The outstanding performance of deep neural networks
(DNNs), for the visual recognition task in particular, has
been demonstrated on several large-scale benchmarks. This
performance has immensely strengthened the line of research that aims to understand and analyze the driving reasons behind the effectiveness of these networks. One important aspect of this analysis has recently gained much attention, namely the reaction of a DNN to noisy input. This has
spawned research on developing adversarial input attacks
as well as training strategies that make DNNs more robust
against these attacks. To this end, we derive in this paper exact analytic expressions for the first and second moments (mean and variance) of a small piecewise linear (PL)
network (Affine, ReLU, Affine) subject to general Gaussian
input. We experimentally show that these expressions are
tight under simple linearizations of deeper PL-DNNs, especially popular architectures in the literature (e.g. LeNet
and AlexNet). Extensive experiments on image classification show that these expressions can be used to study the
behaviour of the output mean of the logits for each class, the
interclass confusion and the pixel-level spatial noise sensitivity of the network. Moreover, we show how these expressions can be used to systematically construct targeted and
non-targeted adversarial attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated impressive performance over the years in many fields of
research. The applications include object classification
[14, 16], semantic segmentation [19], activity recognition/detection [7, 32], speech recognition [15] and bioinformatics [4] to name a few. Despite this success, DNNs
still exhibit uncouth behaviour under certain circumstances.
Some of these nuisances in performance became apparent
when adversarial perturbations were first introduced [31].
For instance, despite their excellent visual recognition performance, there are various simple routines that can tailor
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Any PL-DNN can be linearized before and after a given
ReLU through a two-stage linearization truncating it into a (Affine,
ReLU, Affine) network, whose 1st and 2nd moments can be derived analytically when it is exposed to Gaussian input noise. We
show that these moments are helpful in predicting how PL-DNNs
react to noise and constructing adversarial Gaussian input attacks.

small imperceptible perturbations to the input that result
in a drastic negative effect on classification performance
[12, 24, 31]. More interestingly, some of these perturbations
can be both image and network agnostic [23]. In light of
these revelations, only little progress has been made to systematically understand the reasons behind such behaviour.
However, there are some recent approaches that do try to
deal with these nuisances. For instance and as a direct approach, it has been shown that augmenting the training data
with these perturbations can in fact enhance the robustness
of networks [12, 24]. Unfortunately, this brute force solution does not provide much insight on the reasons behind
such behaviour. In addition to increasing the training set
size and training time, such a strategy might still not be sufficient, since the space of all possible adversarial perturbations is possibly too large for augmentation to help.
Thus, in this paper, we derive expressions of the first and
second moments (mean and consequently the variance) of a
small piecewise linear (PL) network in the form of (Affine,
ReLU, Affine) under Gaussian input. These two expressions provide a powerful tool for analyzing other larger PLDNNs, which are by far the most popularly used networks
in recent literature, through means of two-stage linearization (as shown in Figure 1). We show that these expressions provide much insight in understanding the behaviour

9099

