Generating a Fusion Image: One’s Identity and Another’s Shape
Donggyu Joo∗
Doyeon Kim∗
Junmo Kim
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{jdg105, doyeon kim, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Generating a novel image by manipulating two input images is an interesting research problem in the study of generative adversarial networks (GANs). We propose a new
GAN-based network that generates a fusion image with the
identity of input image x and the shape of input image y.
Our network can simultaneously train on more than two
image datasets in an unsupervised manner. We define an
identity loss LI to catch the identity of image x and a shape
loss LS to get the shape of y. In addition, we propose a
novel training method called Min-Patch training to focus
the generator on crucial parts of an image, rather than its
entirety. We show qualitative results on the VGG Youtube
Pose dataset, Eye dataset (MPIIGaze and UnityEyes), and
the Photo–Sketch–Cartoon dataset.

1. Introduction
Transforming an object or person to a desired shape is a
well-used technique in real world. For example, computer
graphics have made it possible to display scenes on screen
that would be difficult to implement physically, like making a person pose in a posture that was not actually taken.
The approach we use in this study aims to produce a fusion image that combines one image’s identity with another
image’s shape, a task that is demonstrated in Figure 1.
In machine learning, generative models such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) [9] and restricted boltzmann
machine (RBM) [20] have been able to generate new images
that follow the input data distribution. Furthermore, the development of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [6]
has led to revival of generative models. GANs have produced realistic images of human face, furniture, or scene
that are difficult to distinguish from real images [14]. Consequently, GANs have been used to create target images in
various fields such as text-to-image conversion, face completion, and super-resolution imaging [10, 12, 15, 24]. Especially, image to image translation, which changes the
*These two authors contributed equally

x
(x,y)

y

G
G(x,y)

Figure 1. Task of our network. There are two input images x and
y. Generated output G(x, y) is combined image which has x’s
identity and y’s shape.

characteristics of an image to those the user wants, succeeded in translating the images [7]. Such translation has
produced reasonable results from both paired and unpaired
data in tasks including transforming an apple to an orange,
a photo to a painting, and a winter scene to a summer
scene [26]. Our task is also a kind of image to image translation. We can change the identity of an image within a
desired shape. However, since existing image translation
learns the mapping function from one set to the other without explicit loss functions for shape matching, there is a
possibility that shape may not remain the same. Therefore,
we need another framework to deal with both identity and
shape effectively.
In this paper, we propose a framework for creating a result image that follows the shape of one input image and
possesses the identity of another image. Having a label for
a result image, (i.e., in a supervised setting) can make it easier to generate a corresponding image. However, since such
ground truth label images for new combinations of identities and shapes are usually unavailable, we need to create
our result images without the label images.
We demonstrate that FusionGAN achieves our goal by
showing result images that follow the identity of one input image and the shape of another. From YouTube Pose
dataset [4], we generate an image with one person’s identity and another person’s pose. We generate realistic eye
images that follow the shape of synthetic eye images in the
11635

