An Efficient and Provable Approach for Mixture Proportion Estimation Using
Linear Independence Assumption
Xiyu Yu1

Tongliang Liu1 Mingming Gong2,3 Kayhan Batmanghelich2 Dacheng Tao1
1
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University

{xiyu0300@uni., tongliang.liu@, dacheng.tao@}sydney.edu.au {mig73, kayhan}@pitt.edu

Abstract

Y=“airplane”
Y=“dog”

In this paper, we study the mixture proportion estimation (MPE) problem in a new setting: given samples from
the mixture and the component distributions, we identify
the proportions of the components in the mixture distribution. To address this problem, we make use of a linear independence assumption, i.e., the component distributions
are independent from each other, which is much weaker
than assumptions exploited in the previous MPE methods.
Based on this assumption, we propose a method (1) that
uniquely identifies the mixture proportions, (2) whose output provably converges to the optimal solution, and (3) that
is computationally efficient. We show the superiority of
the proposed method over the state-of-the-art methods in
two applications including learning with label noise and
semi-supervised learning on both synthetic and real-world
datasets.

1. Introduction
The estimation of the proportions of component distributions in a mixture, namely, mixture proportion estimation
(MPE), has been an important prerequisite for many practical problems. For example, in the label noise problem
where training data are randomly mislabelled with some
small flip probabilities [9], each class-conditional distribution of noisy data is a mixture of the true class-conditional
distributions. The mixture proportions, which are closely
related to the flip rates, are essential for designing noiserobust loss functions [31, 22, 24], and can be estimated by
MPE methods. MPE also arises in the scenario of semisupervised learning. The proportions of positive and negative examples in the unlabelled sample are often required to
design cost-sensitive loss functions [23, 29].
If we are only given data from the mixture distribution, we can possibly estimate the mixture proportions and

Y=“automobile”

Y=“cat”
Y=“bird”

Figure 1. An illustration of the setting in this study. We are provided with unlabeled or noisy data sampled from the mixture distribution (images inside the ellipse with black dashed line) and
also a small set of correctly labeled data sampled from each component distribution (images outside the ellipse). Here, images with
different color boundaries come from different classes. We aim to
estimate the weights of components based on these information.

component distributions by unsupervised learning [27, 3].
But these unsupervised learning methods typically rely on
strong restrictions on the distribution class, for example,
mixture of Gaussians (MoG), and the solution is generally not unique. Thus, existing MPE methods focus on
the weakly-supervised setting, e.g., in a mixture distribution containing two component distributions, samples from
the mixture and one component are available. This setting
has found applications in PU learning (learning from positive and unlabeled examples) [8] and multi-instance learning [26]. Still, a unique solution cannot be guaranteed in
this setting without making further assumptions.
Two popular assumptions, including irreducibility and
anchor set conditions, have been introduced to make the
problem tractable. Here, we say a component is the target component if we want to estimate its proportion in the
mixture. The irreducibility condition assumes that the tar14480

