Learning to Understand Image Blur
Shanghang Zhang†⋆ , Xiaohui Shen‡ , Zhe Lin‡ , Radomı́r Měch‡ , João P. Costeira⋆ , José M. F. Moura†
†
‡
⋆
Carnegie Mellon University
Adobe Research
ISR - IST, Universidade de Lisboa
{shanghaz, moura}@andrew.cmu.edu, {zlin, xshen, rmech}@adobe.com, jpc@isr.ist.utl.pt

Abstract
While many approaches have been proposed to estimate
and remove blur in a photo, few efforts were made to have
an algorithm automatically understand the blur desirability: whether the blur is desired or not, and how it affects the
quality of the photo. Such a task not only relies on low-level
visual features to identify blurry regions, but also requires
high-level understanding of the image content as well as
user intent during photo capture. In this paper, we propose
a unified framework to estimate a spatially-varying blur
map and understand its desirability in terms of image quality at the same time. In particular, we use a dilated fully convolutional neural network with pyramid pooling and boundary refinement layers to generate high-quality blur response
maps. If blur exists, we classify its desirability to three levels ranging from good to bad, by distilling high-level semantics and learning an attention map to adaptively localize the important content in the image. The whole framework is end-to-end jointly trained with both supervisions of
pixel-wise blur responses and image-wise blur desirability
levels. Considering the limitations of existing image blur
datasets, we collected a new large-scale dataset with both
annotations to facilitate training. The proposed methods
are extensively evaluated on two datasets and demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance on both tasks.

1. Introduction
Image blur is very common in natural photos, arising
from different factors such as object motion, camera lens
out-of-focus, and camera shake. In many cases it is undesired, when important regions are affected and become
less sharp; while in other cases it is often desired, when
the background is blurred to make the subject pop out, or
motion blur is added to give the photo artistic look. Many
research efforts have been made to either detect the undesired blur and subsequently remove it [22, 11, 37, 4],
or directly estimate the desired blur and then enhance it
[2, 38, 23, 8, 21]. However, there are rather limited efforts
to have an algorithm automatically understand whether such
blur is desired or not in the first place, which would be very

Figure 1. Problem statement. Given the natural photos in the left
column, we generate their corresponding blur maps and estimate if
the blur is desirable. Brighter color indicates higher blur amount.

useful to help users categorize photos and make corresponding edits, especially with the dramatic growth in the number
of personal photos nowadays. It can also be used to estimate
photo quality and applied in photo curation [31], photo collage creation [20], image quality and aesthetics [15], and
video summarization [16].
Understanding blur desirability in terms of image quality nevertheless is not trivial and in many cases very challenging, as it not only requires accurate spatially-varying
blur amount estimation, but also needs to understand if the
blurry regions are important from the perspective of image content and sometimes user’s intent when capturing the
photo. Take the examples in Fig.1 for instance, both images
in the first and second row are with depth-of-field effect.
Yet the first one is regarded as a good photo while the second one is considered bad by most people, only because we
think the blurry runners are the subject intended to be captured and more important than other content in the scene.
The blur desirability in the third example is somewhere in
between, as even though the tennis racket and the right arm
of the player are blurred, her major body and face are clear,
16586

