Robust Hough Transform Based 3D Reconstruction from Circular Light Fields
Alessandro Vianello, Jens Ackermann
Robert Bosch GmbH
Robert Bosch Campus 1, Renningen, Germany

Maximilian Diebold, Bernd Jähne
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
Berliner Str. 43, Heidelberg, Germany

alessandro.vianello3@gmail.com

maximilian.diebold@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Light-field imaging is based on images taken on
a regular grid.
Thus, high-quality 3D reconstructions are obtainable by analyzing orientations in
epipolar plane images (EPIs). Unfortunately, such data
only allows to evaluate one side of the object. Moreover, a
constant intensity along each orientation is mandatory for
most of the approaches. This paper presents a novel method
which allows to reconstruct depth information from data
acquired with a circular camera motion, termed circular
light fields. With this approach it is possible to determine
the full 360° view of target objects. Additionally, circular
light fields allow retrieving depth from datasets acquired
with telecentric lenses, which is not possible with linear
light fields. The proposed method finds trajectories of 3D
points in the EPIs by means of a modified Hough transform.
For this purpose, binary EPI-edge images are used, which
not only allow to obtain reliable depth information, but
also overcome the limitation of constant intensity along
trajectories. Experimental results on synthetic and real
datasets demonstrate the quality of the proposed algorithm.

1. Introduction
Three dimensional geometry reconstruction is one of the
most important tasks in computer vision and image processing. Depth data plays a crucial role in industrial applications
(e.g., automatic optical inspection), the game and movie
industry, as well as common consumer products. Active
systems, such as structured light, laser scanners, or timeof-flight cameras are often costly and/or time consuming.
Differently, passive systems like multi-view stereo [21, 10]
or structure from motion are more attractive, considering
the simple hardware required and the possibility to achieve
high-quality 3D reconstructions.
Passive systems based on light fields have been widely
developed. A light field is a densely sampled image sequence, where an object is acquired from different views.

Figure 1. The proposed algorithm processes data generated from
a circular camera motion, retrieving the depth from sinusoidal trajectories of 3D points in the EPIs. The resulting depth maps can
be used to generate a point cloud and a mesh of the target scene.

When all images are stacked on top of each other, forming an image volume, one slice through this volume is called
epipolar plane image. EPIs give information about the motion parallax of the image points, which are moving with
specific trajectories, depending on the camera motion, see
Figure 1 for the circular case. In contrast to light fields, classic multi-view stereo algorithms do not make use of the redundancy contained in a densely sampled image sequence.
In fact, these algorithms often have a view selection [11]
which leads to discarding images due to the small baseline.
Furthermore, optical flow algorithms normally use two or
just few images to compute the depth [15, 3], hence they are
less robust than light fields. One of the most popular types
of light fields are the so called linear light fields, which are
a collection of images captured along a linear path. With
this type of data, scene points trace straight lines on the
EPIs, whose slopes are inversely proportional to the distance of the points. The main disadvantage of linear light
fields is that they are restricted to linear camera movements.
In this way only one side of the scene can be reconstructed.
To have the complete 3D shape, the target object has to be
recorded from four different sides, and then the results have
to be merged. This constraint makes the acquisition procedure long and tedious. Moreover, most of the light field algorithms strongly rely on the Lambertian hypothesis, which
means that an EPI-line should have constant intensity.
Linear light field algorithms are generally developed for
data acquired with standard perspective lenses. However,

7327

