Zero-Shot Visual Recognition using Semantics-Preserving
Adversarial Embedding Networks
Long Chen1
1

Zhejiang University

Hanwang Zhang2,3
2

Jun Xiao1∗

Nanyang Technological University

Wei Liu3
3

Shih-Fu Chang4

Tencent AI Lab

4

Columbia University

7UDLQ
7HVW

&8%

2ULJLQDO

{longc, junx}@zju.edu.cn; hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg; {wliu, sfchang}@ee.columbia.edu

681

63$(1

7UDLQ
7HVW

6$(

7HVW

7HVW

D

E

Figure 1: (a) Attribute variance heat maps of the 312 attributes in CUB birds [59] and the 102 attributes in SUN scenes [46]
(lighter color indicates lower variance, i.e., lower discriminability) and the t-SNE [34] visualizations of the test images
represented by all attributes (left) and only the high-variance ones (right). Some of the low-variance attributes (the lighter
part to the left of the cut-off line) discarded at training are still needed in discriminating unseen test classes. (b) Comparison
of reconstructed images using SAE [25] and our proposed SP-AEN method, which is shown to retain sufficient semantics for
photo-realistic reconstruction.

Abstract
We propose a novel framework called SemanticsPreserving Adversarial Embedding Network (SP-AEN) for
zero-shot visual recognition (ZSL), where test images and
their classes are both unseen during training. SP-AEN
aims to tackle the inherent problem — semantic loss —
in the prevailing family of embedding-based ZSL, where
some semantics would be discarded during training if they
are non-discriminative for training classes, but could become critical for recognizing test classes. Specifically, SPAEN prevents the semantic loss by introducing an independent visual-to-semantic space embedder which disentangles the semantic space into two subspaces for the two arguably conflicting objectives: classification and reconstruction. Through adversarial learning of the two subspaces,
SP-AEN can transfer the semantics from the reconstructive
subspace to the discriminative one, accomplishing the improved zero-shot recognition of unseen classes. Comparing
∗ Corresponding Author

with prior works, SP-AEN can not only improve classification but also generate photo-realistic images, demonstrating the effectiveness of semantic preservation. On four popular benchmarks: CUB, AWA, SUN and aPY, SP-AEN considerably outperforms other state-of-the-art methods by an
absolute performance difference of 12.2%, 9.3%, 4.0%, and
3.6% in terms of harmonic mean values [62].

1. Introduction
Zero-shot visual recognition, or more generally, zeroshot learning (ZSL), recognizes novel classes that are unseen at training stage. The community has reached a consensus that ZSL is all about transferring knowledge from
seen classes to unseen classes; Despite that there are fruitful ZSL methods, the transfer still follows the simple but
intuitive mechanism: although “raccoon” is unseen, we can
recognize it by checking if it satisfies the “raccoon signature”, e.g., visual attributes “striped tail” [13, 27, 67],
classeme “fox-like” [57, 30, 65, 52], or “raccoon” word vectors [47, 37]. These attributes can be modeled at training

1043

