Good View Hunting: Learning Photo Composition from Dense View Pairs
Zijun Wei1 , Jianming Zhang2 , Xiaohui Shen2 , Zhe Lin2 , Radomı́r Měch2 ,
Minh Hoai1 , Dimitris Samaras1
1
Stony Brook University, 2 Adobe Research

Abstract
Finding views with good photo composition is a challenging task for machine learning methods. A key difficulty
is the lack of well annotated large scale datasets. Most
existing datasets only provide a limited number of annotations for good views, while ignoring the comparative nature
of view selection. In this work, we present the first large
scale Comparative Photo Composition dataset, which contains over one million comparative view pairs annotated using a cost-effective crowdsourcing workflow. We show that
these comparative view annotations are essential for training a robust neural network model for composition. In addition, we propose a novel knowledge transfer framework to
train a fast view proposal network, which runs at 75+ FPS
and achieves state-of-the-art performance in image cropping and thumbnail generation tasks on three benchmark
datasets. The superiority of our method is also demonstrated in a user study on a challenging experiment, where
our method significantly outperforms the baseline methods
in producing diversified well-composed views.

1. Introduction
Photo composition is one of the essential ingredients in
the craft of photography. In this work, we aim to train models to find views with good composition (Fig. 1). Solving
this problem can benefit many applications such as image
cropping [44, 10], image thumbnailing [18], view recommendation [7, 38], and autonomous photo taking [4].
Finding good views in a scene is challenging for both
machines [15, 10] and humans [20]. Recently, with the
emergence of deep learning, many works attempt to train
photo composition models directly from data [42, 18, 10,
31, 16]. However, the scarcity of large scale datasets limits
further progress in this direction.
In this paper, we present the first large scale Comparative
Photo Composition (CPC) dataset, from which we could
harvest over 1 million comparative view pairs. Each view
pair contains two views generated from the same image and
their relative ranking crowdsourced under a cost-effective

Figure 1: Given an input image shown on the left, our
View Proposal Network (VPN) can generate a set of diversified well-composed views (the top three view shown on
the right) in less than 15 ms. The generated views can be
used in a wide range of applications such as image cropping, image thumbnailing, image re-targeting and real-time
view recommendation.
workflow. This type of comparative annotation is almost
completely missing in existing datasets (see Table 1). Composition models trained on these view pairs perform significantly better than those trained on existing datasets.
Another major contribution of this work is a novel
knowledge transfer framework to train a real-time anchorbox-based view proposal model [17, 35]. Unlike object proposal networks, the label assignment for our view proposal
model is quite challenging. First, assigning an anchor box to
a ground truth view, based on an overlap metric (e.g. IOU),
is fragile for training composition models; a slight adjustment of the view can often make a big difference in composition quality. Moreover, the annotation is not exhaustive:
most of the anchor boxes will not be annotated. In contrast
to the object detection scenario, we cannot assume that they
are negative samples (see Fig. 2).
Our knowledge transfer framework obviates the above
issues. In our teacher-student [21] framework, we first train
a view evaluation model on the view pairs using a Siamese
architecture [12]. Then we deploy this model as a teacher
to score the candidate anchor boxes on a large variety of
images. These teacher scores train the view proposal net
15437

