Large-scale Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation with Superpoint Graphs
Loic Landrieu1⋆ , Martin Simonovsky2⋆
1
Université Paris-Est, LASTIG MATIS IGN, ENSG
2
Université Paris-Est, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech
loic.landrieu@ign.fr, martin.simonovsky@enpc.fr

Abstract
We propose a novel deep learning-based framework to
tackle the challenge of semantic segmentation of largescale point clouds of millions of points. We argue that the
organization of 3D point clouds can be efficiently captured
by a structure called superpoint graph (SPG), derived
from a partition of the scanned scene into geometrically
homogeneous elements. SPGs offer a compact yet rich
representation of contextual relationships between object
parts, which is then exploited by a graph convolutional
network. Our framework sets a new state of the art for
segmenting outdoor LiDAR scans (+11.9 and +8.8 mIoU
points for both Semantic3D test sets), as well as indoor
scans (+12.4 mIoU points for the S3DIS dataset).

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of large 3D point clouds presents
numerous challenges, the most obvious one being the scale
of the data. Another hurdle is the lack of clear structure
akin to the regular grid arrangement in images. These obstacles have likely prevented Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) from achieving on irregular data the impressive performances attained for speech processing or images.
Previous attempts at using deep learning for large 3D
data were trying to replicate successful CNN architectures
used for image segmentation. For example, SnapNet [5]
converts a 3D point cloud into a set of virtual 2D RGBD
snapshots, the semantic segmentation of which can then be
projected on the original data. SegCloud [44] uses 3D convolutions on a regular voxel grid. However, we argue that
such methods do not capture the inherent structure of 3D
point clouds, which results in limited discrimination performance. Indeed, converting point clouds to 2D format
comes with loss of information and requires to perform surface reconstruction, a problem arguably as hard as semantic
segmentation. Volumetric representation of point clouds is

inefficient and tends to discard small details.
Deep learning architectures specifically designed for 3D
point clouds [37, 43, 40, 38, 10] display good results, but
are limited by the size of inputs they can handle at once.
We propose a representation of large 3D point clouds as
a collection of interconnected simple shapes coined superpoints, in spirit similar to superpixel methods for image segmentation [1]. As illustrated in Figure 1, this structure can
be captured by an attributed directed graph called the superpoint graph (SPG). Its nodes represent simple shapes while
edges describe their adjacency relationship characterized by
rich edge features.
The SPG representation has several compelling advantages. First, instead of classifying individual points or voxels, it considers entire object parts as whole, which are easier to identify. Second, it is able to describe in detail the
relationship between adjacent objects, which is crucial for
contextual classification: cars are generally above roads,
ceilings are surrounded by walls, etc. Third, the size of
the SPG is defined by the number of simple structures in a
scene rather than the total number of points, which is typically several order of magnitude smaller. This allows us
to model long-range interaction which would be intractable
otherwise without strong assumptions on the nature of the
pairwise connections. Our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce superpoint graphs, a novel point cloud
representation with rich edge features encoding the
contextual relationship between object parts in 3D
point clouds.
• Based on this representation, we are able to apply deep
learning on large-scale point clouds without major sacrifice in fine details. Our architecture consists of PointNets [37] for superpoint embedding and graph convolutions for contextual segmentation. For the latter,
we introduce a novel, more efficient version of EdgeConditioned Convolutions [43] as well as a new form
of input gating in Gated Recurrent Units [8].
• We set a new state of the art on two publicly available
datasets: Semantic3D [14] and S3DIS [3]. In particu-

⋆ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

4558

