Regularizing Deep Networks by Modeling and Predicting Label Structure
Mohammadreza Mostajabi

Michael Maire

Gregory Shakhnarovich

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
{mostajabi,mmaire,greg}@ttic.edu

Abstract
We construct custom regularization functions for use in
supervised training of deep neural networks. Our technique
is applicable when the ground-truth labels themselves exhibit internal structure; we derive a regularizer by learning an autoencoder over the set of annotations. Training
thereby becomes a two-phase procedure. The first phase
models labels with an autoencoder. The second phase trains
the actual network of interest by attaching an auxiliary
branch that must predict output via a hidden layer of the autoencoder. After training, we discard this auxiliary branch.
We experiment in the context of semantic segmentation,
demonstrating this regularization strategy leads to consistent accuracy boosts over baselines, both when training
from scratch, or in combination with ImageNet pretraining.
Gains are also consistent over different choices of convolutional network architecture. As our regularizer is discarded
after training, our method has zero cost at test time; the performance improvements are essentially free. We are simply
able to learn better network weights by building an abstract
model of the label space, and then training the network to
understand this abstraction alongside the original task.

1. Introduction
The recent successes of supervised deep learning rely on
the availability of large-scale datasets with associated annotations for training. In computer vision, annotation is a
sufficiently precious resource that it is commonplace to pretrain systems on millions of labeled ImageNet [8] examples.
These systems absorb a useful generic visual representation
ability during pretraining, before being fine-tuned to perform more specific tasks using fewer labeled examples.
Current state-of-the-art semantic segmentation methods [25, 7, 46] follow such a strategy. Its necessity is
driven by the high relative cost of annotating ground-truth
for spatially detailed segmentations [12, 24], and the accuracy gains achievable by combining different data sources
and label modalities during training. A collection of many
images, coarsely annotated with a single label per image

(e.g. ImageNet [8]), is still quite informative in comparison
to a smaller collection with detailed per-pixel label maps for
each image (e.g. PASCAL [12] or COCO [24]).
We show that detailed ground-truth annotation of this
latter form contains additional information that existing
schemes for training deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) fail to exploit. By designing a new training procedure, we are able to capture some of this information, and
as a result increase accuracy at test time.
Our method is orthogonal to recent efforts, discussed in
Section 2, on learning from images in an unsupervised or
self-supervised manner [34, 31, 43, 22, 23, 44, 11]. It is
not dependent upon the ability to utilize an external pool
of data. Rather, our focus on more efficiently utilizing provided labels makes our contribution complementary to these
other learning techniques. Experiments show gains both
when training from scratch, and in combination with pretraining on an external dataset.
Our innovation takes the form of a regularization function that is itself learned from the training set labels. This
yields two distinct training phases. The first phase models the structure of the labels themselves by learning an autoencoder. The second phase follows the standard network
training regime, but includes an auxiliary task of predicting
the output via the decoder learned in the first phase. We
view this auxiliary branch as a regularizer; it is only present
during training. Figure 1 illustrates this scheme.
Section 3 further details our approach and the intuition
behind it. Our regularizer can be viewed as a requirement
that the system understand context, or equivalently, as a
method for synthesizing context-derived labels at coarser
spatial resolution. The auxiliary branch must predict this
more abstract, context-sensitive representation in order to
successfully interface with the decoder.
Experiments, covered in Section 4, focus on the PASCAL semantic segmentation task. We take baseline CNN
architectures, the established VGG [36] network and the
state-of-the-art DenseNet [16], and report performance
gains of enhancing them with our custom regularizer during training. Section 4 also provides ablation studies, explores an alternative regularizer implementation, and visu-

5629

