Learning Intelligent Dialogs for Bounding Box Annotation
Ksenia Konyushkova

Jasper Uijlings

CVLab, EPFL
ksenia.konyushkova@epfl.ch

∗

Christoph H. Lampert

Vittorio Ferrari

Google AI Perception

IST Austria

Google AI Perception

jrru@google.com

chl@ist.ac.at

vittoferrari@google.com

Abstract
We introduce Intelligent Annotation Dialogs for bounding
box annotation. We train an agent to automatically choose
a sequence of actions for a human annotator to produce
a bounding box in a minimal amount of time. Specifically,
we consider two actions: box verification [34], where the
annotator verifies a box generated by an object detector, and
manual box drawing. We explore two kinds of agents, one
based on predicting the probability that a box will be positively verified, and the other based on reinforcement learning.
We demonstrate that (1) our agents are able to learn efficient
annotation strategies in several scenarios, automatically
adapting to the image difficulty, the desired quality of the
boxes, and the detector strength; (2) in all scenarios the resulting annotation dialogs speed up annotation compared to
manual box drawing alone and box verification alone, while
also outperforming any fixed combination of verification and
drawing in most scenarios; (3) in a realistic scenario where
the detector is iteratively re-trained, our agents evolve a
series of strategies that reflect the shifting trade-off between
verification and drawing as the detector grows stronger.

1. Introduction
Many recent advances in computer vision rely on supervised machine learning techniques that are known to crave
for huge amounts of training data. Object detection is no
exception as state-of-the-art methods require a large number
of images with annotated bounding boxes around objects.
However, drawing high quality bounding boxes is expensive:
The official protocol used to annotate ILSVRC [38] takes
about 30 seconds per box [43]. To reduce this cost, recent
works explore cheaper forms of human supervision such as
image-level labels [6, 21, 53], box verification series [34],
point annotations [27, 33], and eye-tracking [31].
Among these forms, the recent work on box verification
series [34] stands out as it demonstrated to deliver high
quality detectors at low cost. The scheme starts from a given
∗ This work was done during an internship at Google AI Perception

Figure 1: Left: an image with a target class cat. The weak
detector identified two box proposals with high scores. The
best strategy in this case is to do a series of box verifications.
Right: an image with a target class potted plant. The weak
detector identified many box proposals with low scores. The
best strategy is to draw a box.
weak detector, typically trained on image labels only, and
uses it to localize objects in the images. For each image, the
annotator is asked to verify whether the box produced by
the algorithm covers an object tightly enough. If not, the
process iterates: the algorithm proposes another box and the
annotator verifies it.
The success of box verification series depends on a variety
of factors. For example, large objects on homogeneous backgrounds are likely to be found early in the series, and hence
require little annotation time (Fig. 1, left). However, small
objects in crowded scenes might require many iterations, or
could even not be found at all (Fig. 1, right). Furthermore,
the stronger the detector is, the more likely it is to correctly
localize new objects, and to do so early in the series. Finally,
the higher the desired box quality (i.e. how tight they should
be), the lower the rate of positively verified boxes. This
causes longer series, costing more annotation time. Therefore, in some situations manual box drawing [32, 43] is
preferable. While more expensive than one verification, it
always produces a box annotation. When an annotation
episode consists of many verifications, its duration can be
longer than the time to draw a box, depending on the relative
costs of the two actions. Thus, different forms of annotation
are more efficient in different situations.
In this paper we introduce Intelligent Annotation Dialogs
(IAD) for bounding box annotation. Given an image, detector, and target class to be annotated, the aim of IAD is to
automatically choose the sequence of annotation actions that
19175

