Tensorize, Factorize and Regularize: Robust Visual Relationship Learning
Seong Jae Hwang1
Hyunwoo J. Kim1
1
2

Sathya N. Ravi1
Maxwell D. Collins1

Zirui Tao1
Vikas Singh2,1

Dept. of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI

Dept. of Biostatistics and Med. Informatics, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI
http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/˜sjh

Abstract
Visual relationships provide higher-level information of
objects and their relations in an image – this enables a semantic understanding of the scene and helps downstream
applications. Given a set of localized objects in some training data, visual relationship detection seeks to detect the
most likely “relationship” between objects in a given image. While the specific objects may be well represented
in training data, their relationships may still be infrequent.
The empirical distribution obtained from seeing these relationships in a dataset does not model the underlying distribution well — a serious issue for most learning methods.
In this work, we start from a simple multi-relational learning model, which in principle, offers a rich formalization
for deriving a strong prior for learning visual relationships.
While the inference problem for deriving the regularizer is
challenging, our main technical contribution is to show how
adapting recent results in numerical linear algebra lead to
efficient algorithms for a factorization scheme that yields
highly informative priors. The factorization provides sample size bounds for inference (under mild conditions) for
the underlying Jobject, predicate, objectK relationship learning task on its own and surprisingly outperforms (in some
cases) existing methods even without utilizing visual features. Then, when integrated with an end-to-end architecture for visual relationship detection leveraging image data,
we substantially improve the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The core primitives of an image are the objects and entities that are captured in it. As a result, a strong thrust
of research, formalized within detection and segmentation
problems, deals with accurate identification of such entities, given an image. On the other hand, there is consensus
that to “understand” an image from a human’s perspective
[29, 21], higher-level cues such as the relationship between
the objects are critical. Being able to reason about which
entities are likely to co-occur [32, 25] and how they interact

(a) Jperson, ride, motorcycleK

(b) Jperson, ?, horseK

(c) Objects interactions with predicates

Figure 1: Visual relationship detection: the goal is to infer visual
relationships that best describe the interactions among those objects. (a):
A relationship instance in a training set. (b): An unknown relationship to
predict. (c): The interactions of the objects (i.e., motorcycle and horse are
both ‘ridable’) can be used to infer the correct relationship.

[54, 12] is a powerful mid-level feature that endows a system with auxiliary information far beyond what individual
object detectors provide. Starting with early work on ANDOR graphs [31, 27] and logic networks [46, 43], algorithms
which make use of relational learning are becoming mainstream within vision, offering strong performance on categorization and retrieval tasks [1, 13]. Furthermore, many
interesting applications [9, 51, 4] have begun to appear as
richer datasets become available [4, 29, 55, 52].
An intuitive visual relationship learning setup is as follows. Given a sufficiently large set of images where the objects have been localized, we process the images and specify
the “relationship” between the objects; for example, person
and couch related by sitting on and/or person and bike related by riding. Then, with a learning module in hand, it
should be possible to learn these associations to facilitate
concurrent estimation of the object class as well as their relationship. For instance, a model may suggest that given a
high confidence for the bike class, a smaller set of classes
for the other object are likely, and perhaps, a small set of
relationships may explain the semantic association between
those two objects. The authors in [40] showed that this idea
of “Visual Phrases” performs well even when provided with
11014

