Sparse, Smart Contours to Represent and Edit Images
Tali Dekel 1

Chuang Gan 2
1

Google Research

Dilip Krishnan 1
2

Ce Liu 1

MIT-Watson AI Lab

3

William T. Freeman 1,3

MIT-CSAIL
Editing in the Contour Domain

Reconstruction from Sparse Contour Represenation
4.4% px

3.5% px

(a) Source

(b) Contours

(c) Source Reconstuction

Reference
(d) Edited/blended Contours

(e) Recon. from Edit

Figure 1. Our method produces high quality reconstructions of images from information along a small number of contours: a source
(512×512) image in (a) is reconstructed in (c) from gradient information stored at the set of colored contours in (b)2 , which are less than
5% of the pixels. The model synthesizes hair texture, facial lines and shading even in regions where no input information is provided.
Our model allows for semantically intuitive editing in the contour domain. Top-right: a caricature-like result (e) is created by moving and
scaling some contours in (d). Bottom-right: hairs are synthesized by pasting a set of hair contours copied from a reference image. Edited
contours are marked in green while the original contours in red.

Abstract
We study the problem of reconstructing an image from
information stored at contour locations. We show that highquality reconstructions with high fidelity to the source image can be obtained from sparse input, e.g., comprising less
than 6% of image pixels. This is a significant improvement
over existing contour-based reconstruction methods that require much denser input to capture subtle texture information and to ensure image quality. Our model, based on generative adversarial networks, synthesizes texture and details
in regions where no input information is provided. The semantic knowledge encoded into our model and the sparsity of the input allows to use contours as an intuitive interface for semantically-aware image manipulation: local edits in contour domain translate to long-range and coherent
changes in pixel space. We can perform complex structural
changes such as changing facial expression by simple edits
of contours. Our experiments demonstrate that humans as
well as a face recognition system mostly cannot distinguish
between our reconstructions and the source images.

1. Introduction
Contours are a concise and perceptually meaningful representation of the image, as they encode “things” and not
“stuff” [1]. This makes them appealing for image reconstruction and manipulation. As contours capture shape and
object’s boundaries, it is desirable to be able to maneuver them (e.g. translating, scaling, copying and pasting)
and have the related pixels adapt accordingly, such that
the edited images preserve the original image structure and
texture details; just as artists use simple sketches to guide
drawing sophisticated paintings. Therefore, faithfully reconstructing images from sparse contours, an open question
that dates back to the seminal work of David Marr [24], is
of great interest as it is the foundation for editing and processing.
A binary contour map is often insufficient to preserve fidelity for reconstruction (e.g. [18], Fig. 2(c)). Therefore,
local image information such as gradients or color have
1 First two principal components of the features is mapped to RGB [4].
2 Project page: https://contour2im.github.io/

13511

