Eye In-Painting with Exemplar Generative Adversarial Networks
Brian Dolhansky, Cristian Canton Ferrer
Facebook Inc.
1 Hacker Way, Menlo Park (CA), USA
{bdol, ccanton}@fb.com

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel approach to in-painting
where the identity of the object to remove or change is
preserved and accounted for at inference time: Exemplar
GANs (ExGANs). ExGANs are a type of conditional GAN
that utilize exemplar information to produce high-quality,
personalized in-painting results. We propose using exemplar information in the form of a reference image of the region to in-paint, or a perceptual code describing that object.
Unlike previous conditional GAN formulations, this extra
information can be inserted at multiple points within the
adversarial network, thus increasing its descriptive power.
We show that ExGANs can produce photo-realistic personalized in-painting results that are both perceptually and semantically plausible by applying them to the task of closedto-open eye in-painting in natural pictures. A new benchmark dataset is also introduced for the task of eye inpainting for future comparisons.

1. Introduction
Every day, a large number of pictures are captured and
shared in social networks with a large percentage of them
featuring people-centric content. There is little doubt that
realistic face retouching algorithms are a growing research
topic within the computer vision and machine learning communities. Some examples include red-eye fixing [41] and
blemish removal [7], where patch matching and Poisson
blending have been used to create plausible-looking results [39]. Full manipulation of the face appearance [23], attribute transferral [35], face frontalization [31] or synthetic
make-up [14], are also becoming very popular. However,
humans are very sensitive to small errors in facial structure,

specially if those faces are our own or are well-known to
us [33]; moreover, the so-called ”uncanny valley” [27] is a
difficult impediment to cross when manipulating facial features.
Recently, deep convolutional networks (DNNs) have
produced high-quality results when in-painting missing regions of pictures showing natural scenery [18]. For the
particular problem of facial transformations, they learn not
only to preserve features such global lighting and skin tone
(which patch-like and blending techniques can also potentially preserve), but can also encode some notion of semantic plausibility. Given a training set of sufficient size,
the network will learn what a human face ”should” look
like [19], and will in-paint accordingly, while preserving
the overall structure of the face image.
In this paper, we will focus on the particular problem of
eye in-painting. While DNNs can produce semanticallyplausible, realistic-looking results, most deep techniques do
not preserve the identity of the person in a photograph. For
instance, a DNN could learn to open a pair of closed eyes,
but there is no guarantee encoded in the model itself that the
new eyes will correspond to the original person’s specific
ocular structure. Instead, DNNs will insert a pair of eyes
that correspond to similar faces in the training set, leading
to undesirable and biased results; if a person has some distinguishing feature (such as an uncommon eye shape), this
will not be reflected in the generated part.
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a specific
type of deep network that contain a learnable adversarial
loss function represented by a discriminator network [13].
GANs have been successfully used to generate faces from
scratch [19], or to in-paint missing regions of a face [18].
They are particularly well-suited to general facial manipulation tasks, as the discriminator uses images of real faces
17902

