Flow Guided Recurrent Neural Encoder for Video Salient Object Detection
Guanbin Li1
1

Yuan Xie1

Tianhao Wei2

Keze Wang1

Liang Lin1,3∗

3
Zhejiang University
SenseTime Group Limited
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, xiey39@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, thwei@zju.edu.cn,
wangkeze@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Sun Yat-sen University

2

Abstract
Image saliency detection has recently witnessed significant progress due to deep convolutional neural networks.
However, extending state-of-the-art saliency detectors from
image to video is challenging. The performance of salient
object detection suffers from object or camera motion and
the dramatic change of the appearance contrast in videos.
In this paper, we present flow guided recurrent neural
encoder (FGRNE), an accurate and end-to-end learning
framework for video salient object detection. It works by
enhancing the temporal coherence of the per-frame feature
by exploiting both motion information in terms of optical
flow and sequential feature evolution encoding in terms of
LSTM networks. It can be considered as a universal framework to extend any FCN based static saliency detector to
video salient object detection. Intensive experimental results verify the effectiveness of each part of FGRNE and
confirm that our proposed method significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on the public benchmarks of DAVIS
and FBMS.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection aims at identifying the most visually distinctive objects in an image or video that attract
human attention. It has drawn a lot of attention due to the
need for solving this problem in many computer vision applications such as image and video compression [12], object segmentation [37], visual tracking [38] and person reidentification [43]. Although image based salient object detection has been extensively studied during the past decade,
video based salient object detection is much less explored
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this paper. Corresponding author is Liang Lin. This work was supported by the State Key
Development Program under Grant 2016YFB1001004, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61702565, Guangdong
Natural Science Foundation Project for Research Teams under Grant
2017A030312006, and was also sponsored by CCF-Tencent Open Research Fund.

due to its high complexity and the lack of large-scale annotated video datasets.
Frames

Static model
㸦DSS㸧

Ours

GT

Figure 1. The challenges of still-image saliency detector and
the effectiveness of temporal coherence modeling in video based
salient object detection.

In recent years, due to the success deployment of deep
convolutional neural networks (CNN), the performance of
salient object detection in static image has been increased
by a significant margin [21, 10, 18, 20]. Nevertheless, directly applying these methods to video salient object detection is non-trivial and challenging. The performance of
salient object detection suffers from object or camera motion and the dramatic change of the appearance contrast in
videos. As shown in the second row of Fig. 1, state-ofthe-art still-image salient object detectors (e.g. DSS [10])
deteriorates drastically from the inability to maintain the visual continuity and temporal correlation of salient objects
between consecutive frames.
Cognitive studies have shown that visual contrast is the
key factor that leads to a specific region becoming salient
in static images. For dynamic videos, the difference between consecutive frames caused by object motion are
more attractive to people’s attention [13]. Such temporal information has been exploited in existing video salient
object detection methods either in the form of graphics
model [35, 3] or simply embedded in a convolutional neural network [36]. Graphics model based methods generally
employ generative framework which first infers an initial
saliency map from either intra-frame appearance contrast

3243

