Hallucinated-IQA: No-Reference Image Quality Assessment
via Adversarial Learning
Kwan-Yee Lin1 and Guanxiang Wang2
1
Department of Information Science, School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Department of Mathematics, School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
1

linjunyi@pku.edu.cn 2 gxwang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
No-reference image quality assessment (NR-IQA) is a
fundamental yet challenging task in low-level computer vision community. The difficulty is particularly pronounced
for the limited information, for which the corresponding reference for comparison is typically absent. Although various
feature extraction mechanisms have been leveraged from
natural scene statistics to deep neural networks in previous
methods, the performance bottleneck still exists.
In this work, we propose a hallucination-guided quality regression network to address the issue. We firstly
generate a hallucinated reference constrained on the distorted image, to compensate the absence of the true reference. Then, we pair the information of hallucinated reference with the distorted image, and forward them to the
regressor to learn the perceptual discrepancy with the guidance of an implicit ranking relationship within the generator, and therefore produce the precise quality prediction.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, comprehensive experiments are evaluated on four popular image
quality assessment benchmarks. Our method significantly
outperforms all the previous state-of-the-art methods by
large margins. The code and model are publicly available
on the project page https://kwanyeelin.github.
io/projects/HIQA/HIQA.html.

1. Introduction
Image quality assessment (IQA) refers to the challenging
task of automatically predicting the perceptual quality of a
distorted image. IQA serves as a key component in the lowlevel computer vision community and has a wide range of
applications [13, 26, 49].
IQA algorithms could be classified into three categories: full-reference IQA (FR-IQA) [50, 24, 19], reducedreference IQA (RR-IQA) [11], and general purpose noreference IQA (NR-IQA) [46, 17, 42, 51, 44, 20, 25]. Al-

(a)

(b)

(c)

Ground‐truth
Reference

Distorted
Image

Hallucinated
Reference

Discrepancy
Map

Figure 1: An illustration of our motivation. The first column is
the Ground-truth Reference image which is undistorted. The second column shows several kinds of distortion that is easily happened. The third row demonstrates the hallucinated reference images which are generated by our approach. The fourth column is
the discrepancy map which captures rich information that can be
utilized to guide the learning of quality regression network to get
high accuracy results.

though FR-IQA and RR-IQA metrics have achieved remarkable results over the decades, the precondition of them
that requiring a corresponding non-distorted reference image for comparison during quality predicting process makes
these metrics infeasible in practical applications, since it is
hard, even impossible in most cases, to obtain an ideal reference image. In contrast, NR-IQA, which takes only the
distorted image to be assessed as input without any additional information, is more realistic and therefore receives
substantial attention in recent years. However, the ill-posed
definition makes it is highly challenging for NR-IQA to
make a good image quality prediction.
The ill-posed nature of the underdetermined NR-IQA
problem is particularly pronounced for the limited information, for which the form of distortion and the correspond-

732

