Human Pose Estimation with Parsing Induced Learner
Xuecheng Nie1
1

Jiashi Feng1

Yiming Zuo2

Shuicheng Yan1,3

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3

Qihoo 360 AI Institute, Beijing, China

niexuecheng@u.nus.edu elefjia@nus.edu.sg

zuoym15@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

yanshuicheng@360.cn

Abstract
Human pose estimation still faces various difficulties in
challenging scenarios. Human parsing, as a closely related
task, can provide valuable cues for better pose estimation,
which however has not been fully exploited. In this paper, we
propose a novel Parsing Induced Learner to exploit parsing
information to effectively assist pose estimation by learning
to fast adapt the base pose estimation model. The proposed
Parsing Induced Learner is composed of a parsing encoder
and a pose model parameter adapter, which together learn
to predict dynamic parameters of the pose model to extract
complementary useful features for more accurate pose estimation. Comprehensive experiments on benchmarks LIP
and extended PASCAL-Person-Part show that the proposed
Parsing Induced Learner can improve performance of both
single- and multi-person pose estimation to new state-of-theart. Cross-dataset experiments also show that the proposed
Parsing Induced Learner from LIP dataset can accelerate
learning of a human pose estimation model on MPII benchmark in addition to achieving outperforming performance.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a fundamental task in computer vision, aiming to estimate joint locations of human
body. Recent years have witnessed many efforts made to
push its performance frontier [11, 25, 36, 40], but it remains
challenging to apply it to realistic scenarios. Distracting factors, e.g. occlusion, self-similarity, large deformation, huge
variation in pose configuration and appearance, often lead
to inaccurate joint localization and even false joint categorization. As shown in Figure 1 (a), partial occlusion on
left arm causes inaccurate localizations of left wrist, while
high similarity between left and right legs results in false
categorization of right ankle.
Human body parts, generated by human parsing methods [21, 23, 37], can provide useful contextual cues to help
localize body joints in these challenging scenarios. For
instance, when body part cues (from left-lower arm and

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation for the proposed Parsing
Induced Learner. (a) Pose estimation result without exploiting
parsing information. (b) Parsing information generated from the
proposed PIL. (c) Pose estimation result with the proposed PIL. The
proposed PIL effectively leverages parsing information to refine
the inaccurate locations and correct false categorizations for the
highlighted body joints.

right-lower leg, as shown in Figure 1 (b)) are taken into
account in joint localization, estimation errors on the joints
of left wrist and right ankle can be effectively corrected, as
shown in Figure 1 (c). Motivated by this, some research
works [13, 20, 38, 39] exploit the parsing information to
help improve pose estimation performance. However, they
generally perform human body parsing and pose estimation
separately and utilize parsing results to refine body joint
localization as post processing. Although some improvement has been achieved, they do not fully utilize parsing
information in an effective and efficient way, thus suffer
several limitations. First, they hand-craft features from parsing results which are not powerful or robust to large pose
variations in the wild. Second, they only use parsing information for inference other than learning pose models and
therefore do not strengthen pose models essentially. Third,
their overall frameworks are not end-to-end learnable.
In this work, we propose to leverage human parsing information more effectively and efficiently for learning better
pose estimation models and improving their performance.
Targeting at the above limitations of existing works, we make
following observations. First, the parsing representations
should be learned towards being beneficial to pose estimation, instead of solely learned from the parsing supervision.

2100

