Link and code: Fast indexing with graphs and compact regression codes
Matthijs Douze† , Alexandre Sablayrolles†,⋆ , and Hervé Jégou†
†

Facebook AI Research

⋆

Inria∗

Abstract
Similarity search approaches based on graph walks have
recently attained outstanding speed-accuracy trade-offs,
taking aside the memory requirements. In this paper, we
revisit these approaches by considering, additionally, the
memory constraint required to index billions of images on
a single server. This leads us to propose a method based
both on graph traversal and compact representations. We
encode the indexed vectors using quantization and exploit
the graph structure to refine the similarity estimation.
In essence, our method takes the best of these two
worlds: the search strategy is based on nested graphs,
thereby providing high precision with a relatively small set
of comparisons. At the same time it offers a significant
memory compression. As a result, our approach outperforms the state of the art on operating points considering
64–128 bytes per vector, as demonstrated by our results on
two billion-scale public benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Similarity search is a key problem in computer vision.
It is a core component of large-scale image search [32,
38], pooling [41] and semi-supervised low-shot classification [16]. Another example is classification with a large
number of classes [22]. In the last few years, most of
the recent papers have focused on compact codes, either
binary [10, 18] or based on various quantization methods [26, 11, 3, 44]. Employing a compact representation
of vectors is important when using local descriptors such as
SIFT [31], since thousands of such vectors are extracted per
image. In this case the set of descriptors typically requires
more memory than the compressed image itself. Having a
compressed indexed representation employing 8 − 32 bytes
per descriptor was a requirement driven by scalability and
practical considerations.
However, the recent advances in visual description have
mostly considered description schemes [37, 27, 19] for
∗ University Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK.

β2

β3

β0
β1

β4

Figure 1. Illustration of our approach: we adopt a graph traversal
strategy [34] that maintains a connectivity between all database
points. Our own algorithm is based on compressed descriptors
to save memory: each database vector (circle) is approximated
(square) with quantization. We further improve the estimate by regressing each database vector from its encoded neighbors, which
provides an excellent representation basis. The regression coefficients β = [β0 , . . . , βk ] are selected from a codebook learned to
minimize the vector reconstruction error.

which each image is represented by an unique vector, typically extracted from the activation layers of a convolutional
neural network [5, 42]. The state of the art in image retrieval
learns the representation end-to-end [20, 39] such that cosine similarity or Euclidean distance reflects the semantic
similarity. The resulting image descriptors consist of no
more than a few hundred components.
In this context, it is worth investigating approaches for
nearest neighbor search trading memory for a better accuracy and/or efficiency. An image representation of 128
bytes is acceptable in many situations, as it is comparable if not smaller than the meta-data associated with it and
stored in a database. While some authors argue that the
performance saturates beyond 16 bytes [8], the best results achieved with 16 bytes on the Deep10M and Deep1B
datasets do not exceed 50% recall at rank 1 [7, 15]. While
going back to the original vectors may improve the recall,
it would require to access a slower storage device, which
would be detrimental to the overall efficiency.
One the opposite, some methods like those implemented
in FLANN [35] consider much smaller datasets and target
high-accuracy and throughput. The state-of-the-art methods
implemented in NMSLIB [9] focuses solely on the compro13646

