Deep Image Prior
Dmitry Ulyanov
Skolkovo Institute of Science
and Technology, Yandex

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford
vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science
and Technology (Skoltech)

dmitry.ulyanov@skoltech.ru

lempitsky@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Deep convolutional networks have become a popular
tool for image generation and restoration. Generally, their
excellent performance is imputed to their ability to learn realistic image priors from a large number of example images.
In this paper, we show that, on the contrary, the structure of
a generator network is sufficient to capture a great deal of
low-level image statistics prior to any learning. In order
to do so, we show that a randomly-initialized neural network can be used as a handcrafted prior with excellent results in standard inverse problems such as denoising, superresolution, and inpainting. Furthermore, the same prior
can be used to invert deep neural representations to diagnose them, and to restore images based on flash-no flash
input pairs.
Apart from its diverse applications, our approach highlights the inductive bias captured by standard generator
network architectures. It also bridges the gap between
two very popular families of image restoration methods:
learning-based methods using deep convolutional networks
and learning-free methods based on handcrafted image priors such as self-similarity.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) currently set the state-of-the-art in inverse image reconstruction problems such as denoising [5, 20] or single-image
super-resolution [19, 29, 18]. ConvNets have also been used
with great success in more “exotic” problems such as reconstructing an image from its activations within certain deep
networks or from its HOG descriptor [8]. More generally,
ConvNets with similar architectures are nowadays used to
generate images using such approaches as generative adversarial networks [11], variational autoencoders [16], and
direct pixelwise error minimization [9, 3].
State-of-the-art ConvNets for image restoration and genCode and supplementary material are available at https://
dmitryulyanov.github.io/deep_image_prior

(a) Ground truth

(b) SRResNet [19], Trained

(c) Bicubic, Not trained

(d) Deep prior, Not trained

Figure 1: Super-resolution using the deep image prior.
Our method uses a randomly-initialized ConvNet to upsample an image, using its structure as an image prior; similar
to bicubic upsampling, this method does not require learning, but produces much cleaner results with sharper edges.
In fact, our results are quite close to state-of-the-art superresolution methods that use ConvNets learned from large
datasets. The deep image prior works well for all inverse
problems we could test.
eration are almost invariably trained on large datasets of images. One may thus assume that their excellent performance
is due to their ability to learn realistic image priors from
data. However, learning alone is insufficient to explain the
good performance of deep networks. For instance, the authors of [33] recently showed that the same image classification network that generalizes well when trained on genuine
data can also overfit when presented with random labels.
Thus, generalization requires the structure of the network
to “resonate” with the structure of the data. However, the

9446

