Discrete-Continuous ADMM
for Transductive Inference in Higher-Order MRFs
Emanuel Laude 1
Laura Leal-Taixé 1
1

Jan-Hendrik Lange 2
Frank R. Schmidt 1 3

Jonas Schüpfer 1 Csaba Domokos 1
Bjoern Andres 2 3 4 Daniel Cremers 1

2
Technical University of Munich
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken
3
4
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
University of Tübingen

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel algorithm for transductive
inference in higher-order MRFs, where the unary energies
are parameterized by a variable classifier. The considered
task is posed as a joint optimization problem in the continuous classifier parameters and the discrete label variables. In contrast to prior approaches such as convex relaxations, we propose an advantageous decoupling of the
objective function into discrete and continuous subproblems and a novel, efficient optimization method related to
ADMM. This approach preserves integrality of the discrete
label variables and guarantees global convergence to a critical point. We demonstrate the advantages of our approach
in several experiments including video object segmentation
on the DAVIS data set and interactive image segmentation.

1. Introduction
Various problems in computer vision, computer graphics and machine learning can be formulated as MAP inference in a (possibly higher order) Markov random field
(MRF) [33, 26, 40, 28, 30, 12, 32, 43]. The resulting optimization problem is defined over a hypergraph (V, C) and a
finite label set L as:
X
X
EC (yC ).
(1)
min
Ei (yi ) +
y∈Y

i∈V

C∈C
|C|>1

The optimization variable y ∈ Y := L|V| corresponds to
a labeling of the vertices V and assigns a label yi ∈ L to
each vertex i ∈ V. For convenience, we make a distinction
between the singleton clique energies (unaries) Ei (yi ) and
the higher order energies EC (yC ), |C| > 1.
In computer vision tasks, where the image is interpreted
as a (higher order) pixelgrid (V, C), the higher order potentials often correspond to priors favoring spatially smooth

Figure 1: A pixel-classifier trained to predict an object mask
(top row) performs well when the distribution of object pixels in the training image is similar to the test image (left),
but often fails if it is dissimilar (right). In a transductive inference approach (bottom row), we optimize jointly for the
test labels and classifier parameters, which successfully prevents the hallucination of object pixels in difficult scenes,
such as in the case of occlusion (right), cf. Sec. 4.2.

solutions. In semantic image segmentation, for instance, inference in MRFs is widely used as a post-processing step
to introduce spatial smoothness on the labeling y [10]. In
this sense, the overall task of semantic segmentation is subdivided into two tasks: First, a classifier, parameterized
by W , is trained in a supervised fashion on a sufficiently
large labeled training set, which assigns to each pixel in a
test image a class (probability) score. Second, to enforce
spatial smoothness of the labeling of the test image, MAPinference in an MRF is performed in a post-processing, in
which the class (probability) scores are interpreted as the
unary energies Ei (yi ; W ) for each yi . We argue that it is
advantageous to merge such a two-step approach into a joint
approach, as the training of the classifier profits from both,
(i) the distribution of the unlabeled pixels in the color or
feature space, and (ii) the available structural information
11614

