Learning by Asking Questions
Ishan Misra1 ∗
Ross Girshick2
Rob Fergus2
1
1
Martial Hebert
Abhinav Gupta
Laurens van der Maaten2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We introduce an interactive learning framework for the
development and testing of intelligent visual systems, called
learning-by-asking (LBA). We explore LBA in context of the
Visual Question Answering (VQA) task. LBA differs from
standard VQA training in that most questions are not observed during training time, and the learner must ask questions it wants answers to. Thus, LBA more closely mimics natural learning and has the potential to be more dataefficient than the traditional VQA setting. We present a
model that performs LBA on the CLEVR dataset, and show
that it automatically discovers an easy-to-hard curriculum
when learning interactively from an oracle. Our LBA generated data consistently matches or outperforms the CLEVR
train data and is more sample efficient. We also show that
our model asks questions that generalize to state-of-the-art
VQA models and to novel test time distributions.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models have led to remarkable
progress in visual recognition. However, while the training data that is fed into these models is crucially important,
it is typically treated as predetermined, static information.
Our current models are passive in nature: they rely on training data curated by humans and have no control over this
supervision. This is in stark contrast to the way we humans
learn — by interacting with our environment to gain information. The interactive nature of human learning makes
it sample efficient (there is less redundancy during training)
and also yields a learning curriculum (we ask for more complex knowledge as we learn).
In this paper, we argue that next-generation recognition
systems need to have agency — the ability to decide what
information they need and how to get it. We explore this in
the context of visual question answering (VQA; [4, 23, 58]).
Instead of training on a fixed, large-scale dataset, we propose an alternative interactive VQA setup called learningby-asking (LBA): at training time, the learner receives only
∗ Work done during internship at Facebook AI Research.

Agent
Acquire
supervision
Ask
Question

Provide
Answer
Interact with
environment

Oracle
Figure 1: The Learning-by-Asking (LBA) paradigm. We
present an open-world Visual Question Answering (VQA)
setting in which an agent interactively learns by asking
questions to an oracle. Unlike standard VQA training,
which assumes a fixed dataset of questions, in LBA the
agent has the potential to learn more quickly by asking
“good” questions, much like a bright student in a class.
LBA does not alter the test-time setup of VQA.
images and decides what questions to ask. Questions asked
by the learner are answered by an oracle (human supervision). At test-time, LBA is evaluated exactly like VQA using well understood metrics.
The interactive nature of LBA requires the learner to
construct meta-knowledge about what it knows and to select the supervision it needs. If successful, this facilitates
more sample efficient learning than using a fixed dataset,
because the learner will not ask redundant questions.
We explore the proposed LBA paradigm in the context
of the CLEVR dataset [23], which is an artificial universe
in which the number of unique objects, attributes, and relations are limited. We opt for this synthetic setting because
there is little prior work on asking questions about images:
CLEVR allows us to perform a controlled study of the algorithms needed for asking questions. We hope to transfer
the insights obtained from our study to a real-world setting.
Building an interactive learner that can ask questions is
a challenging task. First, the learner needs to have a “language” model to form questions. Second, it needs to understand the input image to ensure the question is relevant
and coherent. Finally (and most importantly), in order to
be sample efficient, the learner should be able to evaluate
its own knowledge (self-evaluate) and ask questions which
1 11

