LiDAR-Video Driving Dataset: Learning Driving Policies Effectively
Yiping Chen∗1 , Jingkang Wang∗2 , Jonathan Li#1,3 , Cewu Lu#2 ,
Zhipeng Luo1 , Han Xue2 , and Cheng Wang1
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 University of Waterloo

Abstract
Learning autonomous-driving policies is one of the most
challenging but promising tasks for computer vision. Most
researchers believe that future research and applications
should combine cameras, video recorders and laser scanners to obtain comprehensive semantic understanding of
real traffic. However, current approaches only learn from
large-scale videos, due to the lack of benchmarks that consist of precise laser-scanner data. In this paper, we are
the first to propose a LiDAR-Video dataset, which provides
large-scale high-quality point clouds scanned by a Velodyne
laser, videos recorded by a dashboard camera and standard
drivers’ behaviors. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
extra depth information help networks to determine driving
policies indeed.

1. Introduction
Driving policy learning is a core problem in autonomous
driving research. Computer vision is expected to play an
important role in this challenging task, since driving planning and perception together run as a closed loop. Therefore, some computer vision researchers [5, 20, 21, 27] attempt to model it as a perception-action model, which is an
end-to-end system that maps from pixels to actuation. It
opens a new direction in the autonomous driving field.
However, current research and dataset neglect an important cue, namely, depth information. On the one hand, biological experiments [4, 19] show that monocular people
can not drive nicely. For instance, monocular drivers in experiments did worse in parking and lane changing tasks for
the lack of stereoscopic depth perception. It verifies depth
* indicates equal contributions.
# the corresponding authors are Jonathan Li and Cewu Lu. E-mails:
junli@uwaterloo.ca and lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn. Cewu Lu is
also member of AI research institute at SJTU.

LiVi-Set
濗瀅濼瀉濼瀁濺
濕濸濻濴瀉濼瀂瀅瀆

Policy
Learning
Supervisor

F-map
濟濼濗濔濥
Pointnet

濗濡濡澾濟濦濧濠

Frames
濩濼濷濸瀂瀆
End-to-end System

Training

Testing

Figure 1. LiDAR-Video Driving dataset: a benchmark for polices
learning in autonomous driving.

information is necessary, though drivers have perfect recognition ability. Most of the people believe that depth information should be a necessary cue in real-world auto-driving
due to the consideration of safety. On the other hand, many
high-quality depth sensors would be cheap and widely affordable. For example, the cost of Velodyne comes to hundreds of dollars, that is, it will be ready to be equipped in
most autonomous cars.
In consequence, computer vision researchers should
pay more attention to perception-action model with depth.
Whereas, we found it still misses out both research roadmaps and datasets. Thus, this paper aims to fundamentally
study this problem. We offer a large-scale dataset that includes both driving videos with depth and corresponding
driving behaviors. Our dataset is largely different from previous ones for vision-based auto-driving research. On the
one hand, the depth data sampled by a LiDAR camera is
provided, which misses in [9, 27]. On the other hand, some
datasets like KITTI [11, 12] provide depth information,
however, driving behavior is not included, which makes
them fail to be a benchmark for policy learning. In short, the
proposed dataset is the first driving policy learning dataset
that includes depth information. Our dataset involves many
features: (1) large-scale: our dataset consists of more than

5870

