Stochastic Variational Inference with Gradient Linearization
Tobias Plötz∗
Anne S. Wannenwetsch∗
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Variational inference has experienced a recent surge
in popularity owing to stochastic approaches, which have
yielded practical tools for a wide range of model classes. A
key benefit is that stochastic variational inference obviates
the tedious process of deriving analytical expressions for
closed-form variable updates. Instead, one simply needs to
derive the gradient of the log-posterior, which is often much
easier. Yet for certain model classes, the log-posterior itself
is difficult to optimize using standard gradient techniques.
One such example are random field models, where optimization based on gradient linearization has proven popular,
since it speeds up convergence significantly and can avoid
poor local optima. In this paper we propose stochastic variational inference with gradient linearization (SVIGL). It is
similarly convenient as standard stochastic variational inference – all that is required is a local linearization of the
energy gradient. Its benefit over stochastic variational inference with conventional gradient methods is a clear improvement in convergence speed, while yielding comparable or even better variational approximations in terms of KL
divergence. We demonstrate the benefits of SVIGL in three
applications: Optical flow estimation, Poisson-Gaussian
denoising, and 3D surface reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Computer vision algorithms increasingly become building blocks in ever more complex systems, prompting for
ways of assessing the reliability of each component. Probability distributions allow for a natural way of quantifying predictive uncertainty. Here, variational inference (VI,
see [43] for an extensive introduction) is one of the main
computational workhorses. Stochastic approaches to variational inference [17, 21, 31, 33] have recently rejuvenated
the interest in this family of approximate inference methods.
Part of their popularity stems from their making variational
inference applicable to large-scale models, thus enabling
practical systems [40]. Another benefit, which should not
be underestimated, is that they allow to apply variational
∗ Authors contributed equally

inference in a black-box fashion [31, 40], since it is no
longer required to carry out tedious and moreover modelspecific derivations of the update equations. This allows
practitioners to apply variational inference to new model
classes very quickly. The only required model specifics are
gradients of the log-posterior w.r.t. its unknowns, which are
typically much easier to derive than variational update equations. Moreover, automatic differentiation [4] can be used
to further reduce manual intervention.
While this makes stochastic variational inference techniques attractive from the user’s perspective, there are some
caveats. In this paper we specifically focus on the limitations of gradient-based optimization techniques in the context of certain highly nonlinear model classes. One such
category are random field models [6], which often arise in
dense prediction tasks in vision. Let us take optical flow
[8, 32] as an illustrative example. The data model is highly
multimodal and the prior frequently relies on non-convex
potentials, which complicate inference [5]. Gradient-based
optimization is severely challenged by the multi-modal energy function. Hence, approaches based on energy minimization [8, 32, 42] often rely on a optimization technique
called gradient linearization [29], which proceeds by iteratively linearizing the gradient at the current estimate and
then solving the resulting system of linear equations to obtain the next iterate. Our starting point is the following question: If gradient linearization is beneficial for maximum aposteriori (MAP) estimation in certain model classes, would
not stochastic variational inference benefit similarly?
In this paper, we derive stochastic variational inference with gradient linearization (SVIGL) – a general optimization algorithm for stochastic variational inference that
only hinges on the availability of linearized gradients of
the underlying energy function. In each iteration, SVIGL
linearizes a stochastic gradient estimate of the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence and solves for the root of the linearization. We show that each step of this procedure optimizes a sound objective. Furthermore, we make interesting experimental findings for challenging models from optical flow estimation and Poisson-Gaussian denoising. First,
we observe that SVIGL leads to faster convergence of the
variational objective function than gradient-based stochas-

1566

