Context Encoding for Semantic Segmentation
Hang Zhang 1,2 Kristin Dana 1 Jianping Shi 3 Zhongyue Zhang 2
Xiaogang Wang 4 Ambrish Tyagi 2 Amit Agrawal 2
1

Rutgers University 2 Amazon Inc 3 SenseTime 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{zhang.hang@,kdana@ece.}rutgers.edu, shijianping@sensetime.com
xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, {zhongyue,ambrisht,aaagrawa}@amazon.com,

Abstract
Recent work has made significant progress in improving
spatial resolution for pixelwise labeling with Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) framework by employing Dilated/Atrous convolution, utilizing multi-scale features and
refining boundaries. In this paper, we explore the impact
of global contextual information in semantic segmentation
by introducing the Context Encoding Module, which captures the semantic context of scenes and selectively highlights class-dependent featuremaps. The proposed Context
Encoding Module significantly improves semantic segmentation results with only marginal extra computation cost
over FCN. Our approach has achieved new state-of-theart results 51.7% mIoU on PASCAL-Context, 85.9% mIoU
on PASCAL VOC 2012. Our single model achieves a final score of 0.5567 on ADE20K test set, which surpasses
the winning entry of COCO-Place Challenge 2017. In addition, we also explore how the Context Encoding Module
can improve the feature representation of relatively shallow
networks for the image classification on CIFAR-10 dataset.
Our 14 layer network has achieved an error rate of 3.45%,
which is comparable with state-of-the-art approaches with
over 10× more layers. The source code for the complete
system are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation assigns per-pixel predictions of
object categories for the given image, which provides a
comprehensive scene description including the information
of object category, location and shape. State-of-the-art
semantic segmentation approaches are typically based on
the Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) framework [36].
The adaption of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
1 Links can be found at http://hangzh.com/

Figure 1: Labeling a scene with accurate per-pixel labels is a challenge for semantic segmentation algorithms.
Even humans find the task challenging. However, narrowing the list of probable categories based on scene context
makes labeling much easier. Motivated by this, we introduce the Context Encoding Module which selectively highlights the class-dependent featuremaps and makes the semantic segmentation easier for the network. (Examples
from ADE20K [59].)
(CNNs) [29] benefits from the rich information of object
categories and scene semantics learned from diverse set of
images [10]. CNNs are able to capture the informative representations with global receptive fields by stacking convolutional layers with non-linearities and downsampling. For
conquering the problem of spatial resolution loss associated with downsampling, recent work uses Dilated/Atrous
convolution strategy to produce dense predictions from pretrained networks [4,52]. However, this strategy also isolates
the pixels from the global scene context, leading to misclassified pixels. For example in the 3rd row of Figure 4, the
17151

