Multi-Content GAN for Few-Shot Font Style Transfer
Samaneh Azadi1∗, Matthew Fisher2 , Vladimir Kim2 , Zhaowen Wang2 , Eli Shechtman2 , Trevor Darrell1
1
UC Berkeley, 2 Adobe Research
{sazadi,trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu

{matfishe,vokim,zhawang,elishe}@adobe.com

Abstract
In this work, we focus on the challenge of taking partial
observations of highly-stylized text and generalizing the observations to generate unobserved glyphs in the ornamented
typeface. To generate a set of multi-content images following
a consistent style from very few examples, we propose an endto-end stacked conditional GAN model considering content
along channels and style along network layers. Our proposed network transfers the style of given glyphs to the contents of unseen ones, capturing highly stylized fonts found in
the real-world such as those on movie posters or infographics. We seek to transfer both the typographic stylization (ex.
serifs and ears) as well as the textual stylization (ex. color
gradients and effects.) We base our experiments on our collected data set including 10,000 fonts with different styles
and demonstrate effective generalization from a very small
number of observed glyphs.

1. Introduction
Text is a prominent visual element of 2D design. Artists
invest significant time into designing glyphs that are visually
compatible with other elements in their shape and texture.
This process is labor intensive and artists often design only
the subset of glyphs that are necessary for a title or an annotation, which makes it difficult to alter the text after the
design is created, or to transfer an observed instance of a
font to your own project. In this work, we propose a neural network architecture that automatically synthesizes the
missing glyphs from a few image examples.
Early research on glyph synthesis focused on geometric modeling of outlines [29, 2, 27], which is limited to
particular glyph topology (e.g., cannot be applied to decorative or hand-written glyphs) and cannot be used with image
input. With the rise of deep neural networks, researchers
have looked at modeling glyphs from images [1, 33, 22, 3].
We improve this approach by leveraging recent advances in
conditional generative adversarial networks (cGANS) [11],
∗ Work done during an internship at Adobe Research

which have been successful in many generative applications,
but produce significant artifacts when directly used to generate fonts (Figure 6, 2nd row). Instead of training a single
network for all possible typeface ornamentations, we show
how to use our multi-content GAN architecture to retrain
a customized network for each observed character set with
only a handful of observed glyphs.
Our network operates in two stages, first modeling the
overall glyph shape and then synthesizing the final appearance with color and texture, enabling transfer of fine decorative elements. Some recent texture transfer techniques
directly leverage glyph structure as guiding channels to improve the placement of decorative elements [34]. While this
approach provides good results on clean glyphs it tends to
fail on automatically-generated glyphs, as the artifacts of the
synthesis procedure make it harder to obtain proper guidance from the glyph structure. Instead, we propose to train
an ornamentation network jointly with the glyph generation
network, enabling our ornament synthesis approach to learn
how to decorate automatically generated glyphs with color
and texture and also fix issues that arise during glyph generation. We demonstrate that users strongly preferred the output
of our glyph ornamentation network in the end-to-end glyph
synthesis pipeline.
Our Contributions. In this paper, we propose the first
end-to-end solution to synthesizing ornamented glyphs from
images of a few example glyphs in the same style. To enable this, we develop a novel stacked cGAN architecture
to predict the coarse glyph shapes, and a novel ornamentation network to predict color and texture of the final glyphs.
These networks are trained jointly and specialized for each
typeface using a very small number of observations, and we
demonstrate the benefit of each component in our architecture (Figure 6). We use a perceptual evaluation to demonstrate the benefit of our jointly-trained network over effect
transfer approaches augmented with a baseline glyph-outline
inference network (Section 5.3).
Our Multi-Content GAN (MC-GAN) code and dataset
are available at https://github.com/azadis/
MC-GAN.
17564

