Jointly Localizing and Describing Events for Dense Video Captioning∗
Yehao Li †¶ , Ting Yao ‡ , Yingwei Pan § , Hongyang Chao †¶ , and Tao Mei ‡
†

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
‡
§

¶

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education

{yehaoli.sysu, panyw.ustc}@gmail.com, {tiyao, tmei}@microsoft.com, isschhy@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatically describing a video with natural language
is regarded as a fundamental challenge in computer vision.
The problem nevertheless is not trivial especially when a
video contains multiple events to be worthy of mention,
which often happens in real videos. A valid question is
how to temporally localize and then describe events, which
is known as “dense video captioning.” In this paper, we
present a novel framework for dense video captioning that
unifies the localization of temporal event proposals and sentence generation of each proposal, by jointly training them
in an end-to-end manner. To combine these two worlds, we
integrate a new design, namely descriptiveness regression,
into a single shot detection structure to infer the descriptive
complexity of each detected proposal via sentence generation. This in turn adjusts the temporal locations of each
event proposal. Our model differs from existing dense video
captioning methods since we propose a joint and global optimization of detection and captioning, and the framework
uniquely capitalizes on an attribute-augmented video captioning architecture. Extensive experiments are conducted
on ActivityNet Captions dataset and our framework shows
clear improvements when compared to the state-of-the-art
techniques. More remarkably, we obtain a new record: METEOR of 12.96% on ActivityNet Captions official test set.

1. Introduction
The recent advances in 2D and 3D Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) have successfully pushed the limits and
improved the state-of-the-art of video understanding. For
instance, the first rank performance achieves 8.8% in terms
of top-1 error in untrimmed video classification task of ActivityNet Challenge 2017 [9]. As such, it has become possible to recognize a video with a pre-defined set of labels
∗ This work was performed at Microsoft Research Asia.

Input Video

Video
Captioning

Dense
Video
Captioning

...

...

...

...

...

A man is playing frisbee with a dog.
A man and a dog are
outdoors and waiting for
their turn to play on a
fenced in green field.

The man and the dog runs onto the field and he throws
the frisbee a far distance and the dog runs and fetches it,
then returns it back to the man and they repeat the
process 6 times.

When they are done, another
man runs to them and hands
the man a leash and he leashes
his dog.

The whole time there are people on the sidelines watching them and taking pictures.
A man and a dog walk onto a field.

A man throws a frisbee and the dog chases after it.
The dog brings the frisbee back to the man.

Start time
End time

Figure 1. Examples of video captioning and dense video captioning (upper row: input video; middle row: the sentence generated
by video captioning method; bottom row: temporally localized
sentences generated by dense video captioning approach.)

or categories. In a further step to describe a video with a
complete and nature sentence, video captioning [19, 32, 34]
has expanded the understanding from individual labels to a
sequence of words to express richer semantics and relationships in the video. Nevertheless, considering that videos in
real life are usually long and contain multiple events, the
conventional video captioning methods generating only one
caption for a video in general will fail to recapitulate all the
events in the video. Take the video in Figure 1 as an example, the output sentence generated by a popular video captioning method [32] is unable to describe the procedure of
“playing frisbee with a dog” in detail. As a result, the task
of dense video captioning is introduced recently in [16] and
the ultimate goal is to generate a sentence for each event
occurring in the video.
The difficulty of dense video captioning originates from
two aspects: 1) how to accurately localize each event in
time? 2) how to design a powerful sentence generation
model? In the literature, there have been several techniques,
including temporal action proposal [2, 3, 6, 17] and image/video captioning [32, 34, 37], being proposed for each
individual aspect. However, simply solving the problem of
dense video captioning in a two-stage way, i.e., first temporal event proposal and then sentence generation, may
destroy the interaction between localizing and describing
events, resulting in a sub-optimal solution.
This paper proposes a novel deep architecture to unify

7492

