Fast and Furious: Real Time End-to-End 3D Detection, Tracking and Motion
Forecasting with a Single Convolutional Net
Wenjie Luo, Bin Yang and Raquel Urtasun
Uber Advanced Technologies Group
University of Toronto
{wenjie, byang10, urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel deep neural network
that is able to jointly reason about 3D detection, tracking and motion forecasting given data captured by a 3D
sensor. By jointly reasoning about these tasks, our holistic approach is more robust to occlusion as well as sparse
data at range. Our approach performs 3D convolutions
across space and time over a bird’s eye view representation of the 3D world, which is very efficient in terms of
both memory and computation. Our experiments on a new
very large scale dataset captured in several north american
cities, show that we can outperform the state-of-the-art by a
large margin. Importantly, by sharing computation we can
perform all tasks in as little as 30 ms.

1. Introduction
Modern approaches to self-driving divide the problem
into four steps: detection, object tracking, motion forecasting and motion planning. A cascade approach is typically
used where the output of the detector is used as input to
the tracker, and its output is fed to a motion forecasting
algorithm that estimates where traffic participants are going to move in the next few seconds. This is in turn fed
to the motion planner that estimates the final trajectory of
the ego-car. These modules are usually learned independently, and uncertainty is usually rarely propagated. This
can result in catastrophic failures as downstream processes
cannot recover from errors that appear at the beginning of
the pipeline.
In contrast, in this paper we propose an end-to-end
fully convolutional approach that performs simultaneous
3D detection, tracking and motion forecasting by exploiting
spatio-temporal information captured by a 3D sensor. We
argue that this is important as tracking and prediction can
help object detection. For example, leveraging tracking and
prediction information can reduce detection false negatives

Figure 1: Overview of our approach: Our F aF network takes multiple frames as input and performs detection,
tracking and motion forecasting.

when dealing with occluded or far away objects. False positives can also be reduced by accumulating evidence over
time. Furthermore, our approach is very efficient as it shares
computations between all these tasks. This is extremely important for autonomous driving where latency can be fatal.
We take advantage of 3D sensors and design a network
that operates on a bird-eye-view (BEV) of the 3D world.
This representation respects the 3D nature of the sensor
data, making the learning process easier as the network can
exploit priors about the typical sizes of objects. Our approach is a one-stage detector that takes a 4D tensor created
from multiple consecutive temporal frames as input and performs 3D convolutions over space and time to extract accurate 3D bounding boxes. Our model produces bounding
boxes not only at the current frame but also multiple timestamps into the future. We decode the tracklets from these
predictions by a simple pooling operation that combine the
evidence from past and current predictions.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our model on a very
large scale dataset captured from multiple vehicles driving
in North-america and show that our approach significantly
13569

