Unsupervised Learning and Segmentation of Complex Activities from Video
Fadime Sener, Angela Yao
University of Bonn, Germany
{sener,yao}@cs.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
This paper presents a new method for unsupervised segmentation of complex activities from video into multiple
steps, or sub-activities, without any textual input. We propose an iterative discriminative-generative approach which
alternates between discriminatively learning the appearance of sub-activities from the videos’ visual features to
sub-activity labels and generatively modelling the temporal structure of sub-activities using a Generalized Mallows
Model. In addition, we introduce a model for background
to account for frames unrelated to the actual activities. Our
approach is validated on the challenging Breakfast Actions
and Inria Instructional Videos datasets and outperforms
both unsupervised and weakly-supervised state of the art.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of understanding complex activities from video sequences. A complex activity is a procedural task with multiple steps or sub-activities that follow
some loose ordering. Complex activities can be found in instructional videos; YouTube hosts hundreds of thousands of
such videos on activities as common as ‘making coffee’ to
the more obscure ‘weaving banana fibre cloths’. Similarly,
in assistive robotics, a robot that can understand and parse
the steps of a household task such as ‘doing laundry’ can
anticipate and support upcoming steps or sub-activities.
Complex activity understanding has received little attention in the computer vision community compared to
the more popular simple action recognition task. In simple action recognition, short, trimmed clips are classified
with single labels, e.g. of sports, playing musical instruments [10, 27], and so on. Performance on simple action
recognition has seen a remarkable boost with the use of
deep architectures [10, 25, 29]. Such methods however are
rarely applicable for temporally localizing and/or classifying actions from longer, untrimmed video sequences, usually due to the lack of temporal consideration. Even works
which do incorporate some modelling of temporal structure [4, 24, 28, 29] do little more than capturing frame-toframe changes, which is why the state of the art still relies

on either optical flow [25] or dense trajectories [29, 30].
Moving towards understanding complex activities then becomes even more challenging, as it requires not only parsing long video sequences into semantically meaningful subactivities, but also capturing the temporal relationships that
occur between these sub-activities.
We aim to discover and segment the steps of a complex
activity from collections of video in an unsupervised way
based purely on visual inputs. Within the same activity
class, it is likely that videos share common steps and follow
a similar temporal ordering. To date, works in a similar vein
of unsupervised learning all require inputs from narration;
the sub-activities and sequence information are extracted either entirely from [17, 1], or rely heavily [23] on text. Such
works assume that the text is well-aligned with the visual
information of the video so that visual representations of
the sub-activity are learned from within the text’s temporal
bounds. This is not always the case for instructional videos,
as it is far more natural for the human narrator to first speak
about what will be done, and then carry out the action. Finally, reliably parsing spoken natural language into scripts1
is an unsolved and open research topic in itself. As such, it
is in our interest to rely only on visual inputs.
In this work, we propose an iterative model which alternates between learning a discriminative representation of
a video’s visual features to sub-activities and a generative
model of the sub-activities’ temporal structure. By combining the sub-activity representations with the temporal
model, we arrive at a segmentation of the video sequence,
which is then used to update the visual representations (see
Fig. 1a). We represent sub-activities by learning linear mappings from visual features to a low dimensional embedding
space with a ranking loss. The mappings are optimized such
that visual features from the same sub-activity are pushed
together, while different sub-activities are pulled apart.
Temporally, we treat a complex activity as a sequence
of permutable sub-activities and model the distribution
over permutations with a Generalized Mallows Model
(GMM) [5]. GMMs have been successfully used in the NLP
1 Here, we refer to the NLP definition of script as “a predetermined,
stereotyped sequence of actions that define a well-known situation” [22].

8368

