Objects as context for detecting their semantic parts
Abel Gonzalez-Garcia

Davide Modolo

Vittorio Ferrari

a.gonzalez-garcia@sms.ed.ac.uk

davide.modolo@gmail.com

vferrari@staffmail.ed.ac.uk

University of Edinburgh

Abstract
We present a semantic part detection approach that effectively leverages object information. We use the object
appearance and its class as indicators of what parts to expect. We also model the expected relative location of parts
inside the objects based on their appearance. We achieve
this with a new network module, called OffsetNet, that efficiently predicts a variable number of part locations within
a given object. Our model incorporates all these cues to
detect parts in the context of their objects. This leads to
considerably higher performance for the challenging task
of part detection compared to using part appearance alone
(+5 mAP on the PASCAL-Part dataset). We also compare
to other part detection methods on both PASCAL-Part and
CUB200-2011 datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic parts play an important role in visual recognition. They offer many advantages such as lower intraclass variability than whole objects, higher robustness to
pose variation, and their configuration provides useful information about the aspect of the object. For these reasons, part-based models have gained attention for tasks such
as fine-grained recognition [1–10], object class detection
and segmentation [11–13], or attribute prediction [14–16].
Moreover, part localizations deliver a more comprehensive
image understanding, enabling reasoning about object-part
interactions in semantic terms. Despite their importance,
many part-based models detect semantic parts based only
on their local appearance [1–5, 11, 14, 15, 17]. While some
works [6–10, 12, 16] leverage other types of information,
they use parts mostly as support for other tasks. Part detection is rarely their focus. Here we take part detection one
step further and provide a specialized approach that exploits
the unique nature of this task.
Parts are highly dependent on the objects that contain
them. Hence, objects provide valuable cues to help detecting parts, creating an advantage over detecting them independently. First, the class of the object gives a firm indication of what parts should be inside it, i.e. only those belonging to that object class. For example, a dark round patch
should be more confidently classified as a wheel if it is on

Figure 1. Motivation for our model. Part appearance alone
might not be sufficiently discriminative in some cases. Our model
uses object context to resolve ambiguities and help part detection.

a car, rather than on a dog (fig. 1). Furthermore, by looking
at the object appearance we can determine in greater detail
which parts might be present. For example, a profile view
of a car suggests the presence of a car door, and the absence of the licence plate. This information comes mostly
through the viewpoint of the object, but also from other factors, such as the type of object (e.g. van), or whether the object is truncated (e.g. no wheels if the lower half is missing).
Second, objects also provide information about the location
and shape of the parts they contain. Semantic parts appear
in very distinctive locations within objects, especially given
the object appearance. Moreover, they appear in characteristic relative sizes and aspect ratios. For example, wheels
tend to be near the lower corners of car profile views, often
in a square aspect ratio, and appear rather small.
In this work, we propose a dedicated part detection
model that leverages all of the above object information. We
start from a popular Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
detection model [18], which considers the appearance of local image regions only. We extend this model to incorporate object information that complements part appearance
by providing context in terms of object appearance, class
and the relative locations of parts within the object.
We evaluate our part detection model on all 16 object classes in the PASCAL-Part dataset [11]. We demonstrate that adding object information is greatly beneficial
for the difficult task of part detection, leading to considerable performance improvements. Compared to a base16907

