Interpretable Convolutional Neural Networks
Quanshi Zhang, Ying Nian Wu, and Song-Chun Zhu
University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [14, 12, 7] have
achieved superior performance in many visual tasks, such as
object classification and detection. Besides the discrimination power, model interpretability is another crucial property for neural networks. However, the interpretability is
always an Achilles’ heel of CNNs, and has presented challenges for decades.
In this paper, we focus on a new problem, i.e. without
any additional human supervision, can we modify a CNN to
make its conv-layers obtain interpretable knowledge representations? We expect the CNN to have a certain introspection of its representations during the end-to-end learning
process, so that the CNN can regularize its representations
to ensure high interpretability. Our problem of improving
CNN interpretability is different from conventional off-line
visualization [34, 17, 24, 4, 5, 21] and diagnosis [2, 10, 18]
of pre-trained CNN representations.
Bau et al. [2] defined six kinds of semantics in CNNs,
i.e. objects, parts, scenes, textures, materials, and colors.

Y

S v r l ullyonn t l y rs

F tur m ps o
onv-l y r omput

rt n lt r n
us n
r nt m

F tur m ps o

n nt rpr t

l

F tur m ps o

n or n ry lt r

s

lt r

Conv-l y r L
Conv-l y r L-1

…

This paper proposes a method to modify a traditional
convolutional neural network (CNN) into an interpretable
CNN, in order to clarify knowledge representations in high
conv-layers of the CNN. In an interpretable CNN, each filter in a high conv-layer represents a specific object part.
Our interpretable CNNs use the same training data as ordinary CNNs without a need for any annotations of object
parts or textures for supervision. The interpretable CNN
automatically assigns each filter in a high conv-layer with
an object part during the learning process. We can apply
our method to different types of CNNs with various structures. The explicit knowledge representation in an interpretable CNN can help people understand the logic inside
a CNN, i.e. what patterns are memorized by the CNN for
prediction. Experiments have shown that filters in an interpretable CNN are more semantically meaningful than those
in a traditional CNN. The code is available at https:
//github.com/zqs1022/interpretableCNN .

Output

Conv-l y r 1

Figure 1. Comparison of a filter’s feature maps in an interpretable
CNN and those in a traditional CNN.

In fact, we can roughly consider the first two semantics as
object-part patterns with specific shapes, and summarize the
last four semantics as texture patterns without clear contours. Moreover, filters in low conv-layers usually describe
simple textures, whereas filters in high conv-layers are more
likely to represent object parts.
Therefore, in this study, we aim to train each filter in a
high conv-layer to represent an object part. Fig. 1 shows the
difference between a traditional CNN and our interpretable
CNN. In a traditional CNN, a high-layer filter may describe
a mixture of patterns, i.e. the filter may be activated by both
the head part and the leg part of a cat. Such complex representations in high conv-layers significantly decrease the
network interpretability. In contrast, the filter in our interpretable CNN is activated by a certain part. In this way, we
can explicitly identify which object parts are memorized by
CNN filters for classification without ambiguity. The goal
of this study can be summarized as follows.
• We propose to slightly revise a CNN to improve its
interpretability, which can be broadly applied to CNNs
with different structures.
• We do not need any annotations of object parts or textures for supervision. Instead, our method automatically pushes the representation of each filter towards
an object part.
• The interpretable CNN does not change the loss function on the top layer and uses the same training samples as the original CNN.
18827

