Pix3D: Dataset and Methods for Single-Image 3D Shape Modeling
Xingyuan Sun∗1,2 Jiajun Wu∗1 Xiuming Zhang1 Zhoutong Zhang1
Chengkai Zhang1 Tianfan Xue3 Joshua B. Tenenbaum1 William T. Freeman1,3
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

3

Google Research

Mismatched 3D shapes

Well-aligned images and shapes

Imprecise pose annotations

Our Dataset: Pix3D

Existing Datasets

Figure 1: We present Pix3D, a new large-scale dataset of diverse image-shape pairs. Each 3D shape in Pix3D is associated with a rich and
diverse set of images, each with an accurate 3D pose annotation to ensure precise 2D-3D alignment. In comparison, existing datasets have
limitations: 3D models may not match the objects in images; pose annotations may be imprecise; or the dataset may be relatively small.

Abstract
We study 3D shape modeling from a single image and make
contributions to it in three aspects. First, we present Pix3D,
a large-scale benchmark of diverse image-shape pairs with
pixel-level 2D-3D alignment. Pix3D has wide applications in
shape-related tasks including reconstruction, retrieval, viewpoint estimation, etc. Building such a large-scale dataset,
however, is highly challenging; existing datasets either contain only synthetic data, or lack precise alignment between
2D images and 3D shapes, or only have a small number of
images. Second, we calibrate the evaluation criteria for 3D
shape reconstruction through behavioral studies, and use
them to objectively and systematically benchmark cuttingedge reconstruction algorithms on Pix3D. Third, we design
a novel model that simultaneously performs 3D reconstruction and pose estimation; our multi-task learning approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance on both tasks.

1. Introduction
The computer vision community has put major efforts in
building datasets. In 3D vision, there are rich 3D CAD model
∗ indicates equal contributions.

repositories like ShapeNet [7] and the Princeton Shape Benchmark [49], large-scale datasets associating images and shapes
like Pascal 3D+ [64] and ObjectNet3D [63], and benchmarks
with fine-grained pose annotations for shapes in images like
IKEA [38]. Why do we need one more?
Looking into Figure 1, we realize existing datasets have
limitations for the task of modeling a 3D object from a single
image. ShapeNet is a large dataset for 3D models, but does
not come with real images; Pascal 3D+ and ObjectNet3D have
real images, but the image-shape alignment is rough because
the 3D models do not match the objects in images; IKEA has
high-quality image-3D alignment, but it only contains 90 3D
models and 759 images.
We desire a dataset that has all three merits—a large-scale
dataset of real images and ground-truth shapes with precise
2D-3D alignment. Our dataset, named Pix3D, has 395 3D
shapes of nine object categories. Each shape associates with
a set of real images, capturing the exact object in diverse
environments. Further, the 10,069 image-shape pairs have
precise 3D annotations, giving pixel-level alignment between
shapes and their silhouettes in the images.
Building such a dataset, however, is highly challenging.
For each object, it is difficult to simultaneously collect its
high-quality geometry and in-the-wild images. We can crawl

2974

