Indoor RGB-D Compass from a Single Line and Plane
Pyojin Kim1

Brian Coltin2

H. Jin Kim1

pjinkim1215@gmail.com

brian.j.coltin@nasa.gov

hjinkim@snu.ac.kr

1
2

ASRI, Seoul National University, South Korea
SGT, Inc., NASA Ames Research Center, USA

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to estimate the three degrees of freedom (DoF) drift-free rotational motion of an
RGB-D camera from only a single line and plane in the
Manhattan world (MW). Previous approaches exploit the
surface normal vectors and vanishing points to achieve accurate 3-DoF rotation estimation. However, they require
multiple orthogonal planes or many consistent lines to be
visible throughout the entire rotation estimation process;
otherwise, these approaches fail. To overcome these limitations, we present a new method that estimates absolute camera orientation from only a single line and a single plane
in RANSAC, which corresponds to the theoretical minimal
sampling for 3-DoF rotation estimation. Once we find an
initial rotation estimate, we refine the camera orientation by
minimizing the average orthogonal distance from the endpoints of the lines parallel to the MW axes. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm through an extensive evaluation on a variety of RGB-D datasets and compare with other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Camera orientation estimation from a sequence of images is a fundamental problem for many applications in
computer vision [23, 10] and robotics [20, 25]. Recent visual odometry (VO) and visual simultaneous localization
and mapping (V-SLAM) methods [7, 9, 18] have shown
promising results in estimating camera orientation from a
variety of video sequences. However, these approaches cannot avoid drift error in the rotation estimate without computationally expensive SLAM techniques (loop closure, global
3D map construction).
Several studies [2, 6, 25, 14] have focused on accurate and drift-free rotation estimation in urban and indoor scenes consisting of parallel and orthogonal lines and
planes, called the Manhattan world (MW) [4]. They exploit structural regularities to achieve accurate 3-DoF ro-

VP3

VP1

x

Z
VP2

Y

Figure 1. In an uncharacteristic scene (top left), given a single line
detected in the RGB image (top right) and a single plane identified
in the depth image (bottom left), the proposed method can estimate
drift-free camera orientation and VPs (bottom right).

tation estimation by using the distribution of surface normal vectors and points at infinity, i.e., vanishing points
(VPs). The accuracy of VO has been improved dramatically
in [30, 16, 15] by using the MW assumption in rotation estimation. Although they can estimate the rotational motion of
the camera accurately by exploiting significant structural organization, there are still some problems: multiple orthogonal planes or many consistent lines must remain visible
throughout the entire video sequence. In practice, robots
often encounter harsh environments where there are insufficient structural regularities (see Fig. 1 and Fig. 7), resulting
in the failure of rotation estimation or a loss of accuracy.
To address these issues, we propose a novel approach
that estimates absolute 3-DoF camera orientation from only
a single line and plane to recognize the spatial regularities
of structural environments as shown in Fig. 1. We detect
and track the normal vector of a plane from the depth image
in order to determine two orientation angles of the 3-DoF
rotation. The remaining orientation angle is computed with
14673

