Learning Answer Embeddings for Visual Question Answering
Hexiang Hu∗
U. of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

Wei-Lun Chao∗
U. of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

Fei Sha
U. of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

hexiang.frank.hu@gmail.com

weilunchao760414@gmail.com

feisha@usc.edu

Q1: Where is the ball?

Abstract

The little boy.
In the air.

We propose a novel probabilistic model for visual question answering (Visual QA). The key idea is to infer two
sets of embeddings: one for the image and the question
jointly and the other for the answers. The learning objective is to learn the best parameterization of those embeddings such that the correct answer has higher likelihood
among all possible answers. In contrast to several existing approaches of treating Visual QA as multi-way classification, the proposed approach takes the semantic relationships (as characterized by the embeddings) among answers
into consideration, instead of viewing them as independent
ordinal numbers. Thus, the learned embedded function can
be used to embed unseen answers (in the training dataset).
These properties make the approach particularly appealing
for transfer learning for open-ended Visual QA, where the
source dataset on which the model is learned has limited
overlapping with the target dataset in the space of answers.
We have also developed large-scale optimization techniques
for applying the model to datasets with a large number of
answers, where the challenge is to properly normalize the
proposed probabilistic models. We validate our approach
on several Visual QA datasets and investigate its utility for
transferring models across datasets. The empirical results
have shown that the approach performs well not only on
in-domain learning but also on transfer learning.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (Visual QA) has made significant progress in the last few years. More than 10 datasets
have been released for the task [10, 14, 25], together with
a number of learning models that have been narrowing
the gap between the human’s performance and the machine’s [28, 7, 18, 15, 27].
In this task, the machine is presented with an image and a
related question and needs to output a correct answer. There
∗

Equal contributions

Image + Question
Embedding

Answer
Embedding

In the basket.
The player.
The woman.

Q2: Who is holding the bat?

Joint Embedding Space

The man in the
white uniform.

Figure 1. Conceptual diagram of our approach. We learn two embedding functions to transform image question pair (i, q) and (possible) answer a into a joint embedding space. The distance (by inner products) between the embedded (i, q) and a is then measured
and the closest a (in red) would be selected as the output answer.

are several ways of “outputting”, though. One way is to
ask the machine to generate a piece of free-form texts [8].
However, this often requires humans to decide whether the
answer is correct or not. Thus, scaling this type of evaluation to assess a large amount of data (on a large number of
models) is challenging.
Automatic evaluation procedures have the advantage of
scaling up. There are two major paradigms. One is to use
multiple-choice based Visual QA [32, 1, 22]. In this setup,
for each pair of image and question, a correct answer is
mixed with a set of incorrect answers and the learner optimizes to select the correct one. While popular, it is difficult to design good incorrect answers without bias such
that learners are not able to exploit [5]. Several recent papers [5, 13] have shown that even when the image or the
question is missing, the correct answer can still be identified (using the incidental statistics, i.e., bias, in the data).
The other paradigm that is amenable to automatic evaluation revises the pool of possible answers to be the same
for any pair of image and question [9, 3], i.e., open-ended
Visual QA. In particular, the pool is composed of most frequent K answers in the training dataset. This has the advantage of framing the task as a multi-way classifier that
outputs one of the K categories, with the image and the
question as the input to the classifier.
However, while alleviating the bias of introducing incorrect answers that are image and question specific, the openend Visual QA approaches also suffer from several prob15428

