FoldingNet: Point Cloud Auto-encoder via Deep Grid Deformation
Yaoqing Yang†

Chen Feng‡

Yiru Shen§

Dong Tian‡

yyaoqing@andrew.cmu.edu

cfeng@merl.com

yirus@g.clemson.edu

tian@merl.com

†

Carnegie Mellon University

‡

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)

Abstract
Recent deep networks that directly handle points in a
point set, e.g., PointNet, have been state-of-the-art for supervised learning tasks on point clouds such as classification and segmentation. In this work, a novel end-to-end
deep auto-encoder is proposed to address unsupervised learning challenges on point clouds. On the encoder side,
a graph-based enhancement is enforced to promote local
structures on top of PointNet. Then, a novel folding-based
decoder deforms a canonical 2D grid onto the underlying
3D object surface of a point cloud, achieving low reconstruction errors even for objects with delicate structures.
The proposed decoder only uses about 7% parameters of
a decoder with fully-connected neural networks, yet leads
to a more discriminative representation that achieves higher linear SVM classification accuracy than the benchmark.
In addition, the proposed decoder structure is shown, in
theory, to be a generic architecture that is able to reconstruct an arbitrary point cloud from a 2D grid. Our code
is available at http://www.merl.com/research/
license#FoldingNet

1. Introduction
3D point cloud processing and understanding are usually deemed more challenging than 2D images mainly due
to a fact that point cloud samples live on an irregular structure while 2D image samples (pixels) rely on a 2D grid in
the image plane with a regular spacing. Point cloud geometry is typically represented by a set of sparse 3D points.
Such a data format makes it difficult to apply traditional
deep learning framework. E.g. for each sample, traditional convolutional neural network (CNN) requires its neighboring samples to appear at some fixed spatial orientations
and distances so as to facilitate the convolution. Unfortunately, point cloud samples typically do not follow such constraints. One way to alleviate the problem is to voxelize
a point cloud to mimic the image representation and then
to operate on voxels. The downside is that voxelization has
to either sacrifice the representation accuracy or incurs huge
redundancies, that may pose an unnecessary cost in the sub-

Input

2D grid

§

Clemson University

1st folding

2nd folding

Table 1. Illustration of the two-step-folding decoding. Column
one contains the original point cloud samples from the ShapeNet
dataset [57]. Column two illustrates the 2D grid points to be folded during decoding. Column three contains the output after one
folding operation. Column four contains the output after two folding operations. This output is also the reconstructed point cloud.
We use a color gradient to illustrate the correspondence between
the 2D grid in column two and the reconstructed point clouds after
folding operations in the last two columns. Best viewed in color.

sequent processing, either at a compromised performance or
an rapidly increased processing complexity. Related priorarts will be reviewed in Section 1.1.
In this work, we focus on the emerging field of unsupervised learning for point clouds. We propose an autoencoder (AE) that is referenced as FoldingNet. The output
from the bottleneck layer in the auto-encoder is called a codeword that can be used as a high-dimensional embedding
of an input point cloud. We are going to show that a 2D
grid structure is not only a sampling structure for imaging,
but can indeed be used to construct a point cloud through

206

