Feature Super-Resolution: Make Machine See More Clearly
Weimin Tan, Bo Yan∗, Bahetiyaer Bare
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
{wmtan14, byan, bahtiyarbari16}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Feature
Super-Resolution

濷

Identifying small size images or small objects is a notoriously challenging problem, as discriminative representations are difficult to learn from the limited information contained in them with poor-quality appearance and unclear
object structure. Existing research works usually increase
the resolution of low-resolution image in the pixel space in
order to provide better visual quality for human viewing.
However, the improved performance of such methods is usually limited or even trivial in the case of very small image
size (we will show it in this paper explicitly).
In this paper, different from image super-resolution (ISR), we propose a novel super-resolution technique called
feature super-resolution (FSR), which aims at enhancing
the discriminatory power of small size image in order to
provide high recognition precision for machine. To achieve
this goal, we propose a new Feature Super-Resolution Generative Adversarial Network (FSR-GAN) model that transforms the raw poor features of small size images to highly
discriminative ones by performing super-resolution in the
feature space. Our FSR-GAN consists of two subnetworks: a feature generator network G and a feature discriminator network D. By training the G and the D networks
in an alternative manner, we encourage the G network to
discover the latent distribution correlations between small
size and large size images and then use G to improve the
representations of small images. Extensive experiment results on Oxford5K, Paris, Holidays, and Flick100k datasets
demonstrate that the proposed FSR approach can effectively enhance the discriminatory ability of features. Even when
the resolution of query images is reduced greatly, e.g., 1/64
original size, the query feature enhanced by our FSR approach achieves surprisingly high retrieval performance at
different image resolutions and increases the retrieval precision by 25% compared to the raw query feature.

∗ This work was supported by NSFC (Grant No.:
61772137).

61522202;

濷
High Discriminative
Feature

Low Discriminative
Feature

Recognition

(a) Feature Super-Resolution: a novel super-resolution approach
for enhancing the discriminatory power of a given feature

Image
Super-Resolution
low-resolution image

high-resolution image

Viewing

(b) Image Super-Resolution: a popular technique for increasing
the resolution of a given image.

Figure 1. Feature super-resolution (FSR) versus image superresolution (ISR). (a) We propose a novel super-resolution technique called feature super-resolution (FSR), which aims at enhancing the discriminatory power of a given representation (extracted from low-resolution images or small objects) in order to providing high recognition precision for machine. (b) Image superresolution as a popular technique aims at increasing the resolution
of a given image in order to providing better visual quality for human viewing.

1. Introduction
The powerful deep learning framework makes numerous great classification models presented, such as VGG16
[18], GoogLeNet [19], ResNet [7], SeNet [8], etc. These
models achieve an amazing recognition accuracy on Imagenet dataset [2], even better than human beings do. Actually, they indeed work well on large size images with goodquality appearance and rich object structure. However, they
usually fail to identify very small size images since discriminative representations are difficult to learn from their lowresolution and noise representation. Small size images or
objects are very common in many real-world scenarios such
as small pedestrians in surveillance video, small faces in the
crowd, traffic signs, small objects, etc. Small size image
recognition is much more challenging than normal image
recognition and there are rare good solutions so far.
Current research works such as image super-resolution
(ISR) focus on increasing the resolution of a given image.
Its most common application is to provide better visual
quality after resizing a digital image for human viewing,
4321
3994

