Multi-Cell Detection and Classification using a Generative Convolutional Model
Florence Yellin

Benjamin D. Haeffele

Sophie Roth

René Vidal

Johns Hopkins University

Johns Hopkins University

IMEC

Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Detecting, counting, and classifying various cell types in
images of human blood is important in many biomedical applications. However, these tasks can be very difficult due to
the wide range of biological variability and the resolution
limitations of many imaging modalities. This paper proposes a new approach to detecting, counting and classifying
white blood cell populations in holographic images, which
capitalizes on the fact that the variability in a mixture of
blood cells is constrained by physiology. The proposed approach is based on a probabilistic generative model that describes an image of a population of cells as the sum of atoms
from a convolutional dictionary of cell templates. The class
of each template is drawn from a prior distribution that
captures statistical information about blood cell mixtures.
The parameters of the prior distribution are learned from
a database of complete blood count results obtained from
patients, and the cell templates are learned from images
of purified cells from a single cell class using an extension of convolutional dictionary learning. Cell detection,
counting and classification is then done using an extension
of convolutional sparse coding that accounts for class proportion priors. This method has been successfully used to
detect, count and classify white blood cell populations in
holographic images of lysed blood obtained from 20 normal blood donors and 12 abnormal clinical blood discard
samples. The error from our method is under 6.8% for all
class populations, compared to errors of over 28.6% for all
other methods tested.

1. Introduction
Object detection and classification in images of biological specimens has many potential applications in diagnosing disease and predicting patient outcome. However, due
to the wide range of possible imaging modalities, biological data can potentially suffer from low resolution images
or significant biological variability from patient to patient.
Moreover, many state-of-the-art object detection and classification methods in computer vision require large amounts
of annotated data for training, but such annotations are often
not readily available for biological images, as the annotator
must be an expert in the specific type of biological data. Ad-

ditionally, many state-of-the-art object detection and classification methods are designed for images containing a small
number of object instances per class, while biological images can contain thousands of object instances.
One particular application that highlights many of these
challenges is holographic lens-free imaging (LFI). LFI is
often used in medical applications of microscopy due to its
ability to produce images of cells with a large field of view
(FOV) with minimal hardware requirements. However, a
key challenge is that the resolution of LFI is often low when
the FOV is large, making it difficult to detect and classify
cells [1] [6] [4]. The task of cell classification is further
complicated due to the fact that cell morphologies can also
vary dramatically from person to person, especially when
disease is involved. Additionally, annotations are typically
not available for individual cells in the image, and one might
only be able to obtain estimates of the expected proportions
of various cell classes via the use of a commercial hematology blood analyzer.
In prior work [15, 16], LFI images have been used for
counting fluorescently labeled white blood cells (WBCs),
but not for the more difficult task of classifying WBCs into
their various subtypes, e.g., monocytes, lymphocytes, and
granulocytes. In [10], the authors suggest using LFI images
of stained WBCs for classification, but they do not provide
quantitative classification results. Existing work on WBC
classification uses high-resolution images of stained cells
from a conventional microscope and attempts to classify
cells using hand-crafted features and/or neural networks
[2, 11, 9, 3]. However, without staining and/or high resolution images, the cell details (i.e., nucleus and cytoplasm)
are not readily visible, making our task of WBC classification significantly more difficult. Furthermore, purely datadriven approaches, such as neural networks, typically require large amounts of annotated data to succeed, which is
not available for lens free images of WBCs.
Paper contributions. This paper considers the problem of
detecting, counting, and classifying various subcategories
of WBCs, e.g. monocytes, lymphocytes, and granulocytes,
in reconstructed lens free images. Unlike typical computer
vision problems, each image has hundreds to thousands of
instances of each object category and each training image

8953

