Rotation Averaging and Strong Duality
Anders Eriksson1 , Carl Olsson2,3 , Fredrik Kahl2,3 and Tat-Jun Chin4
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology
3
Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University
4
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide

Abstract
In this paper we explore the role of duality principles
within the problem of rotation averaging, a fundamental
task in a wide range of computer vision applications. In
its conventional form, rotation averaging is stated as a minimization over multiple rotation constraints. As these constraints are non-convex, this problem is generally considered challenging to solve globally. We show how to circumvent this difficulty through the use of Lagrangian duality.
While such an approach is well-known it is normally not
guaranteed to provide a tight relaxation. Based on spectral
graph theory, we analytically prove that in many cases there
is no duality gap unless the noise levels are severe. This allows us to obtain certifiably global solutions to a class of
important non-convex problems in polynomial time.
We also propose an efficient, scalable algorithm that outperforms general purpose numerical solvers and is able to
handle the large problem instances commonly occurring in
structure from motion settings. The potential of this proposed method is demonstrated on a number of different
problems, consisting of both synthetic and real-world data.

1. Introduction
Rotation averaging appears as a subproblem in many
important applications in computer vision, robotics, sensor networks and related areas. Given a number of relative rotation estimates between pairs of poses, the goal is to
compute absolute camera orientations with respect to some
common coordinate system. In computer vision, for instance, non-sequential structure from motion systems such
as [21, 11, 22] rely on rotation averaging to initialize bundle
adjustment. The overall idea is to consider as much data as
possible in each step to avoid suboptimal reconstructions.
In the context of rotation averaging this amounts to using as
many camera pairs as possible.
The problem can be thought of as inference on the camera graph. An edge (i, j) in this undirected graph represents
a relative rotation measurement R̃ij and the objective is to
find the absolute orientation Ri for each vertex i such that
Ri R̃ij = Rj holds (approximately in the presence of noise)

Figure 1: In many structure from motion pipelines, camera orientations are estimated with rotation averaging followed by recovery of camera centres (red) and 3D structure
(blue). Here are three solutions corresponding to different
local minima of the same rotation averaging problem.
for all edges. The problem is generally considered difficult
due to the need to enforce non-convex rotation constraints.
Indeed, both L1 and L2 formulations of rotation averaging
can have local minima, see Fig. 1. Wilson et al. [28] studied
local convexity of the problem and showed that instances
with large loosely connected graphs are hard to solve with
local, iterative optimization methods.
In contrast, our focus is on global optimality. In this
paper we show that convex relaxation methods can in fact
overcome the difficulties with local minima in rotation averaging. We utilize Lagrangian duality to handle the quadratic
non-convex rotation constraints. While such an approach is
normally not guaranteed to provide a tight relaxation we
give analytical error bounds that guarantee there will be no
duality gap. For instance, it is sufficient that each angular
residual is less than 42.9◦ to ensure optimality for complete
camera graphs. Additionally, we develop a scalable and efficient algorithm, based on block coordinate descent, that
outperforms standard semidefinite program (SDP) solvers
for this problem.
Related work.
Rotation averaging has been under intense study in recent years, see [19, 20, 21, 2, 25, 8]. Despite
progress in practical algorithms, they largely come without
guarantees. One of the earliest averaging methods was due
to Govindu [15], who showed that when representing the
rotations with quaternions the problem can be viewed as a
linear homogeneous least squares problem. There is however a sign ambiguity in the quaternion representation that
has to be resolved before the formulation can be applied. It
1127

