Shape from Shading through Shape Evolution
Dawei Yang Jia Deng
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan
{ydawei,jiadeng}@umich.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we address the shape-from-shading problem by training deep networks with synthetic images. Unlike conventional approaches that combine deep learning
and synthetic imagery, we propose an approach that does
not need any external shape dataset to render synthetic images. Our approach consists of two synergistic processes:
the evolution of complex shapes from simple primitives, and
the training of a deep network for shape-from-shading. The
evolution generates better shapes guided by the network
training, while the training improves by using the evolved
shapes. We show that our approach achieves state-of-theart performance on a shape-from-shading benchmark.

1. Introduction
Shape from Shading (SFS) is a classic computer vision
problem at the core of single-image 3D reconstruction [44].
Shading cues play an important role in recovering geometry
and are especially critical for textureless surfaces.
Traditionally, Shape from Shading has been approached
as an optimization problem where the task is to solve for a
plausible shape that can generate the pixels under a Lambertian shading model [43, 15, 5, 4, 3]. The key challenge is to
design an appropriate optimization objective to sufficiently
constrain the solution space, and to design an optimization
algorithm to find a good solution efficiently.
In this paper, we address Shape from Shading by training deep networks on synthetic images. This follows an
emerging line of work on single-image 3D reconstruction
that combines synthetic imagery and deep learning [36, 25,
24, 45, 29, 37, 10, 42, 6]. Such an approach does away
with the manual design of optimization objectives and algorithms, and instead trains a deep network to directly estimate shape. This approach can take advantage of a large
amount of training data, and has shown great promise on
tasks such as view point estimation [36], 3D object reconstruction and recognition [37, 10, 42], and normal estimation in indoor scenes [45].
One limitation of this data-driven approach, however, is

availability of 3D shapes needed for rendering synthetic images. Existing approaches have relied on manually constructed [8, 41, 1] or scanned shapes [9]. But such datasets
can be expensive to build. Furthermore, while synthetic
datasets can be augmented with varying viewpoints and
lighting, they are still constrained by the number of distinct shapes, which may limit the ability of trained models
to generalize to real images.
An intriguing question is whether it would be possible to
do away with manually curated 3D shapes while still being
able to use synthetic images to train deep networks. Our key
hypothesis is that shapes are compositional and we should
be able to compose complex shapes from simple primitives.
The challenge is how to enable automatic composition and
how to ensure that the composed shapes are useful for training deep networks.
We propose an evolutionary algorithm that jointly generates 3D shapes and trains a shape-from-shading deep network. We evolve complex shapes entirely from simple
primitives such as spheres and cubes, and do so in tandem with the training of a deep network to perform shape
from shading. The evolution of shapes and the training of
a deep network collaborate—the former generates shapes
needed by the latter, and the latter provides feedback to
guide the former. Our approach is significantly novel compared to prior works that use synthetic images to train deep
networks, because they have all relied on manually curated
shape datasets [36, 24, 45, 37].
In this algorithm, we represent each shape using an implicit function [28]. Each function is composed of simple
primitives, and the composition is encoded as a computation graph. Starting from simple primitives such as spheres
and cubes, we evolve a population of shapes through transformations and compositions defined over graphs. We render synthetic images from each shape in the population and
use the synthetic images to train a shape-from-shading network. The performance of the network on a validation set
of real images is then used to define the fitness score of
each shape. In each round of the evolution, fitter shapes
have better chance of survival whereas less fit shapes tend
to be eliminated. The end result is a population of surviving

3781

