Modeling Facial Geometry using Compositional VAEs
Timur Bagautdinov∗1 , Chenglei Wu2 , Jason Saragih2 , Pascal Fua1 , Yaser Sheikh2
1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
2
Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch, {firstname.lastname}@fb.com

Abstract
We propose a method for learning non-linear face geometry representations using deep generative models. Our
model is a variational autoencoder with multiple levels of
hidden variables where lower layers capture global geometry and higher ones encode more local deformations. Based
on that, we propose a new parameterization of facial geometry that naturally decomposes the structure of the human
face into a set of semantically meaningful levels of detail.
This parameterization enables us to do model fitting while
capturing varying level of detail under different types of geometrical constraints.

1. Introduction
Building robust and expressive face models is challenging because they must be able to capture deformations at
many different scales. These range from large ones to represent the overall shape of specific person’s face to small ones
to capture subtle expressions such as a smirk or a frown.
Most existing methods can be roughly split into two categories depending on whether they use global linear models [3, 18, 9] or local ones [34, 39]. While the former are
simple to use and usually robust to noise and mismatches,
the underlying linear space is over-constrained and does not
provide sufficient flexibility to represent high-frequency deformations. By contrast local models bring flexibility by
separately modeling local deformations. However, they are
also more vulnerable to noise and outliers, and can easily
produce non-face shapes. Even recent hybrid methods that
enforce global anatomical constraints [39] remain limited
to person-specific settings and it is not clear how to extend
them to capture facial features across multiple identities.
With the advent of Deep Learning, there have been several attempts at using deep nets for data-driven face reconstruction [35, 11, 29]. However, these methods still rely on
global linear models, which precludes from performing re∗ Work done during an internship at Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh.

quired multi-scale modeling.
In this work, we propose a novel method to model multiscale face geometry that learns the facial geometry from
the data without making any restrictive linear assumptions.
Our approach starts with the observation that both global
and local linear models can be viewed as specific instances
of autoencoders. They can therefore both be incorporated
into a generic compositional architecture that combines the
strengths of both local and global models, while being completely data-driven. In particular, our approach features a
new Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with multiple layers of
hidden variables that capture various level of geometrical
details. In effect, some network layers capture the lowfrequency geometry while others represent high-frequency
details.
In the experimental evaluation we demonstrate our
model’s effectiveness on a variety of fitting tasks, including dense depth data, sparse 2D and 3D correspondences, as
well as shape-from-shading reconstruction. We show that it
can capture high-quality face geometry even when trained
using a database featuring only 16 different people.
In short, our main contribution is a model that encodes facial geometry over a range of scales and generalizes to new identities and arbitrary expressions, while being learned from a small number of different people. The
last point is important because creating databases of highquality meshes that cover a wide range of human expressions and a large number of different identities is both expensive and time-consuming.

2. Related Work
One of the main motivations of our work is to demonstrate that it is possible to use deep generative models to
learn meaningful geometric representations directly from
the data. In this section, we therefore first review existing face models and several recent efforts on applying deep
learning to data-driven face reconstruction. We then give a
very brief introduction into deep generative models with a
focus on VAEs.
13877

