PAD-Net: Multi-Tasks Guided Prediction-and-Distillation Network
for Simultaneous Depth Estimation and Scene Parsing
Dan Xu1 ,
1

Wanli Ouyang2 ,

Xiaogang Wang3 ,

Nicu Sebe1

The University of Trento, 2 The University of Sydney, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{dan.xu, niculae.sebe}@unitn.it

wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Depth estimation and scene parsing are two particularly
important tasks in visual scene understanding. In this paper we tackle the problem of simultaneous depth estimation
and scene parsing in a joint CNN. The task can be typically
treated as a deep multi-task learning problem [42]. Different from previous methods directly optimizing multiple
tasks given the input training data, this paper proposes a
novel multi-task guided prediction-and-distillation network
(PAD-Net), which first predicts a set of intermediate auxiliary tasks ranging from low level to high level, and then
the predictions from these intermediate auxiliary tasks are
utilized as multi-modal input via our proposed multi-modal
distillation modules for the final tasks. During the joint
learning, the intermediate tasks not only act as supervision
for learning more robust deep representations but also provide rich multi-modal information for improving the final
tasks. Extensive experiments are conducted on two challenging datasets (i.e. NYUD-v2 and Cityscapes) for both
the depth estimation and scene parsing tasks, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

INPUT RGB

CNN

DEPTH

SURFACE NORMAL

SEMANTIC

CONTOUR

CNN

Intermediate Auxiliary Multiple Tasks

Depth Estimation

Scene Parsing

Final Main Tasks

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Motivation illustration. The proposed approach utilizes
multiple intermediate multi-modal output from multi-task predictions as guidance to facilitate the final main-tasks. Different intermediate tasks ranging from low level to high level are considered,
i.e. monocular depth prediction, surface normal estimation, contour prediction and semantic parsing.

Depth estimation and scene parsing are both fundamental tasks for visual scene perception and understanding. Significant efforts have been made by many researchers on the
two tasks in recent years. Due to the powerful deep learning
technologies, the performance of the two individual tasks
has been greatly improved [10, 54, 4]. Since these two tasks
are correlated, jointly learning a single network for the two
tasks is a promising research line.
Typical deep multi-task learning approaches mainly focused on the final prediction level via employing the crossmodal interactions to mutually refining the tasks [18, 51] or
designing more effective joint-optimization objective functions [40, 21]. These methods directly learn to predict the
two tasks given the same input training data. Under this set-

ting, they usually require the deep models to partially share
network parameters or hidden representations. However, simultaneously learning the different tasks using distinct loss
functions makes the network optimization complicated, and
it is generally not easy to obtain a good generalization ability for all the tasks, which therefore brings worse performance on some of the tasks compared with the optimization with only a single task, as found by UberNet [22]. In
this paper, we explore multi-task deep learning from a different direction, i.e. using intermediate multi-task outputs
as multi-modal input data. This is motivated by three observations. First, it is well-known that multi-modal data
improve the performance of deep predictions. Take the
task of scene parsing as an example, a CNN trained with
1675

