Who’s Better? Who’s Best? Pairwise Deep Ranking for Skill Determination
Hazel Doughty
Dima Damen
Walterio Mayol-Cuevas
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
<Firstname>.<Surname>@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

Who's Better?

This paper presents a method for assessing skill from
video, applicable to a variety of tasks, ranging from surgery
to drawing and rolling pizza dough. We formulate the problem as pairwise (who’s better?) and overall (who’s best?)
ranking of video collections, using supervised deep ranking.
We propose a novel loss function that learns discriminative
features when a pair of videos exhibit variance in skill, and
learns shared features when a pair of videos exhibit comparable skill levels. Results demonstrate our method is applicable across tasks, with the percentage of correctly ordered
pairs of videos ranging from 70% to 83% for four datasets.
We demonstrate the robustness of our approach via sensitivity analysis of its parameters.
We see this work as effort toward the automated organization of how-to video collections and overall, generic skill
determination in video.

~
~

>

>

~
~

Who's Best?
Expert

Novice

1. Introduction
How-to videos on sites such as YouTube and Vimeo,
have enabled millions to learn new skills by observing others more skilled at the task. From drawing to cooking and
repairing household items, learning from videos is nowadays a commonplace activity. However, these loosely organized collections normally contain a mixture of contributors with different levels of expertise. The querying person needs to decide who is better and who to learn from.
Furthermore, the number of how-to videos is only likely to
increase, fueled by more cameras recording our daily lives.
An intelligent agent that is able to assess the skill of the subject, or rank the videos based on the skill displayed, would
enable us to delve into the wealth of this on-line resource.
In this work, we attempt to determine skill for a variety
of tasks from their video recordings. We base this work on
two assumptions, first - for tasks where human observers
consistently label one video as displaying more skill than
another, there is enough information in the visual signal to
automate that decision; and second - the same framework
for determining skill can be used for a variety of tasks ranging from surgery to drawing and rolling pizza dough.

Figure 1. Determining skill in video. Who’s Better? (Top): pairwise decisions of videos containing the same task, performed with
varying or comparable levels of skill. Who’s Best? (Bottom):
ranking learned from pairwise decisions.

We propose to determine skill using a pairwise deep
ranking model, which characterizes the difference in skill
displayed between a pair of videos, where one is ranked
higher than the other by human annotators (Fig 1). We use
a Siamese architecture where each stream is made up of a
two-stream (spatial and temporal) convolutional neural network (2S-CNN). This Siamese architecture is trained using
a novel ranking loss function that considers the extent of the
task within the video, and includes pairs of videos where the
skill level is indistinguishable. By assigning videos a relative score of skill for the given task, we can predict a skill
ranking for a set of videos.
Our main contributions are as follows: i) We present the
first method to determine skill in videos for a wide variety

6057

