An Unsupervised Learning Model for
Deformable Medical Image Registration
Guha Balakrishnan
MIT

Amy Zhao
MIT

Mert R. Sabuncu
Cornell University

John Guttag
MIT

balakg@mit.edu

xamyzhao@mit.edu

msabuncu@cornell.edu

guttag@mit.edu

Adrian V. Dalca
MIT and MGH
adalca@mit.edu

Abstract
We present a fast learning-based algorithm for deformable, pairwise 3D medical image registration. Current registration methods optimize an objective function independently for each pair of images, which can be timeconsuming for large data. We define registration as a
parametric function, and optimize its parameters given
a set of images from a collection of interest. Given a
new pair of scans, we can quickly compute a registration
field by directly evaluating the function using the learned
parameters. We model this function using a CNN, and
use a spatial transform layer to reconstruct one image
from another while imposing smoothness constraints on
the registration field. The proposed method does not require supervised information such as ground truth registration fields or anatomical landmarks. We demonstrate
registration accuracy comparable to state-of-the-art 3D
image registration, while operating orders of magnitude
faster in practice. Our method promises to significantly
speed up medical image analysis and processing pipelines,
while facilitating novel directions in learning-based registration and its applications. Our code is available at
https://github.com/balakg/voxelmorph.

constraints on the registration mapping. Solving this optimization is computationally intensive, and therefore extremely slow in practice.
In contrast, we propose a novel registration method that
learns a parametrized registration function from a collection of volumes. We implement the function using a convolutional neural network (CNN), that takes two n-D input
volumes and outputs a mapping of all voxels of one volume
to another volume. The parameters of the network, i.e., the
convolutional kernel weights, are optimized using a training
set of volume pairs from the dataset of interest. By sharing
the same parameters for a collection of volumes, the procedure learns a common representation which can align any
new pair of volumes from the same distribution. In essence,
we replace a costly optimization of traditional registration
algorithms for each test image pair with one global function
optimization during a training phase. Registration between
a new test scan pair is achieved by simply evaluating the
learned function on the given volumes, resulting in rapid
registration.
The novelty of this work is that:
• we present a learning-based solution requiring no supervised information such as ground truth correspondences or anatomical landmarks during training,
• we propose a CNN function with parameters shared
across a population, enabling registration to be
achieved through a function evaluation, and

1. Introduction
Deformable registration is a fundamental task in a variety of medical imaging studies, and has been a topic of
active research for decades. In deformable registration, a
dense, non-linear correspondence is established between a
pair of n-D image volumes, such as 3D MR brain scans, depicting similar structures. Most registration methods solve
an optimization problem for each volume pair that aligns
voxels with similar appearance while enforcing smoothness

• our method enables parameter optimization for a variety of cost functions, which can be adapted to various
tasks.
Throughout this paper, we use the example of registering 3D MR brain scans. However, our method is broadly
applicable to registration tasks, both within and beyond the
19252

