Interpretable Video Captioning via Trajectory Structured Localization
Xian Wu1

Guanbin Li1∗

Qingxing Cao1 ,

Qingge Ji1

Liang Lin1,2

1

2
Sun Yat-sen University
SenseTime Group Limited
sysuwuxian@gmail.com, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, caoqx@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
issjqg@mail.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Automatically describing open-domain videos with natural language are attracting increasing interest in the field of
artificial intelligence. Most existing methods simply borrow
ideas from image captioning and obtain a compact video
representation from an ensemble of global image feature
before feeding to an RNN decoder which outputs a sentence of variable length. However, it is not only arduous
for the generator to focus on specific salient objects at different time given the global video representation, it is more
formidable to capture the fine-grained motion information
and the relation between moving instances for more subtle linguistic descriptions. In this paper, we propose a Trajectory Structured Attentional Encoder-Decoder (TSA-ED)
neural network framework for more elaborate video captioning which works by integrating local spatial-temporal
representation at trajectory level through structured attention mechanism. Our proposed method is based on a LSTMbased encoder-decoder framework, which incorporates an
attention modeling scheme to adaptively learn the correlation between sentence structure and the moving objects
in videos, and consequently generates more accurate and
meticulous statement description in the decoding stage. Experimental results demonstrate that the feature representation and structured attention mechanism based on the trajectory cluster can efficiently obtain the local motion information in the video to help generate a more fine-grained
video description, and achieve the state-of-the-art performance on the well-known Charades and MSVD datasets.

∗ Corresponding author is Guanbin Li. This work was supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61702565
and Grant 61671182, the Science and Technology Planning Project of
Guangdong Province under Grant 2017B010116001 and the Nature Science Foundation of Guangdong Province under Grant 2016A030313288.
This work was also sponsored by CCF-Tencent Open Research Fund.

1. Introduction
Video captioning which aims at automatically describing videos containing rich and open-domain activities with
natural language sentences, is a core problem towards highlevel video understanding and has recently received increasing interest in both computer vision and artificial intelligence communities. It has a variety of practical applications
including human-robot interaction, video indexing, and describing movies for the blind. Despite recent progress,
video captioning remains a very challenging problem that
calls for more accurate solution.
Conventional video captioning algorithms are based on
template-based methods [8, 17, 29], which works by predefining a serious of sentence generation template with
some specific grammar rules, and adaptively correlating
each part of the sentence with detected object, object properties as well as object relationship from video content analysis. Though this kind of method is simple and intuitive,
they suffer from limited sentence templates and can only
generate very rigid sentence descriptions. Benefit from the
rapid development of deep neural networks, especially Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), sequence learning method
have recently been widely used in video captioning and
achieved very inspiring results. It has quickly become the
mainstream framework for solving the problem [21, 30].
This kind of method is primarily based on an encoder and
decoder mechanism to recurrently map the feature embedding of a video clip to a word sequence. Specifically, an encoder neural network (CNN or RNN) reads the video frames
and generate a compact video representation, which is in
turn fed to a decoder RNN or its variants (LSTM, GRU,
etc) to generate a natural sentence word by word. RNN
based sequence learning method is originally inspired by
the recent advances in neural machine translation and has
attracted a line of improved work ever since its emergence.
However, all these methods utilize global features extracted at image-level for video feature representation, ignoring the movement details of various objects within the
video, they thus can only generate very general descrip16829

