Excitation Backprop for RNNs
Sarah Adel Bargal∗1 , Andrea Zunino∗ 2 , Donghyun Kim1 , Jianming Zhang3 ,
Vittorio Murino2,4 , Stan Sclaroff1
1

Department of Computer Science, Boston University 2 Pattern Analysis & Computer Vision (PAVIS),
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia 3 Adobe Research 4 Computer Science Department, Università di Verona
{sbargal,donhk,sclaroff}@bu.edu, {andrea.zunino,vittorio.murino}@iit.it, jianmzha@adobe.com

Figure 1: Our proposed framework spatiotemporally highlights/grounds the evidence that an RNN model used in producing a class label
or caption for a given input video. In this example, by using our proposed back-propagation method, the evidence for the activity class
CliffDiving is highlighted in a video that contains CliffDiving and HorseRiding. Our model employs a single backward pass to produce
saliency maps that highlight the evidence that a given RNN used in generating its outputs.

Abstract
Deep models are state-of-the-art for many vision tasks
including video action recognition and video captioning.
Models are trained to caption or classify activity in videos,
but little is known about the evidence used to make such decisions. Grounding decisions made by deep networks has
been studied in spatial visual content, giving more insight
into model predictions for images. However, such studies
are relatively lacking for models of spatiotemporal visual
content – videos. In this work, we devise a formulation that
simultaneously grounds evidence in space and time, in a
single pass, using top-down saliency. We visualize the spatiotemporal cues that contribute to a deep model’s classification/captioning output using the model’s internal representation. Based on these spatiotemporal cues, we are able
to localize segments within a video that correspond with a
specific action, or phrase from a caption, without explicitly
optimizing/training for these tasks.

1. Introduction
To visualize what in a video gives rise to an output of a
deep recurrent network, it is important to consider space and
∗ Equal contribution

time saliency, i.e., where and when. The visualization of
what a deep recurrent network finds salient in an input video
can enable interpretation of the model’s behavior in action
classification, video captioning, and other tasks. Moreover,
estimates of the model’s attention (e.g., saliency maps) can
be used directly in localizing a given action within a video
or in localizing the portions of a video that correspond to a
particular concept within a caption.
Several works address visualization of model attention in
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for image classification [1, 34, 24, 33, 21, 36, 18]. These methods produce
saliency maps that visualize the importance of class-specific
image regions (spatial localization). Analogous methods
for Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)-based models must
handle more complex recurrent, non-linear, spatiotemporal dependencies; thus, progress on RNNs has been limited
to [8, 15]. Karpathy et al. [8] visualize the role of Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM) cells for text input, but not for
visual data. Ramanishka et al. [15] map words to regions
in the video captioning task by dropping out (exhaustively
or by sampling) video frames and/or parts of video frames
to obtain saliency maps. This can be computationally expensive, and does not consider temporal evolution but only
frame-level saliency.
11440

