A Hierarchical Generative Model for Eye Image Synthesis and Eye Gaze
Estimation
Kang Wang

Rui Zhao

Qiang Ji

ECSE, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
{wangk10, zhaor, jiq}@rpi.edu

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a Hierarchical Generative
Model (HGM) to enable realistic forward eye image synthesis, as well as effective backward eye gaze estimation. The
proposed HGM consists of a hierarchical generative shape
model (HGSM), and a conditional bidirectional generative
adversarial network (c-BiGAN). The HGSM encodes eye geometry knowledge and relates eye gaze with eye shape, while
c-BiGAN leverages on big data and captures the dependency
between eye shape and eye appearance. As an intermediate component, eye shape connects knowledge-based model
(HGSM) with data-driven model (c-BiGAN) and enables
bidirectional inference. Through a top-down inference, the
HGM can synthesize eye images consistent with the given
eye gaze. Through a bottom-up inference, HGM can infer
eye gaze effectively from a given eye image. Qualitative and
quantitative evaluations on benchmark datasets demonstrate
our model’s effectiveness on both eye image synthesis and
eye gaze estimation. In addition, the proposed model is
not restricted to eye images only. It can be adapted to face
images and any shape-appearance related fields.

1. Introduction
Human eye plays an important role in perceiving the
world around us, expressing our intent, emotion, and communicating with each other. Human can infer rich information
from the appearance of the eye and the eye gaze directions. Being able to synthesize realistic eye appearances and
track eye gaze directions has numerous applications: videoconferencing [4], human computer interface [15], social
attention [13, 29], virtual reality [8], graphical animation
[31] and gaming [3] to name a few.
Realistic eye image synthesis is however challenging.
Recent development of eye image synthesis can be divided into graphics-based and warping-based approaches.
Graphics-based approaches [38, 39] leverage on graphical
engine to render eye textures on top of a 3D eye model. The

Figure 1. Overview of hierarchical generative model.

advantage is the full geometry control over the 3D eye model
to simulate variations in terms of gaze direction, head orientation, etc. However, there is a gap between the synthesized
eye texture distribution and real eye texture distribution. The
overall synthesized eye looks like cartoon/animated image.
On the other hand, warping-based methods take an eye image as input, and warp the input image to have a desired
output appearance. Among them, [7] warped the image to be
under different head orientations, and [41] further extended
to different gaze directions and head orientations. In [33],
the authors refined the input unrealistic images to be more
realistic. And [1, 20] warped the input eye images to have
specific gaze angles (gaze correction). Despite the realism
inherited from the input image or additional model, such synthesis is task-dependent or subject-specific, it cannot produce
sufficient eye geometry variations and appearance variations.
Existing gaze estimation approaches fall into appearancebased and model-based approaches. The appearance-based
approaches [18, 43, 21] estimate eye gaze directly from eye
appearance or extracted eye features. They need sufficient
amount of data with groundtruth labels to produce accurate
results. Model-based approaches [12, 34, 16, 37] leverage on
anatomical eye model knowledge to estimate eye gaze from
detected eye features. They are sensitive to the variation of
personal eye parameters such as eyeball radius. A subjectspecific personal calibration is often required for each person
to estimate these personal eye parameters. They also require
explicit detection of eye features such as pupil center and
cornea reflections.
There is little work on a unified model for joint top-down
eye image synthesis and bottom-up eye gaze estimation,
1440

