SYQ: Learning Symmetric Quantization For Efficient Deep Neural Networks
Julian Faraone*

Nicholas Fraser# Michaela Blott#
The University of Sydney*
Xilinx Research Labs#

(julian.faraone, philip.leong)@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Inference for state-of-the-art deep neural networks is
computationally expensive, making them difficult to deploy
on constrained hardware environments. An efficient way
to reduce this complexity is to quantize the weight parameters and/or activations during training by approximating their distributions with a limited entry codebook. For
very low-precisions, such as binary or ternary networks
with 1-8-bit activations, the information loss from quantization leads to significant accuracy degradation due to
large gradient mismatches between the forward and backward functions. In this paper, we introduce a quantization
method to reduce this loss by learning a symmetric codebook for particular weight subgroups. These subgroups
are determined based on their locality in the weight matrix, such that the hardware simplicity of the low-precision
representations is preserved. Empirically, we show that
symmetric quantization can substantially improve accuracy for networks with extremely low-precision weights
and activations. We also demonstrate that this representation imposes minimal or no hardware implications to more
coarse-grained approaches. Source code is available at
https://www.github.com/julianfaraone/SYQ.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have produced state-ofthe-art results in applications such as computer vision [17],
natural language processing [4] and object detection [31].
As their size continues to grow to improve prediction capabilities, their memory and computational requirements
also scales, making them increasingly difficult to deploy
on embedded systems. For example, [17] achieved stateof-art-results on the ImageNet challenge using AlexNet
which required 240MB of storage and 1.45 billion operations to compute inference per image. Several methods of compression [12], quantization [3] and dimensionality reduction [25] have been applied to reduce these demands, with promising results. This demonstrates the over-

Philip H.W. Leong*

(nfraser, mblott)@xilinx.com

parametrization and redundancies in DNNs and poses an
opportunity for utilizing regularization to make their representations more amenable to hardware implementations.
In particular, low-precision neural networks reduce both
memory and computational requirements whilst achieving
accuracies comparable to floating point [10]. For extremely
low-precisions, such as binary and/or ternary weight representations and 1-8 bits for activations, most of the multiplyaccumulate (MAC) operations can be replaced by simple
bitwise operations. This translates to massive reductions
in storage requirements and spatial complexity in hardware. Additionally, large power savings and speed gains are
achieved when networks can fit in on-chip memory. The issue is that a large reduction in precision, leads to large information loss which incurs significant accuracy degradation,
especially for complex datasets such as ImageNet [26]. Ideally, we can train networks which have both high prediction
capabilities and minimal computational complexity.
DNN training is an iterative process which has a feedforward path to compute the output and a backpropagation path to calculate gradients and update its parameters
for learning. Low-precision networks involve having a set
of full-precision weights which are quantized before computing inference. As the quantization functions are piecewise and constant, the gradients of quantized weights are
calculated and applied to update their corresponding fullprecision weights. Similarly, derivatives of quantized activations are calculated by using a non-constant differentiable
approximation function. This type of training was first proposed as the Straight Through Estimator (STE) [1] which
suggested the use of a nonzero derivative approximation to
functions which are non-differentiable or have zero derivatives everywhere. The problem is that without an accurate
estimator for weights and activations, there exists a significant gradient mismatch which impinges on learning. Seemingly, as discussed in [22], activations are more robust to
quantization than weights for image classification problems
due to weight reuse in Convolutional (CONV) layers affecting multiple operations. To overcome this, methods such as
increasing the weight codebook by applying a scaling co4321
4300

