Frame-Recurrent Video Super-Resolution
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi1,2∗
msajjadi@tue.mpg.de
1

Raviteja Vemulapalli2
ravitejavemu@google.com

Matthew Brown2
mtbr@google.com

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 2 Google

Abstract
Recent advances in video super-resolution have shown
that convolutional neural networks combined with motion
compensation are able to merge information from multiple low-resolution (LR) frames to generate high-quality images. Current state-of-the-art methods process a batch of LR
frames to generate a single high-resolution (HR) frame and
run this scheme in a sliding window fashion over the entire
video, effectively treating the problem as a large number of
separate multi-frame super-resolution tasks. This approach
has two main weaknesses: 1) Each input frame is processed
and warped multiple times, increasing the computational
cost, and 2) each output frame is estimated independently
conditioned on the input frames, limiting the system’s ability
to produce temporally consistent results.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end trainable framerecurrent video super-resolution framework that uses the previously inferred HR estimate to super-resolve the subsequent
frame. This naturally encourages temporally consistent results and reduces the computational cost by warping only
one image in each step. Furthermore, due to its recurrent
nature, the proposed method has the ability to assimilate a
large number of previous frames without increased computational demands. Extensive evaluations and comparisons
with previous methods validate the strengths of our approach
and demonstrate that the proposed framework is able to significantly outperform the current state of the art.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution is a classic problem in image processing
that addresses the question of how to reconstruct a highresolution (HR) image from its downscaled low-resolution
(LR) version. With the rise of deep learning, super-resolution
has received significant attention from the research community over the past few years [3, 5, 20, 21, 26, 28, 35, 36, 39].
While high-frequency details need to be reconstructed exclusively from spatial statistics in the case of single image superresolution, temporal relationships in the input can be ex∗ This work was done when Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi was interning at Google.

Bicubic

Our result

HR frame

Figure 1: Side-by-side comparison of bicubic interpolation,
our FRVSR result, and HR ground truth for 4x upsampling.
ploited to improve reconstruction for video super-resolution.
It is therefore imperative to combine the information from
as many LR frames as possible to reach the best video superresolution results.
The latest state-of-the-art video super-resolution methods
approach the problem by combining a batch of LR frames to
estimate a single HR frame, effectively dividing the task of
video super-resolution into a large number of separate multiframe super-resolution subtasks [3, 28, 29, 39]. However,
this approach is computationally expensive since each input
frame needs to be processed several times. Furthermore, generating each output frame separately reduces the system’s
ability to produce temporally consistent frames, resulting in
unpleasing flickering artifacts.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end trainable framerecurrent video super-resolution (FRVSR) framework to address the above issues. Instead of estimating each video
frame separately, we use a recurrent approach that passes
the previously estimated HR frame as an input for the following iteration. Using this recurrent architecture has several
benefits. Each input frame needs to be processed only once,
reducing the computational cost. Furthermore, information
from past frames can be propagated to later frames via the
HR estimate that is recurrently passed through time. Passing the previous HR estimate directly to the next step helps
the model to recreate fine details and produce temporally
consistent videos.

6626

