Decorrelated Batch Normalization
Lei Huang†‡∗ Dawei Yang‡ Bo Lang† Jia Deng ‡
†
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, P.R.China
‡
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BN) is capable of accelerating the
training of deep models by centering and scaling activations
within mini-batches. In this work, we propose Decorrelated Batch Normalization (DBN), which not just centers
and scales activations but whitens them. We explore multiple
whitening techniques, and find that PCA whitening causes a
problem we call stochastic axis swapping, which is detrimental to learning. We show that ZCA whitening does not suffer
from this problem, permitting successful learning. DBN retains the desirable qualities of BN and further improves BN’s
optimization efficiency and generalization ability. We design
comprehensive experiments to show that DBN can improve
the performance of BN on multilayer perceptrons and convolutional neural networks. Furthermore, we consistently
improve the accuracy of residual networks on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Batch Normalization [25] is a technique for accelerating
deep network training. Introduced by Ioffe and Szegedy, it
has been widely used in a variety of state-of-the-art systems
[17, 49, 19, 54, 48, 20]. Batch Normalization works by
standardizing the activations of a deep network within a minibatch—transforming the output of a layer, or equivalently
the input to the next layer, to have a zero mean and unit
variance. Specifically, let {xi ∈ R, i = 1, 2, . . . , m} be
the original outputs of a single neuron on m examples in a
mini-batch. Batch Normalization produces the transformed
outputs
xi − µ
+ β,
(1)
x̂i = γ √
σ2 + ǫ
Pm
Pm
1
1
2
2
where µ = m
j=1 xj and σ = m
j=1 (xj − µ) are the
mean and variance of the mini-batch, ǫ > 0 is a small number
to prevent numerical instability, and γ, β are extra learnable
parameters. Crucially, during training, Batch Normalization
∗ This work was mainly done while Lei Huang was a visiting student at
the University of Michigan.

is part of both the inference computation (forward pass) as
well as the gradient computation (backward pass). Batch
Normalization can be inserted extensively into a network,
typically between a linear mapping and a nonlinearity.
Batch Normalization was motivated by the well-known
fact that whitening inputs (i.e. centering, decorrelating, and
scaling) speeds up training [32]. It has been shown that better conditioning of the covariance matrix of the input leads
to better conditioning of the Hessian in updating the weights,
making the gradient descent updates closer to Newton updates [32, 50]. Batch Normalization exploits this fact further
by seeking to whiten not only the input to the first layer of
the network, but also the inputs to each internal layer in the
network. But instead of whitening, Batch Normalization
only performs standardization. That is, the activations are
centered and scaled, but not decorrelated. Such a choice
was justified in [25] by citing the cost and differentiability
of whitening, but no actual attempts were made to derive or
experiment with a whitening operation.
While standardization has proven effective for Batch Normalization, it remains an interesting question whether full
whitening—adding decorrelation to Batch Normalization—
can help further. Conceptually, there are clear cases where
whitening is beneficial. For example, when the activations
are close to being perfectly1 correlated, standardization
barely improves the conditioning of the covariance matrix,
whereas whitening remains effective. In addition, prior work
has shown that decorrelated activations result in better features [3, 43, 5] and better generalization [9, 53], suggesting
room for further improving Batch Normalization.
In this paper, we propose Decorrelated Batch Normalization, in which we whiten the activations of each layer within
a mini-batch. Let xi ∈ Rd be the input to a layer for the i-th
example in a mini-batch of size m. The whitened input is
given by
1
x̂i = Σ− 2 (xi − µ),
(2)
P
m
1
where µ = m
j=1 xj is the mini-batch mean and Σ =
Pm
1
T
(x
−
µ)(x
j
j − µ) is the mini-batch covariance
j=1
m
matrix.
1 For example, in 2D, this means all points lie close to the line y = x
and Batch Normalization does not change the shape of the distribution.

791

