Actor and Action Video Segmentation from a Sentence
Kirill Gavrilyuk, Amir Ghodrati, Zhenyang Li, Cees G. M. Snoek
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam
{kgavrilyuk, a.ghodrati, zhenyangli, cgmsnoek}@uva.nl

Abstract
This paper strives for pixel-level segmentation of actors
and their actions in video content. Different from existing
works, which all learn to segment from a fixed vocabulary
of actor and action pairs, we infer the segmentation from a
natural language input sentence. This allows to distinguish
between fine-grained actors in the same super-category,
identify actor and action instances, and segment pairs that
are outside of the actor and action vocabulary. We propose
a fully-convolutional model for pixel-level actor and action
segmentation using an encoder-decoder architecture optimized for video. To show the potential of actor and action
video segmentation from a sentence, we extend two popular
actor and action datasets with more than 7,500 natural language descriptions. Experiments demonstrate the quality of
the sentence-guided segmentations, the generalization ability of our model, and its advantage for traditional actor and
action segmentation compared to the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is pixel-level segmentation of an
actor and its action in video, be it a person that climbs, a
car that jumps or a bird that flies. Xu et al. [29] defined
this challenging computer vision problem in an effort to
lift video understanding beyond the more traditional work
on spatio-temporal localization of human actions inside a
tube, e.g. [19, 26, 32]. Many have shown since that joint
actor and action inference is beneficial over their independent segmentation, e.g. [10, 28]. Where all existing works
learn to segment from a fixed set of predefined actor and action pairs, we propose to segment actors and their actions in
video from a natural language sentence input, as illustrated
in Figure 1.
We are inspired by recent progress in vision and language solutions for challenges like object retrieval [6, 7,
17], person search [14, 30, 34], and object tracking [15]. To
arrive at object segmentation from a sentence, Hu et al. [6]
rely on an LSTM network to encode an input sentence into a
vector representation, before a fully convolutional network

Figure 1: From a natural language input sentence our proposed model generates a pixel-level segmentation of an actor and its action in video content.

extracts a spatial feature map from an image and outputs an
upsampled response map for the target object. Li et al. [15]
propose object tracking from a sentence. Without specifying a bounding box, they identify a target object from the
sentence and track it throughout a video. The target localization of their network is similar to Hu et al. [6], be it that
they introduce a dynamic convolutional layer to allow for
dynamic adaptation of visual filters based on the input sentence. In effect making the textual embedding convolutional
before the matching. Like [6, 15] we also propose an endto-end trainable solution for segmentation from a sentence
that embeds text and images into a joint model. Rather than
relying on LSTMs we prefer a fully-convolutional model
from the start, including dynamic filters. Moreover, we optimize our model for the task of segmenting an actor and
its action in video, rather than in an image, allowing us to
exploit both RGB and Flow.
The first and foremost contribution of this paper is the
new task of actor and action segmentation from a sentence.
As a second contribution we propose a fully-convolutional
model for pixel-level actor and action segmentation using

5958

