Pseudo Mask Augmented Object Detection
Xiangyun Zhao∗
Northwestern University

Shuang Liang†
Tongji University

Yichen Wei
Microsoft Research

zhaoxiangyun915@gmail.com

shuangliang@tongji.edu.cn

yichenw@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel and effective framework to facilitate object detection with the instance-level
segmentation information that is only supervised by bounding box annotation. Starting from the joint object detection and instance segmentation network, we propose to recursively estimate the pseudo ground-truth object masks
from the instance-level object segmentation network training, and then enhance the detection network with top-down
segmentation feedbacks. The pseudo ground truth mask and
network parameters are optimized alternatively to mutually
benefit each other. To obtain the promising pseudo masks in
each iteration, we embed a graphical inference that incorporates the low-level image appearance consistency and the
bounding box annotations to refine the segmentation masks
predicted by the segmentation network. Our approach progressively improves the object detection performance by
incorporating the detailed pixel-wise information learned
from the weakly-supervised segmentation network. Extensive evaluation on the detection task in PASCAL VOC 2007
and 2012 [12] verifies that the proposed approach is effective.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen significant progresses in object
detection. Since the deep convolutional neutral network has
been firstly used in R-CNN [19], a lot of improvements have
been made, and they improve the performance from many
different aspects, e.g., deeper networks and stronger features [44, 45, 24], better object proposals [38, 46], more
discriminative and powerful features [29, 1], more accurate localization [36, 15], focusing on a set of hard examples [34, 42].
In this work, we investigate the object detection task
from another important aspect, that is, how to exploit object
segmentation to improve object detection. Although it has
∗ This work is done when Xiangyun Zhao was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia.
† Corresponding author.

been well recognized in the literature that the two tasks are
closely related and detection could benefit from segmentation, most previous works, e.g., [1, 8], share two common
drawbacks.
First, they rely on accurate and pixel-wise ground truth
segmentation masks for the segmentation problem. However, such mask annotation is very expensive to obtain. Instead, most large-scale object recognition datasets such as
ImageNet [10] and PASCAL VOC [12] only provide bounding box level annotations. In addition, most of these methods only explore how to facilitate object detection with semantic image segmentation, which did not independently
consider the characteristics of each instance. We argue that
the instance-level segmentation task is more aligned with
object detection by considering the object information from
different granularity (pixel-level versus box-level). Recently, Mask-RCNN [23] unifies object detection and instance segmentation in a single network, and show that instance segmentation could help object detection. However,
pixel-wise instance segmentation labeling is still required.
Second, most works have independent network structures for segmentation and detection tasks, e.g., the stateof-the-art MNC [8] and Mask-RCNN [23]. Although the
two tasks often share the same underlying convolutional
features, the two networks do not directly interact with each
other and the commonality between the two tasks may not
be fully exploited. For the existing approaches, the benefits
of jointing learning are mostly from the better learned deep
feature representation as in a normal multi-task setting. It
is seldom explored that how segmentation information can
benefit detection directly and more closely in a deep learning framework.
In this work, we propose a novel approach that better addresses the above two issues, which augments the object detector with generated object masks from the bounding box
annotation, named as Pesudo-mask Augmented Detection
(PAD). It starts from a strong baseline network architecture
that directly integrates the state-of-the-art Fast-RCNN [18]
network for object detection and InstanceFCN [6] for object
segmentation, in a normal multi-task setting.
Given the baseline network, we make two major con-

4061

