Unsupervised Cross-dataset Person Re-identification by Transfer Learning of
Spatial-Temporal Patterns
Jianming Lv1 , Weihang Chen1 , Qing Li2 , and Can Yang1
1

South China University of Technology
2
City University of Hongkongy
{jmlv,cscyang}@scut.edu.cn,csscut@mail.scut.edu.cn,qing.li@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

As one of the most challenging and well studied problem in the field of surveillance video analysis, person reidentification (Re-ID) aims to match the image frames which
contain the same pedestrian in surveillance videos. The core
of these algorithms is to learn the pedestrian features and
the similarity measurements, which are view invariant and
robust to the change of cameras.

Visual
Classifier
C

(3)

+

+

Fusion
Model
F

…

1. Introduction

(1)

Spatio-temporal
Patterns
(2)

…

Most of the proposed person re-identification algorithms
conduct supervised training and testing on single labeled
datasets with small size, so directly deploying these trained
models to a large-scale real-world camera network may lead
to poor performance due to underfitting. It is challenging
to incrementally optimize the models by using the abundant
unlabeled data collected from the target domain. To address
this challenge, we propose an unsupervised incremental
learning algorithm, TFusion, which is aided by the transfer
learning of the pedestrians’ spatio-temporal patterns in the
target domain. Specifically, the algorithm firstly transfers the
visual classifier trained from small labeled source dataset
to the unlabeled target dataset so as to learn the pedestrians’ spatial-temporal patterns. Secondly, a Bayesian fusion
model is proposed to combine the learned spatio-temporal
patterns with visual features to achieve a significantly improved classifier. Finally, we propose a learning-to-rank
based mutual promotion procedure to incrementally optimize the classifiers based on the unlabeled data in the target
domain. Comprehensive experiments based on multiple real
surveillance datasets are conducted, and the results show
that our algorithm gains significant improvement compared
with the state-of-art cross-dataset unsupervised person reidentification algorithms.

Labeled
Source Dataset

Unlabeled Target Dataset

+
Learning to rank

(4)

Ranking

Figure 1: The TFusion model consists of 4 steps: (1) Train
the visual classifier C in the labeled source dataset (Section
4.2); (2) Using C to learn the pedestrians’ spatio-temporal
patterns in the unlabeled target dataset (Section 4.3); (3) Construct the fusion model F (Section 4.4); (4) Incrementally
optimize C by using the ranking results of F in the unlabeled
target dataset (Section 4.6).
Most of the proposed algorithms [1][3] [30][14] [20] [24]
conduct supervised learning on the labeled datasets with
small size. Directly deploying these trained models to the
real-world environment with large-scale camera networks
can lead to poor performance, because the target domain
may be significantly different from the small training dataset.
Thus the incremental optimization in real-world deployment
is critical to improve the performance of the Re-ID algorithms. However, it is usually expensive and impractical to
label the massive online surveillance videos to support supervised learning. How to leverage the abundant unlabeled
data is a practical and extremely challenging problem.
To address this problem, some unsupervised algorithms
[13] [18] [27] are proposed to extract view invariant features
and to measure the similarity of different images in unlabeled
datasets. Without powerful supervised tuning and optimiza17948

