Revisiting Video Saliency: A Large-scale Benchmark and a New Model
Wenguan Wang 1 , Jianbing Shen∗ 1 , Fang Guo 1 , Ming-Ming Cheng 2 , Ali Borji 3
1

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
CCCE, Nankai University, China 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, USA
wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com, {shenjianbing, guofang}@bit.edu.cn
cmm@nankai.edu.cn, aborji@crcv.ucf.edu
https://github.com/wenguanwang/DHF1K

Abstract
In this work, we contribute to video saliency research in
two ways. First, we introduce a new benchmark for predicting human eye movements during dynamic scene freeviewing, which is long-time urged in this field. Our dataset,
named DHF1K (Dynamic Human Fixation), consists of 1K
high-quality, elaborately selected video sequences spanning
a large range of scenes, motions, object types and background complexity. Existing video saliency datasets lack
variety and generality of common dynamic scenes and fall
short in covering challenging situations in unconstrained
environments. In contrast, DHF1K makes a significant
leap in terms of scalability, diversity and difficulty, and is
expected to boost video saliency modeling. Second, we
propose a novel video saliency model that augments the
CNN-LSTM network architecture with an attention mechanism to enable fast, end-to-end saliency learning. The
attention mechanism explicitly encodes static saliency information, thus allowing LSTM to focus on learning more
flexible temporal saliency representation across successive
frames. Such a design fully leverages existing large-scale
static fixation datasets, avoids overfitting, and significantly
improves training efficiency and testing performance. We
thoroughly examine the performance of our model, with
respect to state-of-the-art saliency models, on three largescale datasets (i.e., DHF1K, Hollywood2, UCF sports). Experimental results over more than 1.2K testing videos containing 400K frames demonstrate that our model outperforms other competitors.
∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen. This work was supported in
part by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4182056, the
National Basic Research Program of China under Grant 2013CB328805,
the Fok Ying Tung Education Foundation under Grant 141067, and the
Specialized Fund for Joint Building Program of Beijing Municipal Education Commission.

1. Introduction
Human visual system (HVS) has an astonishing ability to
quickly select visually important regions in its visual field.
This cognitive process enables humans to easily interpret
complex scenes in real time. Over the last few decades,
several computational models have been proposed for imitating attentional mechanisms of HVS during static scene
viewing. Significant advances have been achieved recently
with the rapid spread of deep learning techniques and the
availability of large-scale static gaze datasets (e.g., SALICON [31]). In stark contrast, predicting observers’ fixations during dynamic scene free-viewing has less been explored. This task, referred to as dynamic fixation prediction
or video saliency detection is very useful for understanding human attentional behaviors and has several practical
real-word applications (e.g., video captioning, compression,
question answering, object segmentation, etc). It is thus
highly desired to have a standard, high-quality dataset composed of diverse and representative video stimuli. Exiting
datasets are severely limited in their coverage and scalability, and they only include special scenarios such as limited
human activities in constrained situations. None of them includes general, representative, and diverse instances in unconstrained, task-independent scenarios. As a consequence,
existing datasets often fail to offer a rich set of fixations for
learning video saliency and to assess models. Moreover, the
existing datasets did not provide an evaluation server with
standalone held out test set to avoid potential dataset overfitting, which hinders further development on this topic.
While saliency benchmarks (e.g., MIT300 [32] and
LSUN [68]) have been very instrumental in progressing the
static saliency field, such standard widespread benchmarks
are missing for video saliency modeling. We believe such
benchmarks are highly needed to move the field forward.
To this end, we propose a new benchmark “DHF1K (Dynamic Human Fixation 1K)” with a public server for report14894

