Vision-and-Language Navigation: Interpreting visually-grounded
navigation instructions in real environments
Peter Anderson1
Qi Wu2
Damien Teney2
Jake Bruce3
Mark Johnson4
3
2
1
Niko Sünderhauf
Ian Reid
Stephen Gould
Anton van den Hengel2
1

Australian National University 2 University of Adelaide 3 Queensland University of Technology 4 Macquarie University

1
2

firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au, 3 jacob.bruce@hdr.qut.edu.au, 3 niko.suenderhauf@qut.edu.au

{qi.wu01,damien.teney,ian.reid,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au, 4 mark.johnson@mq.edu.au

Abstract
A robot that can carry out a natural-language instruction has been a dream since before the Jetsons cartoon series imagined a life of leisure mediated by a fleet of attentive
robot helpers. It is a dream that remains stubbornly distant.
However, recent advances in vision and language methods have made incredible progress in closely related areas.
This is significant because a robot interpreting a naturallanguage navigation instruction on the basis of what it sees
is carrying out a vision and language process that is similar to Visual Question Answering. Both tasks can be interpreted as visually grounded sequence-to-sequence translation problems, and many of the same methods are applicable. To enable and encourage the application of vision and
language methods to the problem of interpreting visuallygrounded navigation instructions, we present the Matterport3D Simulator – a large-scale reinforcement learning
environment based on real imagery [11]. Using this simulator, which can in future support a range of embodied vision
and language tasks, we provide the first benchmark dataset
for visually-grounded natural language navigation in real
buildings – the Room-to-Room (R2R) dataset1 .

1. Introduction
The idea that we might be able to give general, verbal
instructions to a robot and have at least a reasonable probability that it will carry out the required task is one of the
long-held goals of robotics, and artificial intelligence (AI).
Despite significant progress, there are a number of major
technical challenges that need to be overcome before robots
will be able to perform general tasks in the real world. One
of the primary requirements will be new techniques for linking natural language to vision and action in unstructured,
previously unseen environments. It is the navigation version
1 https://bringmeaspoon.org

Instruction: Head upstairs and walk past the piano through an
archway directly in front. Turn right when the hallway ends at
pictures and table. Wait by the moose antlers hanging on the wall.

Figure 1. Room-to-Room (R2R) navigation task. We focus on
executing natural language navigation instructions in previously
unseen real-world buildings. The agent’s camera can be rotated
freely. Blue discs indicate nearby (discretized) navigation options.

of this challenge that we refer to as Vision-and-Language
Navigation (VLN).
Although interpreting natural-language navigation instructions has received significant attention previously [12,
13, 20, 38, 41, 52], it is the recent success of recurrent neural network methods for the joint interpretation of images
and natural language that motivates the VLN task, and the
associated Room-to-Room (R2R) dataset described below.
The dataset particularly has been designed to simplify the
application of vision and language methods to what might
otherwise seem a distant problem.
Previous approaches to natural language command of
robots have often neglected the visual information processing aspect of the problem. Using rendered, rather than real
images [7, 27, 62], for example, constrains the set of vis-

3674

