Fooling Vision and Language Models
Despite Localization and Attention Mechanism
Xiaojun Xu1,2 , Xinyun Chen2 , Chang Liu2 , Anna Rohrbach2,3 , Trevor Darrell2 , Dawn Song2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 EECS, UC Berkeley, 3 MPI for Informatics

Abstract

other forms of localization and/or language context offer effective defense.

Adversarial attacks are known to succeed on classifiers,
but it has been an open question whether more complex vision systems are vulnerable. In this paper, we study adversarial examples for vision and language models, which
incorporate natural language understanding and complex
structures such as attention, localization, and modular architectures. In particular, we investigate attacks on a dense
captioning model and on two visual question answering
(VQA) models. Our evaluation shows that we can generate
adversarial examples with a high success rate (i.e., > 90%)
for these models. Our work sheds new light on understanding adversarial attacks on vision systems which have a language component and shows that attention, bounding box
localization, and compositional internal structures are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. These observations will inform future work towards building effective defenses.

In this work, we extend the investigation towards more
complex models that not only include a vision component
but also a language component to deepen our understanding of the practicality of adversarial examples. In particular,
we investigate two classes of systems. First, we are interested in dense captioning systems, such as DenseCap [30],
which identify regions of interest first and then generate
captions for each region. Second, we are interested in visual question answering (VQA) systems, which answer a
natural language question based on a given image input.
The state-of-the-art VQA systems typically compute attention maps based on the input and then answer the question
based on the attended image regions. Therefore, both types
of models have a localization component, and thus they are
good targets for studying whether localization can help prevent adversarial attacks. Further, we explore state-of-the-art
VQA models based on Neural Modular Networks [25], and
evaluate whether such compositional architectures are also
vulnerable to adversarial attacks; in these models, a new
network architecture is instantiated for each question type,
potentially providing a buffer against attacks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning, especially deep learning, has achieved
great success in various application scenarios, such as image classification, speech recognition, and machine translation. However, recent studies prove the existence of adversarial examples for many vision-based learning models,
which may hinder the adoption of deep learning techniques
to security-sensitive applications [19, 43, 56, 65]. Most existing works consider image classification and demonstrate
that it is almost always possible to fool these models to classify an adversarially generated image as a class specified by
the adversary [66]. Albeit numerous defenses have been
proposed [19, 60, 52, 67, 51, 48], almost all of them are
later shown to be broken [8, 23, 9].
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in whether
adversarial examples are practical enough to attack more
complex vision systems [44, 45, 6]. In the latest results of
this debate, Lu et al. show that previous adversarial examples constructed to fool CNN-based classifiers cannot fool
state-of-the-art detectors [45]. We are interested in whether

We evaluate adversarial examples against these vision
and language models. We find that in most cases, the attacks
can successfully fool the victim models despite their internal localization component via attention heatmaps or region
proposals, and/or modular structures. Our study shows that,
in an online (non-physical) setting when the attackers have
full access to the victim model including its localization
component (white-box attack), the generated adversarial examples can fool the entire model regardless of the localization component. Therefore, our evaluation results provide
further evidence that employing a localization in combination with a classifier may not be sufficient to defend against
adversarial examples, at least in non-physical settings.
We also make the following additional contributions.
First, we develop a novel attack approach for VQA models,
which significantly outperforms the previous state-of-theart attacks. Second, we observe and analyze the effect of a
14951

