EPINET: A Fully-Convolutional Neural Network
Using Epipolar Geometry for Depth from Light Field Images
Hae-Gon Jeon2 Youngjin Yoon2 In So Kweon2
1
2
Yonsei University
KAIST

changhashin@yonsei.ac.kr earboll@kaist.ac.kr jeromeyoon@kaist.ac.kr iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

50
EPI1

1. Introduction
Light field cameras collect and record light coming from
different directions. As one of the most advanced techniques introduced in the area of computational photography,
the new hand-held light field camera design has a broad impact on photography as it changes how images are captured
and enables the users to alter the point of view or focal plane
after the shooting.
Since the introduction of the camera array system [38],
many approaches for making compact and hand-held light
field cameras have been proposed like the lenslet-based
cameras [25, 3, 2, 26], which utilize a micro-lens array
placed in front of the imaging sensor. Images captured from
the lenslet-based cameras can be converted into multi-view
images with a slightly different view point via geometric

Bad Pixel (0.03)

Light field cameras capture both the spatial and the angular properties of light rays in space. Due to its property, one can compute the depth from light fields in uncontrolled lighting environments, which is a big advantage over
active sensing devices. Depth computed from light fields
can be used for many applications including 3D modelling
and refocusing. However, light field images from hand-held
cameras have very narrow baselines with noise, making the
depth estimation difficult. Many approaches have been proposed to overcome these limitations for the light field depth
estimation, but there is a clear trade-off between the accuracy and the speed in these methods. In this paper, we
introduce a fast and accurate light field depth estimation
method based on a fully-convolutional neural network. Our
network is designed by considering the light field geometry
and we also overcome the lack of training data by proposing
light field specific data augmentation methods. We achieved
the top rank in the HCI 4D Light Field Benchmark on most
metrics, and we also demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method on real-world light-field images.

10

LF

LF

30

SC_GC
CAE
SPO
OFSY330

20

PS_RF
OBER-cross+ANP

Ours

seonjookim@yonsei.ac.kr

LF_OCC

EPI2
RPRF-5

40

Seon Joo Kim1

10

Mean Square Error

Changha Shin1

EPI2
8

OFSY330
6

RPRF-5

EPI1

LF_OCC
SC_GC

PS_RF

CAE SPO

4

OBER-cross+ANP

Ours
2

0
1

2

3

Runtime (log10)

4

1

2

3

4

Runtime (log10)

Figure 1. Comparison of the accuracy and the run time of light field
depth estimation algorithms. Our method achieved the top rank in
the HCI 4D Light Field Benchmark, both in accuracy and speed.
Our method is 85 times faster than OBER-cross+ANP, which is a
close second in the accuracy ranking.

calibration processes [6, 7]. Thanks to this special camera
structure, light field cameras can be used to estimate the
depth of a scene in uncontrolled environments. This is one
of the key advantages of the light field cameras over active
sensing devices [4, 1], which require controlled illumination and are therefore limited to the indoor use.
On the other hand, the hand-held light field cameras have
their own limitation. Due to their structure, the baseline
between sub-aperture images is very narrow and there exists a trade-off between the spatial and the angular resolution within the restricted image sensor resolution. Various
approaches [30, 16, 11, 42, 34, 43] have been introduced
to overcome these limitations and acquire accurate depth
maps. These methods achieve good performances close to
other passive sensor-based depth estimation methods such
as the stereo matching, but are less practical due to their
heavy computational burden. Although several fast depth
estimation methods [37, 15] have been proposed, they lose
the accuracy to gain the speed.
In this paper, we introduce a deep learning-based approach for the light field depth estimation that achieves both
accurate results and fast speed. Using a convolutional neural network, we estimate accurate depth maps with sub-

4748

