Memory Matching Networks for One-Shot Image Recognition∗
Qi Cai † , Yingwei Pan † , Ting Yao ‡ , Chenggang Yan § , and Tao Mei ‡
†
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
§
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
{cqcaiqi, panyw.ustc}@gmail.com, {tiyao, tmei}@microsoft.com, cgyan@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the new ideas of augmenting Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with Memory
and learning to learn the network parameters for the unlabelled images on the fly in one-shot learning. Specifically,
we present Memory Matching Networks (MM-Net) — a novel deep architecture that explores the training procedure,
following the philosophy that training and test conditions
must match. Technically, MM-Net writes the features of a
set of labelled images (support set) into memory and reads from memory when performing inference to holistically
leverage the knowledge in the set. Meanwhile, a Contextual
Learner employs the memory slots in a sequential manner to
predict the parameters of CNNs for unlabelled images. The
whole architecture is trained by once showing only a few
examples per class and switching the learning from minibatch to minibatch, which is tailored for one-shot learning
when presented with a few examples of new categories at
test time. Unlike the conventional one-shot learning approaches, our MM-Net could output one unified model irrespective of the number of shots and categories. Extensive
experiments are conducted on two public datasets, i.e., Omniglot and miniImageNet, and superior results are reported
when compared to state-of-the-art approaches. More remarkably, our MM-Net improves one-shot accuracy on Omniglot from 98.95% to 99.28% and from 49.21% to 53.37%
on miniImageNet.

1. Introduction
The recent advances in deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have demonstrated high capability in visual
recognition. For instance, an ensemble of residual nets [12]
achieves 3.57% top-5 error on the ImageNet test set, which
is even lower than 5.1% of the reported human-level performance. The achievements have relied on the fact that learn∗ This work was performed at Microsoft Research Asia.

ing deep CNNs requires large quantities of annotated data.
As a result, the standard optimization of deep CNNs does
not offer a satisfactory solution for learning new categories
from very little data, which is generally referred to as “OneShot or Few-Shot Learning” problem. One possible way to
alleviate this problem is to capitalize on the idea of transfer
learning [3, 35] by fine-tuning a pre-trained network from
another task with more labelled data. However, as pointed
out in [35], the benefit of a pre-trained network will greatly decrease especially when the network was trained on the
task or data which is very different from the target one, not
to mention that the very little data may even break down
the whole network due to overfitting. More importantly, the
general training procedure which contains a number of examples per category in each batch does not match inference
at test time when only a single or very few examples of a
new category is given. This discrepancy affects the generalization of the learnt deep CNNs from prior knowledge.
We propose to mitigate the aforementioned two issues in
our one-shot learning framework. First, we induce from a
single or few examples per category to form a small set of
labelled images (support set) in each batch of training. The
optimization of our framework is then performed by recognizing other instances (unlabelled images) from the categories in the support set correctly. As such, the training
strategy is amended particularly for one-shot learning so as
to match inference in the test stage. Moreover, a memory
module is leveraged to compress and generalize the input
set into slots in the memory and produce the outputs holistically on the whole support set, which further enhances the
recognition. Second, we feed the memory slots into one
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), as a contextual learner, to predict the parameters of CNNs for the unlabelled
images. As a result, the contextual learner captures both
long-term memory across all the categories in the training
and short-term knowledge specified on the categories at test
time. Note that our solution does not require a fine-tuning
process and computes the parameters on the fly. In addition,
the memory is an uniform medium which could convert dif-

4080

