Tracking Multiple Objects Outside the Line of Sight using Speckle Imaging
Matthew O’Toole
Stanford University

Mohit Gupta
University of Wisconsin-Madison

bmsmith@cs.wisc.edu

motoole@stanford.edu

mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
This paper presents techniques for tracking non-line-ofsight (NLOS) objects using speckle imaging. We develop
a novel speckle formation and motion model where both
the sensor and the source view objects only indirectly via
a diffuse wall. We show that this NLOS imaging scenario is
analogous to direct LOS imaging with the wall acting as a
virtual, bare (lens-less) sensor. This enables tracking of a
single, rigidly moving NLOS object using existing specklebased motion estimation techniques. However, when imaging multiple NLOS objects, the speckle components due to
different objects are superimposed on the virtual bare sensor image, and cannot be analyzed separately for recovering the motion of individual objects. We develop a novel
clustering algorithm based on the statistical and geometrical properties of speckle images, which enables identifying
the motion trajectories of multiple, independently moving
NLOS objects. We demonstrate, for the first time, tracking
individual trajectories of multiple objects around a corner
with extreme precision (< 10 microns) using only off-theshelf imaging components.

1. Introduction
The ability to track the motion of objects outside a sensor’s line of sight (LOS) has far-reaching implications, with
potential applications in search-and-rescue, remote sensing
of inaccessible environments, surveillance, and medicine.
Imagine an endoscopic imaging system aiding a robot arm
to perform complex surgery inside a human body, or a first
responder robot searching for biometric signals such as a
pulse and heartbeat to locate survivors in a hazardous environment. In these applications, it is critical to precisely
detect and measure subtle motion outside the LOS. Such
capability is beyond the scope of conventional vision techniques that are designed for tracking direct LOS objects.
Recently, it has been shown that it is possible to track
motion of non-line-of-sight (NLOS) objects by treating visible surfaces (e.g., walls) as diffuse reflectors that redirect
light to and from the region hidden from the camera (see
Figure 1 left). This can be achieved by using high-speed
pulsed light sources and time-resolved detectors [2, 7], as
well as off-the-shelf intensity sensors [14]. These tech-

Moving
objects

Occluder

Brandon M. Smith
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Laser spot
(virtual diffuse source)

Camera
sensor

Lens

Recorded
image

≅

Diffuse wall
(virtual bare sensor)

Moving
objects

Diffuse
laser

Bare
sensor

Figure 1. Tracking objects around a corner (left) is analogous to
direct line of sight imaging, where the objects are illuminated directly by a diffuse source and imaged with a bare sensor (right).

niques are exciting first steps. However, the motion precision achieved by these techniques remains limited. For example, state-of-the-art tracking accuracy for time-resolved
sensors is on the order of centimeters [2]. Intensity sensors
can achieve similar accuracies [14], albeit by restricting the
problem to single object tracking.
Our goal is to develop techniques for tracking micromotion (e.g., < 10 µm) of multiple objects, around the corner, with only low-cost components. Given the orders of
magnitude gap between this goal and the capabilities of current NLOS tracking approaches [2, 7, 14], we propose a
new approach based on laser speckle imaging. Speckle is a
high-frequency ‘noise-like’ intensity pattern created when
coherent (laser) light reflects off an optically-rough surface.
A key property of laser speckle is its extreme motion sensitivity: even small (micron-scale) surface motion results
in large speckle movement, which can be readily measured
even with low cost sensors to estimate surface motion. Such
high motion sensitivity has been used for micro-motion
analysis in direct LOS settings [16, 17, 21]. The focus of
this paper is on tracking objects outside the LOS. To this
end, we make two contributions.
NLOS object tracking via speckle imaging: First, we develop a novel NLOS speckle imaging and motion model,
where both the sensor and the source view the object only
indirectly via a diffuse wall, as illustrated in Figure 1 (left).
Specifically, a collimated source illuminates a point on the
wall, and a camera images a wall patch via a lens. We show
that this NLOS imaging scenario is analogous to direct LOS
speckle imaging with a bare sensor [17], where the illuminated point acts as a virtual diffuse source, and the imaged
patch acts as a virtual bare sensor. Given this analogy, the

6258

