Logo Synthesis and Manipulation
with Clustered Generative Adversarial Networks
Alexander Sage
D-ITET, ETH Zurich

Eirikur Agustsson
D-ITET, ETH Zurich

sagea@ee.ethz.ch

aeirikur@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Radu Timofte
D-ITET, ETH Zurich
Merantix GmbH

Luc Van Gool
D-ITET, ETH Zurich
ESAT, KU Leuven

radu.timofte@vision.ee.ethz.ch

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Designing a logo for a new brand is a lengthy and tedious back-and-forth process between a designer and a
client. In this paper we explore to what extent machine
learning can solve the creative task of the designer. For this,
we build a dataset – LLD – of 600k+ logos crawled from
the world wide web. Training Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) for logo synthesis on such multi-modal data
is not straightforward and results in mode collapse for some
state-of-the-art methods. We propose the use of synthetic
labels obtained through clustering to disentangle and stabilize GAN training, and validate this approach on CIFAR10 and ImageNet-small to demonstrate its generality. We
are able to generate a high diversity of plausible logos and
demonstrate latent space exploration techniques to ease the
logo design task in an interactive manner. GANs can cope
with multi-modal data by means of synthetic labels achieved
through clustering, and our results show the creative potential of such techniques for logo synthesis and manipulation.
Our dataset and models are publicly available at https:
//data.vision.ee.ethz.ch/sagea/lld/.

1. Introduction and related work
Logo design Designing a logo for a new brand usually is
a lengthy and tedious process, both for the client and the
designer. A lot of ultimately unused drafts are produced,
from which the client selects his favorites, followed by multiple cycles refining the logo to match the clients needs and
wishes. Especially for those clients without a specific idea
of the end product, this results in a procedure that is not only
time, but also cost intensive.
The goal of this work is to provide a framework towards
a system with the ability to generate (virtually) infinitely

Figure 1: Original and generated images from four selected
clusters from our LLD-icon-sharp dataset. The top three
rows consist of original logos, followed by logos generated
using our iWGAN-LC trained on 128 RC clusters.
many variations of logos (some examples are shown in Figure 1) to facilitate and expedite such a process. To this end,
the prospective client should be able to modify a prototype
logo according to specific parameters like shape and color,
or shift it a certain amount towards the characteristics of
another prototype. Such a system could help both designer
and client to get an idea of a potential logo, which the designer could then build upon, even if the system itself was
not (yet) able to output production-quality designs.
Logo image data Existing research literature focused
mostly on retrieval, detection, and recognition of a reduced number of logos [14, 17, 31, 33, 35, 43] and, consequently, a number of datasets were introduced. The most
representative large public logo datasets are shown in Table 1. Due to the low diversity of the contained logos, these
datasets are not suitable for learning and validating automatic logo generators. At the same time a number of web
pages allow (paid) access to a large number of icons, such
as iconsdb.com (4135+ icons), icons8.com (59900+), iconfinder.com (7473+), iconarchive.com (450k+) and thenounproject.com (1m+). However, the diversity of these icons is
limited by the number of sources, namely designers/artists,
15879

