Multistage Adversarial Losses for Pose-Based Human Image Synthesis
Chenyang Si1,3
Wei Wang1,3,∗
Liang Wang1,2,3
Tieniu Tan1,2,3
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
chenyang.si@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {wangwei, wangliang, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Human image synthesis has extensive practical applications e.g. person re-identification and data augmentation
for human pose estimation. However, it is much more challenging than rigid object synthesis, e.g. cars and chairs, due
to the variability of human posture. In this paper, we propose a pose-based human image synthesis method which
can keep the human posture unchanged in novel viewpoints.
Furthermore, we adopt multistage adversarial losses separately for the foreground and background generation, which
fully exploits the multi-modal characteristics of generative
loss to generate more realistic looking images. We perform
extensive experiments on the Human3.6M dataset and verify the effectiveness of each stage of our method. The generated human images not only keep the same pose as the
input image, but also have clear detailed foreground and
background. The quantitative comparison results illustrate
that our approach achieves much better results than several
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing a novel view image from a single image is
an important and challenging problem in computer vision.
Particularly, human view synthesis which plays important
roles in human understanding has extensive practical applications. For example, human view synthesis can effectively
solve the cross-view problems, e.g. cross-view action recognition [26, 7, 12] and cross-view person re-identification
[28, 2]. Multiview human synthesis can be used as a means
of data augmentation for human pose estimation in [22].
Novel view synthesis is very challenging due to the need
of inferring unseen content from a single image. Geometrybased methods [1, 8, 31] generate novel view images by
∗ Corresponding Author: Wei Wang

Input

cGANs[16]

VSA[25]

PG2 [13]

Ours

GT

Figure 1. Human image synthesis by our proposed method and
three state-of-the-art methods: cGANs [16], VSA [25], PG2 [13].
Our generated images in the green dashed box keep the same pose
with the groundtruth images, while the other methods can not always obtain correct poses. Moreover, our method generates much
better foreground and background images than the others.

reconstructing 3D object, while transformation-based methods [19, 27, 32] directly learn to model the transformation
between different perspectives of object. Recently, there occurred a lot of work on image generation and synthesis by
means of variational autoencoders (VAE) [10] and generative adversarial networks (GANs) [3], which have shown
impressive results [21, 20, 33, 11].
Generally, the above methods are used to synthesize
rigid objects, e.g. faces, cars and chairs, which have the
characteristics of shape invariance and symmetry. Generating human images is much more challenging than synthesizing rigid objects, due to the variability of human posture.
Taking [29] for example, although this work can generate
multi-view human images from a single image, it can not
keep the human posture unchanged.
In this paper, we propose a pose-based human image

118

