PackNet: Adding Multiple Tasks to a Single Network by Iterative Pruning
Arun Mallya and Svetlana Lazebnik
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{amallya2,slazebni}@illinois.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a method for adding multiple tasks to
a single deep neural network while avoiding catastrophic forgetting. Inspired by network pruning techniques, we exploit
redundancies in large deep networks to free up parameters
that can then be employed to learn new tasks. By performing iterative pruning and network re-training, we are able
to sequentially “pack” multiple tasks into a single network
while ensuring minimal drop in performance and minimal
storage overhead. Unlike prior work that uses proxy losses
to maintain accuracy on older tasks, we always optimize
for the task at hand. We perform extensive experiments on
a variety of network architectures and large-scale datasets,
and observe much better robustness against catastrophic
forgetting than prior work. In particular, we are able to add
three fine-grained classification tasks to a single ImageNettrained VGG-16 network and achieve accuracies close to
those of separately trained networks for each task.

1. Introduction
Lifelong or continual learning [1, 14, 22] is a key requirement for general artificially intelligent agents. Under
this setting, the agent is required to acquire expertise on
new tasks while maintaining its performance on previously
learned tasks, ideally without the need to store large specialized models for each individual task. In the case of deep
neural networks, the most common way of learning a new
task is to fine-tune the network. However, as features relevant to the new task are learned through modification of the
network weights, weights important for prior tasks might
be altered, leading to deterioration in performance referred
to as “catastrophic forgetting” [4]. Without access to older
training data due to the lack of storage space, data rights, or
deployed nature of the agent, which are all very realistic constraints, naı̈ve fine-tuning is not a viable option for continual
learning.
Current approaches to overcoming catastrophic forgetting, such as Learning without Forgetting (LwF) [18] and
Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) [14], try to preserve

knowledge important to prior tasks through the use of proxy
losses. The former tries to preserve activations of the initial network while training on new data, while the latter
penalizes the modification of parameters deemed to be important to prior tasks. Distinct from such prior work, we
draw inspiration from approaches in network compression
that have shown impressive results for reducing network size
and computational footprint by eliminating redundant parameters [8, 17, 19, 20]. We propose an approach that uses
weight-based pruning techniques [7, 8] to free up redundant
parameters across all layers of a deep network after it has
been trained for a task, with minimal loss in accuracy. Keeping the surviving parameters fixed, the freed up parameters
are modified for learning a new task. This process is performed repeatedly for adding multiple tasks, as illustrated
in Figure 1. By using the task-specific parameter masks
generated by pruning, our models are able to maintain the
same level of accuracy even after the addition of multiple
tasks, and incur a very low storage overhead per each new
task.
Our experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our method
on several tasks for which high-level feature transfer does not
perform very well, indicating the need to modify parameters
of the network at all layers. In particular, we take a single
ImageNet-trained VGG-16 network [28] and add to it three
fine-grained classification tasks – CUBS birds [29], Stanford
Cars [15], and Oxford Flowers [21] – while achieving accuracies very close to those of separately trained networks
for each individual task. This significantly outperforms prior
work in terms of robustness to catastrophic forgetting, as well
as the number and complexity of added tasks. We also show
that our method is superior to joint training when adding the
large-scale Places365 [30] dataset to an ImageNet-trained
network, and obtain competitive performance on a broad
range of architectures, including VGG-16 with batch normalization [13], ResNets [9], and DenseNets [11].

2. Related Work
A few prior works and their variants, such as Learning
without Forgetting (LwF) [18, 22, 27] and Elastic Weight
Consolidation (EWC) [14, 16], are aimed at training a net17765

