AON: Towards Arbitrarily-Oriented Text Recognition
Zhanzhan Cheng1
Yangliu Xu2
Fan Bai3
Yi Niu1
Shiliang Pu1
Shuigeng Zhou3∗
1
2
Hikvision Research Institute, China; Tongji University, Shanghai, China;
3
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of
Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China;
{chengzhanzhan;xuyangliu;niuyi;pushiliang}@hikvision.com;
1993sallyxyl@tongji.edu.cn;{fbai17;sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Recognizing text from natural images is a hot research
topic in computer vision due to its various applications.
Despite the enduring research of several decades on optical character recognition (OCR), recognizing texts from
natural images is still a challenging task. This is because
scene texts are often in irregular (e.g. curved, arbitrarilyoriented or seriously distorted) arrangements, which have
not yet been well addressed in the literature. Existing methods on text recognition mainly work with regular (horizontal and frontal) texts and cannot be trivially generalized to
handle irregular texts. In this paper, we develop the arbitrary orientation network (AON) to directly capture the
deep features of irregular texts, which are combined into
an attention-based decoder to generate character sequence.
The whole network can be trained end-to-end by using only images and word-level annotations. Extensive experiments on various benchmarks, including the CUTE80, SVTPerspective, IIIT5k, SVT and ICDAR datasets, show that
the proposed AON-based method achieves the-state-of-theart performance in irregular datasets, and is comparable to
major existing methods in regular datasets.

1. Introduction
Scene text recognition has attracted much research interest of the computer vision community [6, 15, 22, 27, 31, 39]
because of its various applications such as road sign recognition and navigation reading for advanced driver assistant system (ADAS). Though Optical Character Recognition
(OCR) has been extensively studied for several decades,
recognizing texts from natural images is still a challenging
task due to complicated environments (e.g. uneven lighting,
blurring, perspective distortion and orientation).
∗ Corresponding author.

In the past years, there have been many works to solve
scene text recognition [6, 22, 31, 39]. Although these approaches have shown promising results, most of them can
effectively handle only regular texts that are often tightlybounded, horizontal and frontal. However, in real-world

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Examples of irregular (slant/perspective, curved and oriented etc.) texts in natural images. Subfigures (a) - (b), (c) - (d)
and (e) - (f) are slant/perspective, curved and oriented images respectively.

applications, many scene texts are in irregular arrangements
(e.g. arbitrarily-oriented, curved, slant and perspective etc.)
as shown in Fig. 1, so most existing methods cannot be
widely applied in practice.
Recently, there are two related works aiming at irregular texts: the spatial transformer network (STN) [18] based method by [32] and the attention-based method with
fully convolutional network (FCN) [23] by [39]. Shi et
al. [32] attempted to first rectify irregular (e.g. curved
or perspectively distorted) texts to approximately regular
texts, then recognized the rectified images with an attentionbased sequence recognition network. However, in complicated (e.g. arbitrarily-oriented or serious curved) natural scenes, it is hard to optimize the STN-based method
without human-labeled geometric ground truth. Besides,
training STN needs sophisticated skills. For example, the
15571

