Neural Sign Language Translation
Necati Cihan Camgoz1 , Simon Hadfield1 , Oscar Koller2 , Hermann Ney2 , Richard Bowden1
1

University of Surrey, {n.camgoz, s.hadfield, r.bowden}@surrey.ac.uk
2
RWTH Aachen University, {koller, ney}@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
Sign Language Recognition (SLR) has been an active
research field for the last two decades. However, most
research to date has considered SLR as a naive gesture
recognition problem. SLR seeks to recognize a sequence of
continuous signs but neglects the underlying rich grammatical and linguistic structures of sign language that differ
from spoken language. In contrast, we introduce the Sign
Language Translation (SLT) problem. Here, the objective
is to generate spoken language translations from sign
language videos, taking into account the different word
orders and grammar.
We formalize SLT in the framework of Neural Machine
Translation (NMT) for both end-to-end and pretrained
settings (using expert knowledge). This allows us to jointly
learn the spatial representations, the underlying language
model, and the mapping between sign and spoken language.
To evaluate the performance of Neural SLT, we collected
the first publicly available Continuous SLT dataset, RWTHPHOENIX-Weather 2014T1 . It provides spoken language
translations and gloss level annotations for German Sign
Language videos of weather broadcasts. Our dataset contains over .95M frames with >67K signs from a sign vocabulary of >1K and >99K words from a German vocabulary
of >2.8K. We report quantitative and qualitative results for
various SLT setups to underpin future research in this newly
established field. The upper bound for translation performance is calculated at 19.26 BLEU-4, while our end-to-end
frame-level and gloss-level tokenization networks were able
to achieve 9.58 and 18.13 respectively.

1. Introduction
Sign Languages are the primary language of the deaf
community. Despite common misconceptions, sign languages have their own specific linguistic rules [55] and do
not translate the spoken languages word by word. Therefore, the numerous advances in SLR [15] and even the move
to the challenging Continuous SLR (CSLR) [33, 36] problem, do not allow us to provide meaningful interpretations
1 https://www-i6.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/
koller/RWTH-PHOENIX-2014-T/
˜

Figure 1. Difference between CSLR and SLT.

of what a signer is saying. This translation task is illustrated in Figure 1, where the sign language glosses give the
meaning and the order of signs in the video, but the spoken
language equivalent (which is what is actually desired) has
both a different length and ordering.
Most of the research that has been conducted in SLR
to date has approached the task as a basic gesture recognition problem, ignoring the linguistic properties of the sign
language and assuming that there is a one-to-one mapping
of sign to spoken words. Contrary to SLR, we propose to
approach the full translation problem as a NMT task. We
use state-of-the-art sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) based
deep learning methods to learn: the spatio-temporal representation of the signs, the relation between these signs (in
other words the language model) and how these signs map
to the spoken or written language. To achieve this we introduce new vision methods, which mirror the tokenization
and embedding steps of standard NMT. We also present the
first continuous SLT dataset, RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather
2014T, to allow future research to be conducted towards
sign to spoken language translation. The contributions of
this paper can be summarized as:
• The first exploration of the video to text SLT problem.
• The first publicly available continuous SLT dataset,
PHOENIX14T, which contains video segments, gloss
annotations and spoken language translations.
• A broad range of baseline results on the new corpus including a range of different tokenization and attention
schemes in addition to parameter recommendations.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2
we survey the fields of sign language recognition, seq2seq
learning and neural machine translation. In Section 3 we
formalize the SLT task in the framework of neural machine translation and describe our pipeline. We then intro4321
7784

