Learning Pixel-level Semantic Affinity with Image-level Supervision
for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Jiwoon Ahn
DGIST, Korea

Suha Kwak
POSTECH, Korea

jyun@dgist.ac.kr

suha.kwak@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
The deficiency of segmentation labels is one of the main
obstacles to semantic segmentation in the wild. To alleviate
this issue, we present a novel framework that generates segmentation labels of images given their image-level class labels. In this weakly supervised setting, trained models have
been known to segment local discriminative parts rather
than the entire object area. Our solution is to propagate
such local responses to nearby areas which belong to the
same semantic entity. To this end, we propose a Deep Neural Network (DNN) called AffinityNet that predicts semantic
affinity between a pair of adjacent image coordinates. The
semantic propagation is then realized by random walk with
the affinities predicted by AffinityNet. More importantly, the
supervision employed to train AffinityNet is given by the initial discriminative part segmentation, which is incomplete
as a segmentation annotation but sufficient for learning semantic affinities within small image areas. Thus the entire
framework relies only on image-level class labels and does
not require any extra data or annotations. On the PASCAL
VOC 2012 dataset, a DNN learned with segmentation labels generated by our method outperforms previous models
trained with the same level of supervision, and is even as
competitive as those relying on stronger supervision.

1. Introduction
Recent development of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
has driven the remarkable improvements in semantic segmentation [2, 3, 4, 19, 22, 25, 32, 39]. Despite the great
success of DNNs, however, we still have a far way to go
in achieving semantic segmentation in an uncontrolled and
realistic environment. One of the main obstacles is lack of
training data. Due to the prohibitively expensive annotation
cost of pixel-level segmentation labels, existing datasets often suffer from lack of annotated examples and class diversity. This makes the conventional approaches limited to a
small range of object categories predefined in the datasets.

Weakly supervised approaches have been studied to resolve the above issue and allow semantic segmentation
models more scalable. Their common motivation is to utilize annotations like bounding boxes [6, 12, 28] and scribbles [18, 36] that are weaker than pixel-level labels but readily available in a large amount of visual data or easily obtainable thanks to their low annotation costs. Among various types of weak annotations for semantic segmentation,
image-level class labels have been widely used [11, 14, 17,
26, 29, 30, 37] since they are already given in existing largescale image datasets (e.g., ImageNet [7]) or automatically
annotated for image retrieval results by search keywords.
However, learning semantic segmentation with the imagelevel label supervision is a significantly ill-posed problem
since such supervision indicates only the existence of a certain object class, and does not inform object location and
shape that are essential for learning segmentation.
Approaches in this line of research have incorporated additional evidences to simulate the location and shape information absent in the supervision. A popular choice for the
localization cue is the Class Activation Map (CAM) [40],
which highlights local discriminative parts of target object
by investigating the contribution of hidden units to the output of a classification DNN. The discriminative areas highlighted by CAMs are in turn used as seeds that will be propagated to cover the entire object area. To recover the object
area accurately from the seeds, previous approaches have
utilized image segmentation [17, 30], motions in video [35],
or both [11], all of which are useful to estimate object shape.
For the same purpose, a class-agnostic salient region is estimated and incorporated with the seeds in [26]. However,
they demand extra data (i.e., videos) [11, 35], additional supervision (i.e., object bounding box) [26], or off-the-shelf
techniques (i.e., image segmentation) that cannot take advantage of representation learning in DNNs [11, 17, 30].
In this paper, we present a simple yet effective approach
to compensate the missing information for object shape
with no external data or additional supervision. The key
component of our framework is AffinityNet, which is a
DNN that takes an image as input and predicts semantic

4981

