PiCANet: Learning Pixel-wise Contextual Attention for Saliency Detection
Nian Liu1
Junwei Han1∗
Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3
1
Northwestern Polytechincal University 2 University of California, Merced
{liunian228, junweihan2010}@gmail.com

3

Google Cloud

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Contexts play an important role in the saliency detection task. However, given a context region, not all contextual information is helpful for the final task. In this paper,
we propose a novel pixel-wise contextual attention network,
i.e., the PiCANet, to learn to selectively attend to informative context locations for each pixel. Specifically, for each
pixel, it can generate an attention map in which each attention weight corresponds to the contextual relevance at
each context location. An attended contextual feature can
then be constructed by selectively aggregating the contextual information. We formulate the proposed PiCANet in both
global and local forms to attend to global and local contexts, respectively. Both models are fully differentiable and
can be embedded into CNNs for joint training. We also incorporate the proposed models with the U-Net architecture
to detect salient objects. Extensive experiments show that
the proposed PiCANets can consistently improve saliency
detection performance. The global and local PiCANets facilitate learning global contrast and homogeneousness, respectively. As a result, our saliency model can detect salient
objects more accurately and uniformly, thus performing favorably against the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection aims at modeling human visual attention mechanism to detect distinct regions or objects, on
which people likely focus their eyes in visual scenes. Contextual information plays an essential role in this visual task.
As one of the earliest pioneering computational saliency
models, Itti et al. [12] calculate the feature difference between each pixel and its surrounding regions as the contrast
to infer saliency. Numerous methods have been subsequently developed [7, 4, 15] that utilize local or global contexts
as the reference to evaluate the contrast of each image location (i.e., local or global contrast). These models aggregate
visual information at all the locations of the referred context
region into a contextual feature to infer contrast.
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Example of learned global and local pixel-wise contextual attention maps. (a) shows the original image and two example
pixels, i.e., the red dot on the foreground dog and the blue dot
on the background. (b) and (c) show the learned global and local contextual attention maps for the two pixels, respectively. The
brightness of each location indicates the magnitude of its attention
weight. The red boxes indicate the referred context regions.

Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been introduced into saliency detection to learn effective
contextual representation. Specifically, several methods
[18, 24, 47] first directly use CNNs to extract features from
multiple image regions with varying contexts and subsequently combine these contextual features to infer saliency.
Some other models [17, 19, 23, 22, 37, 9, 26, 45, 46, 38]
adopt fully convolutional networks (FCNs) [25] for feature
representation at each image location and generate saliency map in a convolutional way. In these models, the first
school extracts contextual features from each input image
region, while the second one extracts features at each image
location from its corresponding receptive field.
However, all the existing models utilize context regions holistically to construct contextual features, in which the
information at every contextual location is integrated. Intuitively, for a specific image pixel, not all of its contextual
information contribute to its final decision. Some related
regions are usually more useful, while other noisy responses should be discarded. For example, for the red dot pixel in the first row in Figure 1, we need to compare it with
the background to infer its global contrast. If we want to

3089

