Hyperparameter Optimization for Tracking with Continuous Deep Q-Learning
Xingping Dong 1 , Jianbing Shen∗ 1,2 , Wenguan Wang 1 , Yu, Liu 1 , Ling Shao 2,3 , and Fatih Porikli 4
1

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
3
School of Computing Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, U.K.
4
Research School of Engineering, Australian National University, Australia

Abstract
Hyperparameters are numerical presets whose values
are assigned prior to the commencement of the learning
process. Selecting appropriate hyperparameters is critical
for the accuracy of tracking algorithms, yet it is difficult to
determine their optimal values, in particular, adaptive ones
for each specific video sequence. Most hyperparameter optimization algorithms depend on searching a generic range
and they are imposed blindly on all sequences. Here, we
propose a novel hyperparameter optimization method that
can find optimal hyperparameters for a given sequence using an action-prediction network leveraged on Continuous
Deep Q-Learning. Since the common state-spaces for object tracking tasks are significantly more complex than the
ones in traditional control problems, existing Continuous
Deep Q-Learning algorithms cannot be directly applied. To
overcome this challenge, we introduce an efficient heuristic to accelerate the convergence behavior. We evaluate our
method on several tracking benchmarks and demonstrate its
superior performance1 .

1. Introduction
Recent years witnessed a burst of object tracking solutions based on correlation filters and deep learning models. After the pioneering work of Henriques et al. [19],
the kernelized correlation filter has evoked increasing attention in tracking applications thanks to its computational advantages, robust performance, and appealing theoreti∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen (shenjianbing@bit.edu.cn).
This work was supported in part by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4182056, the Australian Research Council’s Discovery
Projects funding scheme under Grant DP150104645, the Fok Ying Tung
Education Foundation under Grant 141067, and the Specialized Fund for
Joint Building Program of Beijing Municipal Education Commission.
1 Our source code is available at https://github.com/
shenjianbing/dqltracking.

KCF

SiamFc-3s

Siam-py

Ours

Figure 1. Sample results of our hyperparameter optimization
method on a real-time tracker: Siam-py [48]. By only optimizing the hyperparameters of Siam-py, we achieve a significant improvement. For instance, our method improves the distance precision [53] from 4.6% to an astounding score of 99.7% on Bolt (top
row). It also outperforms the original versions of KCF [19] and
SiamFc-3s [3].

cal framework. Many variants were devised to further improve its accuracy. For instance, Color Name [10] applies
an alternative feature representation, DSST [9] estimates
object scale using a multi-scale correlation filter, and LCT
[34] and MUSTer [20] attempt to recover the target after a
complete occlusion. In parallel, contemporary deep learning models have also been incorporated in object tracking
tasks. Some approaches focus on accuracy, including DeepTrack [27, 28] and MDnet [37], which won the VOT 2015

518

