Image-Image Domain Adaptation with Preserved Self-Similarity and
Domain-Dissimilarity for Person Re-identification
Weijian Deng† , Liang Zheng‡§ , Qixiang Ye† , Guoliang Kang‡ , Yi Yang‡ , Jianbin Jiao†∗
†
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences ‡ University of Technology Sydney
§
Singapore University of Technology and Design
{dengwj16, liangzheng06}@gmail.com, {qxye, jiaojb}@ucas.ac.cn, guoliang.kang@student.uts.edu.au, yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Person re-identification (re-ID) models trained on one
domain often fail to generalize well to another. In our attempt, we present a “learning via translation” framework.
In the baseline, we translate the labeled images from source
to target domain in an unsupervised manner. We then
train re-ID models with the translated images by supervised
methods. Yet, being an essential part of this framework, unsupervised image-image translation suffers from the information loss of source-domain labels during translation.
Our motivation is two-fold. First, for each image, the
discriminative cues contained in its ID label should be
maintained after translation. Second, given the fact that two
domains have entirely different persons, a translated image
should be dissimilar to any of the target IDs. To this end,
we propose to preserve two types of unsupervised similarities, 1) self-similarity of an image before and after translation, and 2) domain-dissimilarity of a translated source image and a target image. Both constraints are implemented
in the similarity preserving generative adversarial network
(SPGAN) which consists of an Siamese network and a CycleGAN. Through domain adaptation experiment, we show
that images generated by SPGAN are more suitable for domain adaptation and yield consistent and competitive re-ID
accuracy on two large-scale datasets.

1. Introduction
This paper considers domain adaptation in person re-ID.
The re-ID task aims at searching for the relevant images to
the query. In our setting, the source domain is fully annotated, while the target domain does not have ID labels.
In the community, domain adaptation of re-ID is gaining
increasing popularity, because 1) of the expensive labeling
process and 2) when models trained on one dataset are directly used on another, the re-ID accuracy drops dramati∗ Corresponding Author

self-similarity

domain-dissimilarity

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of self-similarity and domaindissimilarity. In each triplet, left: an source-domain image,
middle: a source-target translated version of the source image, right: an arbitrary target-domain image. We require
that 1) a source image and its translated image should contain the same ID, i.e., self-similarity, and 2) the translated
image should be of a different ID with any target image,
i.e., domain dissimilarity. Note: the source and target domains contain entirely different IDs.
cally [6] due to dataset bias [41]. Therefore, supervised,
single-domain re-ID methods may be limited in real-world
scenarios, where domain-specific labels are not available.
A common strategy for this problem is unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). But this line of methods assume
that the source and target domains contain the same set of
classes. Such assumption does not hold for person re-ID because different re-ID datasets usually contain entirely different persons (classes). In domain adaptation, a recent trend
consists in image-level domain translation [18, 4, 28]. In
the baseline approach, two steps are involved. First, labeled images from the source domain are transferred to the
target domain, so that the transferred image has a similar
style with the target. Second, the style-transferred images
and their associated labels are used in supervised learning
in the target domain. In literature, commonly used style
transfer methods include [27, 22, 48, 57]. In this paper, we
use CycleGAN [57] following the practice in [27, 18].
In person re-ID, there is a distinct yet unconsidered re-

994

