Weakly Supervised Action Localization by Sparse Temporal Pooling Network
Ting Liu∗

Gautam Prasad
Google
Venice, CA, USA

Phuc Nguyen∗
University of California
Irvine, CA, USA
nguyenpx@uci.edu

{liuti, gautamprasad}@google.com

Bohyung Han
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
bhhan@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a weakly supervised temporal action localization algorithm on untrimmed videos using convolutional
neural networks. Our algorithm learns from video-level
class labels and predicts temporal intervals of human actions with no requirement of temporal localization annotations. We design our network to identify a sparse subset of
key segments associated with target actions in a video using an attention module and fuse the key segments through
adaptive temporal pooling. Our loss function is comprised
of two terms that minimize the video-level action classification error and enforce the sparsity of the segment selection.
At inference time, we extract and score temporal proposals
using temporal class activations and class-agnostic attentions to estimate the time intervals that correspond to target actions. The proposed algorithm attains state-of-the-art
results on the THUMOS14 dataset and outstanding performance on ActivityNet1.3 even with its weak supervision.

1. Introduction
Action recognition and localization in videos are crucial problems for high-level video understanding tasks including, but not limited to, event detection, video summarization, and visual question answering. Many researchers
have been investigating these problems extensively in the
last decades, but the main challenge remains the lack of
appropriate representation methods of videos. Contrary to
the almost immediate success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in many visual recognition tasks for images,
applying deep neural networks to videos is not straightforward due to the inherently complex structures of video data,
high computation demand, lack of knowledge for modeling
temporal information, and so on. Some attempts to using
the representations only from deep learning [18, 29, 35, 40]
were not significantly better than methods relying on handcrafted visual features [21, 36, 37]. As a result, many exist∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

RGB
Stream

Action
Class

RGB T-CAM
Video

Proposals

Action
Location

FLOW T-CAM

FLOW
Stream

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed algorithm. Our algorithm
takes a two-stream input—RGB frames and optical flow between
frames—from a video, and performs action classification and localization concurrently. For localization, Temporal Class Activation Maps (T-CAMs) are computed from the two streams and
employed to generate one dimensional temporal action proposals,
from which the target actions are localized in the temporal domain.

ing algorithms seek to achieve state-of-the-art performance
by combining hand-crafted and learned features.
Many existing video understanding techniques rely on
trimmed videos as their inputs. However, most videos in
the real world are untrimmed and contain large numbers of
irrelevant frames pertaining to target actions and these techniques are prone to fail due to the challenges in extracting
salient information. While action localization algorithms
are designed to operate on untrimmed videos, they usually
require temporal annotations of action intervals, which is
prohibitively expensive and time-consuming at large scale.
Therefore, it is more practical to develop competitive localization algorithms that require minimal temporal annotations for training.
Our goal is to temporally localize actions in untrimmed
videos. To this end, we propose a novel deep neural network that learns to select a sparse subset of useful video

6752

