Dual Attention Matching Network for Context-Aware Feature Sequence based
Person Re-Identification
Jianlou Si1 , Honggang Zhang1 , Chun-Guang Li1 , Jason Kuen2 ,
Xiangfei Kong2 , Alex C. Kot2 , Gang Wang3
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Alibaba AI Labs, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Typical person re-identification (ReID) methods usually
describe each pedestrian with a single feature vector and
match them in a task-specific metric space. However, the
methods based on a single feature vector are not sufficient
enough to overcome visual ambiguity, which frequently occurs in real scenario. In this paper, we propose a novel endto-end trainable framework, called Dual ATtention Matching network (DuATM), to learn context-aware feature sequences and perform attentive sequence comparison simultaneously. The core component of our DuATM framework is a dual attention mechanism, in which both intrasequence and inter-sequence attention strategies are used
for feature refinement and feature-pair alignment, respectively. Thus, detailed visual cues contained in the intermediate feature sequences can be automatically exploited and
properly compared. We train the proposed DuATM network
as a siamese network via a triplet loss assisted with a decorrelation loss and a cross-entropy loss. We conduct extensive experiments on both image and video based ReID
benchmark datasets. Experimental results demonstrate the
significant advantages of our approach compared to the
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (ReID) aims at associating the
same pedestrian across multiple cameras [13, 63], which
has attracted rapidly increased attention in the computer
vision community due to its importance for many potential applications, such as video surveillance analysis and
content-based image/video retrieval. A typical person ReID
pipeline usually describes each pedestrian image or video
footage with a single feature vector firstly and then match
them in a task-specific metric space, where the feature vectors of same pedestrian are expected to have smaller dis-

X

(a)

(b)

(c)

X

(d)

Figure 1. Hard examples in person ReID. (a): negative pair with
similar appearance. (b): positive pair with large spatial displacement. (c): positive pair with body-part missing due to occlusion.
(d): positive video pair with interference frames (marked by ellipse) and temporal misalignments (indicated by red “×” mark).

tances than that of different pedestrians, e.g., [20, 34, 21, 64,
54]. Recently, benefited from the success of deep learning,
feature vector based methods have obtained significant performance improvements [14, 37, 28, 26]. However, when
the individuals undergo drastic appearance changes or when
they are dressed in similar clothes, it becomes quite difficult to use single feature vector based representation for
reliable person ReID. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), different individuals are very similar to each other in appearance, except
for some local patterns on skirts. Unfortunately, the single
feature vector based methods usually pay more attention on
the overall appearance rather than the local discriminative
parts and thus fail to yield accurate matching results. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 1 (d), there are also some interference
frames in each video sequence, which will heavily contaminate the whole feature vector and thus lead to mismatching.
An alternative way to address these problems is to describe each person with a set of feature vectors and match
them based on feature set or feature sequence.1 For example, in [18, 1, 32, 59, 60], the spatial-patch based local feature sequences or body-part based semantic feature
sets are extracted from pedestrian images and matched according to some heuristic correspondence structures; in
[44, 43, 69], multiple sub-segment or frame level compar1 In this paper, we refer to a group of feature vectors as feature sequence
if they have spatial/temporal adjacent relations; otherwise as feature set.

15363

