Deep Semantic Face Deblurring
Ziyi Shen1

Wei-Sheng Lai2
Tingfa Xu1∗
Jan Kautz3
Ming-Hsuan Yang2,4
1
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
University of California, Merced
3
4
Nvidia
Google Cloud
https://sites.google.com/site/ziyishenmi/cvpr18_face_deblur

Abstract
In this paper, we present an effective and efficient face
deblurring algorithm by exploiting semantic cues via deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). As face images are
highly structured and share several key semantic components (e.g., eyes and mouths), the semantic information of
a face provides a strong prior for restoration. As such, we
propose to incorporate global semantic priors as input and
impose local structure losses to regularize the output within
a multi-scale deep CNN. We train the network with perceptual and adversarial losses to generate photo-realistic results and develop an incremental training strategy to handle
random blur kernels in the wild. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate that the proposed face deblurring algorithm restores sharp images with more facial details and performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods in terms of restoration quality, face recognition and execution speed.

1. Introduction
Single image deblurring aims to recover a clear image
from a single blurred input image. Conventional methods
model the blur process (assuming spatially invariant blur) as
the convolution operation between a latent clear image and
a blur kernel, and formulate this problem based on the maximum a posteriori (MAP) framework. As the problem is illposed, the state-of-the-art algorithms rely on natural image
priors (e.g., L0 gradient [48] and dark channel prior [31]) to
constrain the solution space.
While existing image priors are effective for deblurring
natural images, the underlying assumption may not hold
for images from specific categories, e.g., text, face and
low-light conditions. Therefore, numerous approaches exploit domain-specific priors or strategies, such as L0 intensity [30] for text images and light streaks [13] for extremely low-light images. As face images typically have
fewer textures and edges for estimating blur kernels, Pan et
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Face deblurring results. We exploit the semantic information of face within an end-to-end deep CNN for face image
deblurring. (a) Ground truth images (b) Blurred images (c) Ours
w/o semantics (d) Ours w/ semantics.

al. [29] propose to search a similar face exemplar from an
external dataset and extract the contour as reference edges.
However, a similar reference image may not always exist to
cover the diversity of face images in the wild. Furthermore,
those methods based on the MAP framework typically entail heavy computational cost due to the iterative optimization of latent images and blur kernels. The long execution
time limits the applications on resource-sensitive platforms,
e.g., cloud and mobile devices.
In this work, we focus on deblurring face images and
propose an efficient as well as effective solution using
deep CNNs. Since face images are highly structured and
composed of similar components, the semantic information
serves as a strong prior for restoration. Therefore, we propose to leverage the face semantic labels as global priors
and local constraints for deblurring face images. Specifically, we first generate the semantic labels of blurred input
images using a face parsing network. The face deblurring
network then takes the blurred image and semantic labels
as input to restore a clear image in a coarse-to-fine man18260

