DOTA: A Large-scale Dataset for Object Detection in Aerial Images∗
Gui-Song Xia1†, Xiang Bai2†, Jian Ding1 , Zhen Zhu2 , Serge Belongie3 ,
Jiebo Luo4 , Mihai Datcu5 , Marcello Pelillo6 , Liangpei Zhang1
1
Wuhan University, 2 Huazhong Univ. Sci. and Tech. 3 Cornell University,
4
Rochester University, 5 German Aerospace Center (DLR), 6 University of Venice
{guisong.xia, jian.ding, zlp62}@whu.edu.cn, {xbai, zzhu}@hust.edu.cn
sjb344@cornell.edu, jiebo.luo@gmail.com, mihai.datcu@dlr.de, pelillo@dsi.unive.it

Abstract

1. Introduction
Object detection in Earth Vision refers to localizing objects of interest (e.g., vehicles, airplanes) on the earth’s surface and predicting their categories. In contrast to conventional object detection datasets, where objects are generally oriented upward due to gravity, the object instances in
aerial images often appear with arbitrary orientations, as illustrated in Fig. 1, depending on the perspective of the Earth
Vision platforms.
∗ DOTA website is https://captain-whu.github.io/DOTA.
† Equal contribution

(a)

(b)

(c)
ship

(d)
harbor

#Instances

car

(e)

#Instances

Object detection is an important and challenging problem in computer vision. Although the past decade has
witnessed major advances in object detection in natural
scenes, such successes have been slow to aerial imagery,
not only because of the huge variation in the scale, orientation and shape of the object instances on the earth’s surface, but also due to the scarcity of well-annotated datasets
of objects in aerial scenes. To advance object detection research in Earth Vision, also known as Earth Observation
and Remote Sensing, we introduce a large-scale Dataset for
Object deTection in Aerial images (DOTA). To this end, we
collect 2806 aerial images from different sensors and platforms. Each image is of the size about 4000 × 4000 pixels and contains objects exhibiting a wide variety of scales,
orientations, and shapes. These DOTA images are then annotated by experts in aerial image interpretation using 15
common object categories. The fully annotated DOTA images contains 188, 282 instances, each of which is labeled
by an arbitrary (8 d.o.f.) quadrilateral. To build a baseline
for object detection in Earth Vision, we evaluate state-ofthe-art object detection algorithms on DOTA. Experiments
demonstrate that DOTA well represents real Earth Vision
applications and are quite challenging.

(f)

roundabout

#pixels

radians

Figure 1: An example taken from DOTA. (a) Typical image in DOTA consisting of many instances across multiple
categories. (b) Illustration of the variety in instance orientation and size. (c),(d) Illustration of sparse instances and
crowded instances, respectively. Here we show four out of
fifteen of the possible categories in DOTA. Examples shown
in (b),(c),(d) are cropped from source image (a). The histograms (e),(f) exhibit the distribution of instances with respect to size and orientation in DOTA.
Extensive studies have been devoted to object detection
in aerial images [24, 15, 18, 3, 20, 39, 19, 32, 31, 22],
drawing upon recent advances in Computer Vision and accounting for the high demands of Earth Vision applications.
Most of these methods [39, 19, 32, 3] attempt to transfer object detection algorithms developed for natural scenes to the
aerial image domain. Recently, driven by the successes of
deep learning-based algorithms for object detection, Earth

3974

