Geometry Guided Convolutional Neural Networks for
Self-Supervised Video Representation Learning

1

Chuang Gan1 , Boqing Gong2 , Kun Liu3 , Hao Su 4 , Leonidas J. Guibas 5
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab , 2 Tencent AI Lab, 3 BUPT, 4 UCSD, 5 Stanford University

Abstract
It is often laborious and costly to manually annotate
videos for training high-quality video recognition models,
so there has been some work and interest in exploring alternative, cheap, and yet often noisy and indirect training signals for learning the video representations. However, these signals are still coarse, supplying supervision
at the whole video frame level, and subtle, sometimes enforcing the learning agent to solve problems that are even
hard for humans. In this paper, we instead explore geometry, a grand new type of auxiliary supervision for the
self-supervised learning of video representations. In particular, we extract pixel-wise geometry information as flow
fields and disparity maps from synthetic imagery and real
3D movies, respectively. Although the geometry and highlevel semantics are seemingly distant topics, surprisingly,
we find that the convolutional neural networks pre-trained
by the geometry cues can be effectively adapted to semantic video understanding tasks. In addition, we also find that
a progressive training strategy can foster a better neural
network for the video recognition task than blindly pooling
the distinct sources of geometry cues together. Extensive results on video dynamic scene recognition and action recognition tasks show that our geometry guided networks significantly outperform the competing methods that are trained
with other types of labeling-free supervision signals.

1. Introduction
Video understanding is among one of the most fundamental research problems in computer vision and machine
learning. The ubiquity of video acquisition devices (e.g.,
smart phones, surveillance cameras, etc.) has created videos
far surpassing what we can watch. It has therefore been a
pressing need to develop automatic video analysis and understanding algorithms for various applications.
To recognize actions and events happening in videos,
recent approaches that employ deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [12, 17, 31, 34, 35], recurrent networks [15, 33, 4], and attention networks [23, 22] have

achieved state-of-the-art results. They fall into the paradigm
of supervised learning and rely on the existence of largescale well-labeled training data.
However, it is extremely laborious and costly to manually annotate videos. The actions of interest, for instance
“cutting in kitchen”, may last for only several seconds in
an hour-long video. In order to obtain a training example of this action, the annotator needs to watch through the
lengthy video, manually localize those positive frames, and
then trim the video. Even with sophisticated GUIs, the labor cost for obtaining one training video sequence is still
much higher than that of labeling many images. This problem becomes more severe as the number of action classes
grows.
To alleviate the demand for costly human annotations,
there has been some work and interest in exploring alternative, cheap, and yet often noisy and indirect training signals.
By pre-training a neural network with large-scale data with
such supervision signals, a strongly discriminative network
can then be obtained afterwards through fine-tuning on a
small-scale human annotated dataset. Various signals have
been explored in the past [37, 26, 7, 1, 16, 24, 27]. However, these signals are still coarse or vague. The auxiliary
signal is often at the whole video frame level rather than
pixel level. In addition, some of such supervisions are subtle; for example, the temporal ordering used in [24] is even
hard for humans to determine.
In this paper, we explore a new type of auxiliary supervision signal — geometry cues. In particular, we extract
pixel-wise geometry information such as flow fields and disparity maps from synthetic images and real 3D movies, respectively. Although the geometry and semantics seem to
be two distant topics historically, surprisingly, we find that
the network pre-trained by the geometry cues can be well
adapted to semantic understanding tasks. Empirical results
show that our geometry guided networks significantly outperform the baseline methods pre-trained by other auxiliary
signals in the previous work. Intuitively, the signal that can
be used to assist semantic understanding has to be strongly
correlated with semantics. Our experimental results therefore also indicate the intrinsic correlation between the ge-

5589

