Deformable Shape Completion with Graph Convolutional Autoencoders
Or Litany1,2 , Alex Bronstein1,3 , Michael Bronstein4 , Ameesh Makadia2
1
Tel Aviv University 2 Google Research 3 Technion 4 USI Lugano

Abstract
The availability of affordable and portable depth sensors has made scanning objects and people simpler than
ever. However, dealing with occlusions and missing parts
is still a significant challenge. The problem of reconstructing a (possibly non-rigidly moving) 3D object from a single
or multiple partial scans has received increasing attention
in recent years. In this work, we propose a novel learningbased method for the completion of partial shapes. Unlike
the majority of existing approaches, our method focuses on
objects that can undergo non-rigid deformations. The core
of our method is a variational autoencoder with graph convolutional operations that learns a latent space for complete realistic shapes. At inference, we optimize to find the
representation in this latent space that best fits the generated shape to the known partial input. The completed shape
exhibits a realistic appearance on the unknown part. We
show promising results towards the completion of synthetic
and real scans of human body and face meshes exhibiting
different styles of articulation and partiality.

1. Introduction
The problem of reconstructing 3D shapes from partial observations is central to a broad spectrum of applications, ranging from virtual and augmented reality to
robotics and autonomous navigation. Of particular interest is the setting where objects may undergo articulations
or more generally non-rigid deformations. While several
methods based on (volumetric) convolutional neural networks have been proposed for completing man-made rigid
objects (see [12, 51, 55, 61, 49]), they struggle at handling
deformable shapes. However, this is not a limitation specific to volumetric approaches. The same difficulties with
deformable shapes, irrespective of the completion task, are
present for other 3D shape representations utilized in deep
learning frameworks, such as view-based [52, 59] and point
clouds [42, 43].
The main reason for this is that for methods based on
Euclidean convolutional operations (e.g. volumetric or
view-based deep neural networks), an assumption of self-

similarity under rigid transformations (in most cases, axisaligned) is implied. For example a chair seat will always
be parallel to the floor. Non-rigid deformations violate
this assumption, effectively making each pose a novel object. Thus, tackling such data with a standard CNN requires many network parameters and a prohibitively large
amount of training. Although model-based methods such
as [2] have shown good performance, they are restricted to
a specific class of shape with manually constructed models.
To explicitly enable robustness towards non-rigid deformations, the approach advocated in this paper adopts recent
advances for in CNNs on graphs which directly exploit the
3D mesh structure. This allows the learning of a powerful
non-rigid shape representation from data without an explicit
model.
Another shortcoming of deep learning shape completion
techniques stems from their end-to-end design. A network
trained to perform completion would be biased towards the
type of missing data introduced at training, and may not
generalize well to previously unseen types of missing information. To allow generalization to any style of partiality we
choose to separate the task of completion from the training
procedure altogether. As a result, we also avoid a significant
amount of preprocessing and augmentation that is typically
done on the training data.
Finally, when a complete mesh is desired as the output, producing a triangulation from point clouds or volumetric grids is itself a challenging problem and may introduce undesired artifacts (although recent advances such
as [12] address this by directly producing implicit surfaces).
Conversely, by utilizing a mesh-convolutional network our
method will produce complete and plausible surfaces by design.
Contribution. The main contribution of this work is a
method for deformable shape completion that decouples the
task of partial shape completion from the task of learning
a generative shape model, for which we introduce a novel
graph convolutional autoencoder architecture. Compared
to previous works the proposed method has several advantages. First, it can handle any style of partiality without
needing to see any partial shapes during training. Second,
11886

