Two-Stream Convolutional Networks for Dynamic Texture Synthesis
Matthew Tesfaldet Marcus A. Brubaker
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
York University, Toronto

Konstantinos G. Derpanis
Department of Computer Science
Ryerson University, Toronto

{mtesfald,mab}@eecs.yorku.ca

kosta@scs.ryerson.ca

Abstract

Dynamic Texture Synthesis

Dynamics Style Transfer
appearance target

We introduce a two-stream model for dynamic texture
synthesis. Our model is based on pre-trained convolutional
networks (ConvNets) that target two independent tasks: (i)
object recognition, and (ii) optical flow prediction. Given
an input dynamic texture, statistics of filter responses from
the object recognition ConvNet encapsulate the per-frame
appearance of the input texture, while statistics of filter responses from the optical flow ConvNet model its dynamics.
To generate a novel texture, a randomly initialized input sequence is optimized to match the feature statistics from each
stream of an example texture. Inspired by recent work on
image style transfer and enabled by the two-stream model,
we also apply the synthesis approach to combine the texture
appearance from one texture with the dynamics of another
to generate entirely novel dynamic textures. We show that
our approach generates novel, high quality samples that
match both the framewise appearance and temporal evolution of input texture. Finally, we quantitatively evaluate
our texture synthesis approach with a thorough user study.

1. Introduction
Many common temporal visual patterns are naturally described by the ensemble of appearance and dynamics (i.e.,
temporal pattern variation) of their constituent elements.
Examples of such patterns include fire, fluttering vegetation,
and wavy water. Understanding and characterizing these
temporal patterns has long been a problem of interest in human perception, computer vision, and computer graphics.
These patterns have been previously studied under a variety
of names, including turbulent-flow motion [17], temporal
textures [30], time-varying textures [3], dynamic textures
[8], textured motion [45] and spacetime textures [7]. Here,
we adopt the term “dynamic texture”. In this work, we propose a factored analysis of dynamic textures in terms of appearance and temporal dynamics. This factorization is then
used to enable dynamic texture synthesis which, based on

appearance &
dynamics target

output

output

dynamics target

Figure 1: Dynamic texture synthesis. (left) Given an input
dynamic texture as the target, our two-stream model is able
to synthesize a novel dynamic texture that preserves the target’s appearance and dynamics characteristics. (right) Our
two-stream approach enables synthesis that combines the
texture appearance from one target with the dynamics from
another, resulting in a composition of the two.
example texture inputs, generates a novel dynamic texture
instance. It also enables a novel form of style transfer where
the target appearance and dynamics can be taken from different sources as shown in Fig. 1.
Our model is constructed from two convolutional networks (ConvNets), an appearance stream and a dynamics
stream, which have been pre-trained for object recognition
and optical flow prediction, respectively. Similar to previous work on spatial textures [13, 19, 33], we summarize an
input dynamic texture in terms of a set of spatiotemporal
statistics of filter outputs from each stream. The appearance stream models the per frame appearance of the input
texture, while the dynamics stream models its temporal dynamics. The synthesis process consists of optimizing a randomly initialized noise pattern such that its spatiotemporal
statistics from each stream match those of the input texture. The architecture is inspired by insights from human
perception and neuroscience. In particular, psychophysical
studies [6] show that humans are able to perceive the structure of a dynamic texture even in the absence of appearance
cues, suggesting that the two streams are effectively inde-

6703

