Viewpoint-aware Video Summarization
Atsushi Kanehira1 , Luc Van Gool3,4 , Yoshitaka Ushiku1 , and Tatsuya Harada1,2
1

The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN, 3 ETH Zürich, 4 KU Leuven

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel variant of video summarization, namely building a summary that depends on the
particular aspect of a video the viewer focuses on. We refer to this as viewpoint. To infer what the desired viewpoint
may be, we assume that several other videos are available,
especially groups of videos, e.g., as folders on a person’s
phone or laptop. The semantic similarity between videos
in a group vs. the dissimilarity between groups is used
to produce viewpoint-specific summaries. For considering
similarity as well as avoiding redundancy, output summary
should be (A) diverse, (B) representative of videos in the
same group, and (C) discriminative against videos in the
different groups. To satisfy these requirements (A)-(C) simultaneously, we proposed a novel video summarization
method from multiple groups of videos. Inspired by Fisher’s
discriminant criteria, it selects summary by optimizing the
combination of three terms (a) inner-summary, (b) innergroup, and (c) between-group variances defined on the feature representation of summary, which can simply represent
(A)-(C). Moreover, we developed a novel dataset to investigate how well the generated summary reflects the underlying viewpoint. Quantitative and qualitative experiments
conducted on the dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of
proposed method.

1. Introduction
Owing to the recent spread of Internet services and inexpensive cameras, an enormous number of videos have
become available, making it difficult to verify all content.
Thus, video summarization, which compresses a video by
extracting the important parts while avoiding redundancy,
has attracted the attention of many researchers.
The information deemed important can be varied based
on the particular aspect the viewer focuses on, which hereafter we will refer to as viewpoint in this paper1 . For instance, given the video in which the running events take
1 Note it does not mean the physical position.

Viewpoint1

Where is it ?

Viewpoint2

What happens?

Figure 1: Many types of summaries can exist for one video
based on the viewpoint toward it.
place in Venice, as shown in Fig. 1, if we watch it focusing
on the “kind of activity,” the scene in which many runners
come across in front of the camera is considered to be important. Alternatively, if the attention is focused on “place,”
the scene that shows a beautiful building may be more important. Such viewpoints may not be limited to explicit ones
stated in the above examples, and in this sense, the optimal
summary is not necessarily determined in only one way.
Most existing summarization methods, however, assume
there is only one optimal for one video. Even though
the variance between subjects are considered by comparing
multiple human-created summaries during evaluation, it is
difficult to determine how well the viewpoint is considered.
Although several different ways may exist for interpreting a viewpoint, this paper takes the approach of dealing
with it by considering the similarity, which represents what
we feel is similar or dissimilar, and has a close relationship
with the viewpoint. For example, as shown in Fig. 2, “running in Paris” is closer to “running in Venice” than “shopping in Venice” from the viewpoint of the “kind of activity,”
but such a relationship will be reversed when the viewpoint
changes to “place.” Here, we use the word similarity to indicate the one that captures semantic information rather than
17435

