BPGrad: Towards Global Optimality in Deep Learning via Branch and Pruning
Ziming Zhang∗ †
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
201 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02139-1955

Yuanwei Wu∗, Guanghui Wang
EECS, The University of Kansas
1450 Jayhawk Blvd., Lawrence, KS 66045

zzhang@merl.com

{y262w558, ghwang}@ku.edu

Abstract
Understanding the global optimality in deep learning
(DL) has been attracting more and more attention recently.
Conventional DL solvers, however, have not been developed
intentionally to seek for such global optimality. In this paper we propose a novel approximation algorithm, BPGrad,
towards optimizing deep models globally via branch and
pruning. Our BPGrad algorithm is based on the assumption
of Lipschitz continuity in DL, and as a result it can adaptively determine the step size for current gradient given the
history of previous updates, wherein theoretically no smaller
steps can achieve the global optimality. We prove that, by repeating such branch-and-pruning procedure, we can locate
the global optimality within finite iterations. Empirically an
efficient solver based on BPGrad for DL is proposed as well,
and it outperforms conventional DL solvers such as Adagrad, Adadelta, RMSProp, and Adam in the tasks of object
recognition, detection, and segmentation.

1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) has been demonstrated successfully
in many different research areas such as image classification [20], speech recognition [16] and natural language processing [32]. In general, its empirical success stems mainly
from better network architectures [15], larger mount of training data [6], and better learning algorithms [12].
However, theoretical understanding of DL for its success
still remains elusive. Very recently researchers start to understand DL from the perspective of optimization such as the
optimality of learned models [13, 14, 36]. It has been proved
that under certain (very restrictive) conditions the critical
points learned for the deep models actually achieve global
optimality, even though the optimization in deep learning is
highly nonconvex. These theoretical results may partially
explain why such deep models work well in practice.
∗ Joint first authors for the paper.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of how BPGrad works, where each black dot denotes
the solution at each iterations (i.e. branch), directed dotted lines denote the
current gradients, and red dotted circles denote the regions wherein there
should be no solutions achieving global optimality (i.e. pruning). BPGrad
can automatically estimate the scales of these regions based on the function
evaluation of solutions and the Lipschitz continuity assumption.

Global optimality is always desirable and preferred in optimization. Locating global optimality in deep learning, however, is extremely challenging due to its high non-convexity,
and thus no conventional DL solvers, e.g. stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [2], Adagrad [7], Adadelta [37], RMSProp [33] and Adam [18], is intentionally developed for
this purpose, to our best knowledge. Alternatively different
regularization techniques are applied to smooth the objective
functions in DL so that the solvers can converge to some geometrically wider and flatter regions in the parameter space
where good model solutions may exist [39, 4, 40]. But these
solutions may not necessarily be the global optimum.
Inspired by the techniques in global optimization of nonconvex functions, we propose a novel approximation algorithm, BPGrad, which has the ability of locating global
optimality in DL via branch and pruning (BP). BP [29] is
a well-known algorithm developed for searching for global
solutions for nonconvex optimization problems. Its basic
idea is to effectively and gradually shrink the gap between
the lower and upper bounds of global optimum by efficiently
branching and pruning the parameter space. Fig. 1 illustrates
the optimization procedure in BPGrad.
In order to branch and prune the space we assume that the
objective functions in DL are Lipschitz continuous [8], or can
be approximated by Lipschitz functions. This is motivated
by the facts that (1) Lipschitz continuity provides a natural
way to estimate the lower and upper bounds of the global
optimum (see Sec. 2.3.1) used in BP, and (2) it can also
serve as regularization, if needed, to smoothen the objective
functions so that the returned solutions can generalize well.

3301

