Deep Texture Manifold for Ground Terrain Recognition
Jia Xue 1 Hang Zhang 1,2 Kristin Dana 1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University, 2 Amazon AI
{jia.xue, zhang.hang}@rutgers.edu, kdana@ece.rutgers.edu

Abstract
We present a texture network called Deep Encoding
Pooling Network (DEP) for the task of ground terrain
recognition. Recognition of ground terrain is an important
task in establishing robot or vehicular control parameters,
as well as for localization within an outdoor environment.
The architecture of DEP integrates orderless texture details
and local spatial information and the performance of DEP
surpasses state-of-the-art methods for this task. The GTOS
database (comprised of over 30,000 images of 40 classes
of ground terrain in outdoor scenes) enables supervised
recognition. For evaluation under realistic conditions, we
use test images that are not from the existing GTOS dataset,
but are instead from hand-held mobile phone videos of similar terrain. This new evaluation dataset, GTOS-mobile,
consists of 81 videos of 31 classes of ground terrain such
as grass, gravel, asphalt and sand. The resultant network
shows excellent performance not only for GTOS-mobile, but
also for more general databases (MINC and DTD). Leveraging the discriminant features learned from this network,
we build a new texture manifold called DEP-manifold. We
learn a parametric distribution in feature space in a fully
supervised manner, which gives the distance relationship
among classes and provides a means to implicitly represent
ambiguous class boundaries. The source code and database
are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Ground terrain recognition is an important area of research in computer vision for potential applications in autonomous driving and robot navigation. Recognition with
CNNs have achieved success in object recognition and the
CNN architecture balances preservation of relative spatial
information (with convolutional layers) and aggregation of
spatial information (pooling layers). This structure is de1 http://ece.rutgers.edu/vision/

Figure 1: Homogeneous textures (upper row) compared to
more common real-world instances with local spatial structure that provides an important cue for recognition (lower
row).
signed for object recognition, scene understanding, face
recognition, and applications where spatial order is critical for classification. However, texture recognition uses an
orderless component to provide invariance to spatial layout [5, 18, 38].
In classic approaches for texture modeling, images are
filtered with a set of handcrafted filter banks followed by
grouping the outputs into texton histograms [7, 16, 21, 34],
or bag-of-words [6, 15]. Later, Cimpoi et al. [5] introduce
FV-CNN that replace the handcrafted filter banks with pretrained convolutional layers for the feature extractor, and
achieve state-of-the-art results. Recently, Zhang et al. [38]
introduce Deep Texture Encoding Network (Deep-TEN)
that ports the dictionary learning and feature pooling approaches into the CNN pipeline for an end-to-end material/texture recognition network. Recognition algorithms
that focus on texture details work well for images containing only a single material. But for “images in the wild”, homogeneous surfaces rarely fill the entire field-of-view, and
1558

