Data Distillation: Towards Omni-Supervised Learning
Ilija Radosavovic

Piotr Dollár

Ross Girshick

Georgia Gkioxari

Kaiming He

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Abstract
We investigate omni-supervised learning, a special
regime of semi-supervised learning in which the learner exploits all available labeled data plus internet-scale sources
of unlabeled data. Omni-supervised learning is lowerbounded by performance on existing labeled datasets, offering the potential to surpass state-of-the-art fully supervised methods. To exploit the omni-supervised setting, we
propose data distillation, a method that ensembles predictions from multiple transformations of unlabeled data, using a single model, to automatically generate new training
annotations. We argue that visual recognition models have
recently become accurate enough that it is now possible to
apply classic ideas about self-training to challenging realworld data. Our experimental results show that in the cases
of human keypoint detection and general object detection,
state-of-the-art models trained with data distillation surpass the performance of using labeled data from the COCO
dataset alone.

1. Introduction
This paper investigates omni-supervised learning, a
paradigm in which the learner exploits as much wellannotated data as possible (e.g., ImageNet [6], COCO [24])
and is also provided with potentially unlimited unlabeled
data (e.g., from internet-scale sources). It is a special regime
of semi-supervised learning. However, most research on
semi-supervised learning has simulated labeled/unlabeled
data by splitting a fully annotated dataset and is therefore likely to be upper-bounded by fully supervised learning with all annotations. On the contrary, omni-supervised
learning is lower-bounded by the accuracy of training on
all annotated data, and its success can be evaluated by how
much it surpasses the fully supervised baseline.
To tackle omni-supervised learning, we propose to perform knowledge distillation from data, inspired by [3, 18]
which performed knowledge distillation from models. Our
idea is to generate annotations on unlabeled data using a
model trained on large amounts of labeled data, and then
retrain the model using the extra generated annotations.
However, training a model on its own predictions often provides no meaningful information. We address this problem

model A
image

ensemble

model B
model C

student model

predict

Model Distillation

image

transform A

model A

transform B

model A

transform C

model A

student model

ensemble

predict

Data Distillation

Figure 1. Model Distillation [18] vs. Data Distillation. In data
distillation, ensembled predictions from a single model applied to
multiple transformations of an unlabeled image are used as automatically annotated data for training a student model.

by ensembling the results of a single model run on different
transformations (e.g., flipping and scaling) of an unlabeled
image. Such transformations are widely known to improve
single-model accuracy [20] when applied at test time, indicating that they can provide nontrivial knowledge that is not
captured by a single prediction. In other words, in comparison with [18], which distills knowledge from the predictions of multiple models, we distill the knowledge of a single model run on multiple transformed copies of unlabeled
data (see Figure 1).
Data distillation is a simple and natural approach based
on “self-training” (i.e., making predictions on unlabeled
data and using them to update the model), related to which
there have been continuous efforts [36, 48, 43, 33, 22, 46,
5, 21] dating back to the 1960s, if not earlier. However,
our simple data distillation approach can become realistic
largely thanks to the rapid improvement of fully-supervised
models [20, 39, 41, 16, 12, 11, 30, 28, 25, 15] in the past
few years. In particular, we are now equipped with accurate models that may make fewer errors than correct predictions. This allows us to trust their predictions on unseen
14119

