Towards Universal Representation for Unseen Action Recognition
Yi Zhu1 , Yang Long∗2 , Yu Guan2 , Shawn Newsam1 , and Ling Shao3
1

University of California, Merced
Open Lab, School of Computing, Newcastle University, UK.
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE.
2

Abstract
Unseen Action Recognition (UAR) aims to recognise
novel action categories without training examples. While
previous methods focus on inner-dataset seen/unseen splits,
this paper proposes a pipeline using a large-scale training source to achieve a Universal Representation (UR) that
can generalise to a more realistic Cross-Dataset UAR (CDUAR) scenario. We first address UAR as a Generalised
Multiple-Instance Learning (GMIL) problem and discover
‘building-blocks’ from the large-scale ActivityNet dataset
using distribution kernels. Essential visual and semantic
components are preserved in a shared space to achieve the
UR that can efficiently generalise to new datasets. Predicted UR exemplars can be improved by a simple semantic adaptation, and then an unseen action can be directly recognised using UR during the test. Without further training, extensive experiments manifest significant improvements over the UCF101 and HMDB51 benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The field of human action recognition has advanced
rapidly over the past few years. We have moved from
manually designed features [41, 8] to learned convolutional
neural network (CNN) features [39, 15]; from encoding
appearance information to encoding motion information
[37, 40, 36]; and from learning local features to learning
global video features [42, 6, 19]. The performance has continued to soar higher as we incorporate more of the steps
into an end-to-end learning framework [56, 55]. However,
such robust and accurate action classifiers often rely on
large-scale training video datasets using deep neural networks, which require large numbers of expensive annotated
samples per action class. Although several large-scale video
datasets have been proposed like Sports-1M [15], Activi∗ Yang Long contributed equally to this work.

tyNet [13], YouTube-8M [1] and Kinetics [16], it is practically infeasible and extremely costly to annotate action
videos with the ever-growing need of new categories.
Zero-shot action recognition has recently drawn considerable attention because of its ability to recognize unseen
action categories without any labelled examples. The key
idea is to make a trained model that can generalise to unseen
categories with a shared semantic representation. The most
popular side information being used are attributes, word
vectors and visual-semantic embeddings. Such zero-shot
learning frameworks effectively bypass the data collection
limitations of traditional supervised learning approaches,
which makes them more promising paradigms for UAR.
Extensive work on zero-shot action recognition has been
done in the past five years. [22, 10, 12, 26, 24] considered
using attributes for classifications. These attribute-based
methods are easy to understand and implement, but hard
to define and scale up to a large-scale scenario. Semantic
representations like word vectors [9, 3, 25] are thus preferred since only category names are required for constructing the label embeddings. There also has been much recent
work on using visual-semantic embeddings extracted from
pre-trained deep networks [14, 44, 28] due to their superior
performance over single view word vectors or attributes.
However, whichever side information we adopt, the generalisation capability of these approaches is not promising,
which is referred to as the domain shift problem. Most previous work thus still focuses on inner-dataset seen/unseen
splits. This is not very practical since each new dataset or
each category will require re-training. Motivated by such
a fact we propose to utilise a large-scale training source
to achieve a Universal Representation (UR) that can automatically generalise to a more realistic Cross-Dataset UAR
(CD-UAR) scenario. Unseen actions from new datasets can
be directly recognised via the UR without further training
or fine-tuning on the target dataset.
The proposed pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 1. We first
leverage the power of deep neural networks to extract vi-

9436

