Structure Preserving Video Prediction
Jingwei Xu Bingbing Ni∗ Zefan Li Shuo Cheng Xiaokang Yang
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmission
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
{xjwxjw,nibingbing,Leezf,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, acccheng94@gmail.com

Abstract

Proposed Model

Despite recent emergence of adversarial based methods
for video prediction, existing algorithms often produce unsatisfied results in image regions with rich structural information (i.e., object boundary) and detailed motion (i.e., articulated body movement). To this end, we present a structure preserving video prediction framework to explicitly address above issues and enhance video prediction quality.
On one hand, our framework contains a two-stream generation architecture which deals with high frequency video
content (i.e., detailed object or articulated motion structure)
and low frequency video content (i.e., location or moving
directions) in two separate streams. On the other hand, we
propose a RNN structure for video prediction, which employs temporal-adaptive convolutional kernels to capture
time-varying motion patterns as well as tiny objects within
a scene. Extensive experiments on diverse scenes, ranging
from human motion to semantic layout prediction, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed video prediction approach.

1. Introduction
Video prediction is a long-standing task in computer vision research [19, 30, 41, 18]. Boosted by recent emergence
of adversarial learning [21], many work [6, 8, 7] attempt to
predict future video frames, targeting at higher perceptual
quality (i.e., whether the predicted video looks realistic).
For example, the work of [5] considers the video prediction task as a min-max game. MCNet [38] directly combines GAN [11] module into a video prediction framework.
However, pixel level prediction still remains a challenging
task [27], which requires not only to learn the exact static
structure of inputs, e.g., object sketch, but also dynamic motion, e.g., articulated movement pattern. Moreover, many
of these static and dynamic structural information are fine∗ Corresponding Author

Prior Model

(A)Dynamic Structure Prediction

(B)Static Structure Prediction
Figure 1. Comparison prediction examples. (A) Dynamic structure: the weightlifting sports consist of complex compound motion, and prior model tends to produce blurry results. (B) Static
structure: the traffic sign is very hard to maintain during the prediction because of its slim shape.

grained (i.e., with very detailed texture or subtle motion),
which renders video prediction task even more challenging
if object structure and motion information need to be preserved in great detail. As shown in Figure 1, at least the
following difficulties exist:
• Static Structure Loss. This problem mainly arises
from predicting these scenes which has a fixed structure,
e.g., traffic sign, trees etc. in a city landscape. And the
motion of these static structures often result from the motion

1460

