Analytical Modeling of Vanishing Points and Curves in Catadioptric Cameras
Pedro Miraldo
Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa

Francisco Eiras
University of Oxford

Srikumar Ramalingam
University of Utah

pedro.miraldo@tecnico.ulisboa.pt

francisco.eiras@cs.ox.ac.uk

srikumar@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Vanishing points and vanishing lines are classical geometrical concepts in perspective cameras that have a lineage dating back to 3 centuries. A vanishing point is a point
on the image plane where parallel lines in 3D space appear
to converge, whereas a vanishing line passes through 2 or
more vanishing points. While such concepts are simple and
intuitive in perspective cameras, their counterparts in catadioptric cameras (obtained using mirrors and lenses) are
more involved. For example, lines in the 3D space map to
higher degree curves in catadioptric cameras. The projection of a set of 3D parallel lines converges on a single point
in perspective images, whereas they converge to more than
one point in catadioptric cameras. To the best of our knowledge, we are not aware of any systematic development of
analytical models for vanishing points and vanishing curves
in different types of catadioptric cameras. In this paper,
we derive parametric equations for vanishing points and
vanishing curves using the calibration parameters, mirror
shape coefficients, and direction vectors of parallel lines in
3D space. We show compelling experimental results on vanishing point estimation and absolute pose estimation for a
wide range of catadioptric cameras in both simulations and
real experiments.

1. Introduction
The idea of vanishing points in catadioptric images is
definitely more involved than the classical and well-known
image of the point of convergence from parallel railroad
tracks. In Fig 1, we show two images of an urban scene captured using a spherical catadioptric camera (a pinhole camera looking at a spherical mirror). We consider two sets of
parallel lines and their associated curves in the image space.
First, we do not think in terms of straight lines in catadioptric images. Lines in the 3D space are projected to curves
in catadioptric images. Furthermore, unlike perspective images, each set of parallel lines converges at more than one
vanishing point. For example, in Fig. 1(a), the set of parallel lines projects as curves that intersect at two vanishing

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: We illustrate vanishing points and vanishing
curves in a catadioptric camera. (a) and (b) show two images from a spherical catadioptric camera. In (a), the red
curves denote a set of parallel lines in 3D space, and the
two blue points where the red curves converge are the two
vanishing points. Similarly we show two other vanishing
points associated with a different set of parallel lines that
are denoted by green lines. In (b), we show a red vanishing
curve passing through two or more vanishing points.

points. In Fig. 1(b), we show a vanishing curve that passes
through more than one vanishing point. In other words,
we can think of vanishing curves as some sort of horizon
curves. These illustrated vanishing points and vanishing
curves can also be expressed in polynomial equations, i.e.,
expressed in parametric equations. The main contribution
of this paper is the analytical modeling of vanishing points
and vanishing curves for different classes of catadioptric
cameras (e.g., spherical, ellipsoidal, or hyperbolic mirrors).
In perspective cameras, vanishing points and vanishing
lines are classical concepts that were primarily used by
artists for drawings. However, these concepts are not just
artistic fascinations, and they have been used by many vision researchers for a wide variety of applications: camera
calibration [22, 23, 54, 57, 28], robot control [51, 49, 14],
3D reconstruction [44, 33, 24, 17, 48] and rotation estimation [4, 35, 39, 25, 11, 21]. This paper focuses on catadioptric cameras [42], which refers to a camera system where
a pinhole camera observes the world from the reflection

2012

