Facial Expression Recognition by De-expression Residue Learning
Huiyuan Yang, Umur Ciftci and Lijun Yin
Department of Computer Science
State University of New York at Binghamton, USA
{hyang51, uciftci}@binghamton.edu; lijun@cs.binghamton.edu

Abstract
A facial expression is a combination of an expressive
component and a neutral component of a person. In this
paper, we propose to recognize facial expressions by extracting information of the expressive component through
a de-expression learning procedure, called De-expression
Residue Learning (DeRL). First, a generative model is
trained by cGAN. This model generates the corresponding
neutral face image for any input face image . We call this
procedure de-expression because the expressive information is filtered out by the generative model; however, the
expressive information is still recorded in the intermediate layers. Given the neutral face image, unlike previous
works using pixel-level or feature-level difference for facial
expression classification, our new method learns the deposition (or residue) that remains in the intermediate layers
of the generative model. Such a residue is essential as it
contains the expressive component deposited in the generative model from any input facial expression images. Seven
public facial expression databases are employed in our
experiments. With two databases (BU-4DFE and BP4Dspontaneous) for pre-training, the DeRL method has been
evaluated on five databases, CK+, Oulu-CASIA, MMI, BU3DFE, and BP4D+. The experimental results demonstrate
the superior performance of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Research on facial expression recognition (FER) has
been conducted on both posed and spontaneous facial expressions under various imaging conditions, including various head poses, illumination conditions, resolutions, and
occlusions [34] [14] [17] [18] [12]. Although significant
progress has been made towards improving the expression
classification, the current main challenge comes from the
large variations of individuals in attributes such as: age,
gender, ethnic background and personality. Facial expressions may appear different (w.r.t. expressiveness or subtlety, etc.) for people with different personalities and ex-

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed method - De-expression
Residue Learning (DeRL). A facial expression is the combination
of a neutral face image and the expressive component. Our proposed method recognizes facial expression by learning the residual
expressive component in the generative model.

pressive styles. Only recently have works [21] [13] started
to take aspects of subject’s identity attributes i.e., age, gender, and personal characteristics, into consideration for facial expression analysis.
Research shows that people are capable of recognizing
facial expressions by comparing a subject’s expression with
a reference expression (i.e., neutral expression) of the same
subject [4] [5] [10]. In other words, a facial expression
can be decomposed to an expressive component and neutral
component [25]. Up until now, several existing works utilized the image-difference or feature-difference of the query
image and neutral face image [2] [30] [15] [13] to recognize facial expressions. However, their assumption is that
the neutral expression must be obtainable. As a matter of
fact, the neutral expression may not be always available for
a given subject. In order to alleviate the problem, it is on demand to develop a neutral expression generator based on the
given expressive input. The Generative Adversarial Model

2168

