Focus Manipulation Detection via Photometric Histogram Analysis
Scott McCloskey
Honeywell ACS Labs
Golden Valley, MN 55422

Can Chen
Computer Information & Science
University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19716

scott.mccloskey@honeywell.com

canchen@udel.edu

Jingyi Yu
University of Delaware, ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai, CHN 200031
yu@eecis.udel.edu

Abstract
With the rise of misinformation spread via social media
channels, enabled by the increasing automation and realism of image manipulation tools, image forensics is an increasingly relevant problem. Classic image forensic methods leverage low-level cues such as metadata, sensor noise
fingerprints, and others that are easily fooled when the image is re-encoded upon upload to facebook, etc. This necessitates the use of higher-level physical and semantic cues
that, once hard to estimate reliably in the wild, have become
more effective due to the increasing power of computer vision. In particular, we detect manipulations introduced by
artificial blurring of the image, which creates inconsistent
photometric relationships between image intensity and various cues. We achieve 98% accuracy on the most challenging cases in a new dataset of blur manipulations, where the
blur is geometrically correct and consistent with the scene’s
physical arrangement. Such manipulations are now easily generated, for instance, by smartphone cameras having
hardware to measure depth, e.g. ‘Portrait Mode’ of the iPhone7Plus. We also demonstrate good performance on
a challenge dataset evaluating a wider range of manipulations in imagery representing ‘in the wild’ conditions.

1. Introduction
Image forensics is a long-standing problem whose objective is to detect manipulations which call into question
the veracity of the image content. Manipulating images is
now easier than ever, given the computer vision powered
advance of software packages such as PhotoShop, and the
forensic task is harder than ever due to sheer volume of images created and shared on modern platforms. A false de-

tection rate that would have been acceptable in a previous
era is now completely unworkable, for example, when applied to the 30 billion images shared via Instagram.
Artificial blur can be used to obscure important details and, unlike metadata edits or other forensic cues, both
motion and optical blur are naturally-occurring phenomena. Indeed, as shown by the recent popularity of Portrait
Mode-type features, blur is a desirable feature of high quality images. Shallow depth of field (DoF), in which nonsubject parts of the image are blurred, is a signature element
in professional photography and film editing. DoF effects are known to improve photorealism, mediate monocular
depth perception [21, 22], and improve the salience of focused objects. Shallow DoF with smooth Bokeh and correct
blur in out-of-focus regions has long required high-end Digital Single-Lens Reflex (DSLR) cameras with high quality
lenses, while small aperture mobile phone cameras sharply
image all parts of the scene. Not surprisingly, then, enabling
shallow DoF effects have been identified as a key objective
of computational photography teams at Google [2] and elsewhere. Software and mobile phone apps such as PhotoShop
[1], FabFocus [4], Depth Effects [3], etc. provide the shallow DoF effect, but require a lot of user effort and don’t
enforce 3D geometric consistency. To address this, recent smartphones - such as the iPhone7Plus, Google Pixel 2,
and HuaweiHonor8 - use 3D sensing hardware and/or algorithms which automates the production of shallow DoF
images that are geometrically correct.
Though these manipulations are geometrically consistent and visually persuasive, there are still detectable differences with images having genuinely shallow DoF. The key
commonality of these manipulation methods is that they apply the local blur in software, where the blur kernel doubles
as a de-noising filter. As a result, these manipulations in11674

