Deep Face Detector Adaptation
without Negative Transfer or Catastrophic Forgetting
Muhammad Abdullah Jamal
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816

Haoxiang Li
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA 95110

Boqing Gong
Tencent AI Lab
Bellevue, WA 98004

a jamal@Knights.ucf.edu

lhxustcer@gmail.com

boqinggo@outlook.com

Abstract
Arguably, no single face detector fits all real-life scenarios. It is often desirable to have some built-in schemes for
a face detector to automatically adapt, e.g., to a particular user’s photo album (the target domain). We propose a
novel face detector adaptation approach that works as long
as there are representative images of the target domain no
matter they are labeled or not and, more importantly, without the need of accessing the training data of the source
domain. Our approach explicitly accounts for the notorious negative transfer caveat in domain adaptation thanks
to a residual loss by design. Moreover, it does not incur
catastrophic interference with the knowledge learned from
the source domain and, therefore, the adapted face detectors maintain about the same performance as the old detectors in the original source domain. As such, our adaption
approach to face detectors is analogous to the popular interpolation techniques for language models; it may opens a
new direction for progressively training the face detectors
domain by domain. We report extensive experimental results to verify our approach on two massively benchmarked
face detectors.

1. Introduction
Face detection is often the very first step in analyzing
faces. Recent literatures [3, 4, 5, 6] demonstrate the effectiveness of deep learning for face detection. However, as a
massively data-driven method, the deep learning based face
detectors are inevitably biased accordingly to the training
data distribution. Collecting a comprehensive dataset for
training can be highly expensive, if not impossible. Besides,
considering the limited computational budget in real-world
applications, arguably, there is no single face detector that
fits all scenarios.
To address the discrepancy between the data distribution
in training and the deployment of the face detector, it is

highly desirable to have some adaptation mechanism built
for the face detectors. When there are labeled or unlabeled
images available from a particular target domain, one can
adapt the detectors to achieve better performance in the target domain than the original ones do.
In this paper, we propose a novel face detector adaptation
approach that is applicable whenever the target domain supplies many representative images, no matter they are labeled
or not. It entails some very interesting properties which we
contend are missing or not explicitly discussed in the previous works of adapting face detectors [7, 8, 9].
First of all, our approach is designed to avoid negative
transfer, i.e., the adapted detector is supposed to perform
better than or at least on par with the original one in the
target domain. It is worth noting that the negative transfer
frequently occurs in domain adaptation [10, 11, 12], being a
notoriously hard problem to solve. Moreover, this problem
is likely more severe in the face detector adaptation since
the room to improve the state-of-the-art face detectors is
actually very small — for the same reason, we argue that it
is vital for a face detector adaptation algorithm to explicitly
take account of the negative transfer caveat.
Besides, we do not rely on the source data to conduct the
adaptation, in a sharp contrast to most domain adaptation
methods for generic visual recognition [13, 14, 15]. Indeed,
the face detector adaptation is supposed to be done without
accessing the source data because the source datasets are
often extremely large and contain sensitive identity information. We note that some existing works on face detector
adaptation [9] actually follow this protocol.
At last but not the least, we strive to prevent our approach from catastrophic forgetting or the so called interference [16, 17, 18] with the source domain. In this sense, our
method is analogous to the well-known language model interpolation [19] where one extends the old language model
by interpolating it with the one trained for a new domain
such that, in expectation, the resulting model performs well
on all old domains as well the new domain. As such, our
approach may also open an alternative direction for training
15608

