Enhancing the Spatial Resolution of Stereo Images using a Parallax Prior
Daniel S. Jeon
Seung-Hwan Baek
Inchang Choi
Min H. Kim∗
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{sjjeon,shwbaek,inchangchoi,minhkim}@vclab.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a novel method that can enhance the spatial resolution of stereo images using a parallax prior. While traditional stereo imaging has focused on estimating depth from
stereo images, our method utilizes stereo images to enhance
spatial resolution instead of estimating disparity. The critical challenge for enhancing spatial resolution from stereo
images: how to register corresponding pixels with subpixel
accuracy. Since disparity in traditional stereo imaging is
calculated per pixel, it is directly inappropriate for enhancing spatial resolution. We, therefore, learn a parallax prior
from stereo image datasets by jointly training two-stage networks. The first network learns how to enhance the spatial
resolution of stereo images in luminance, and the second
network learns how to reconstruct a high-resolution color
image from high-resolution luminance and chrominance of
the input image. Our two-stage joint network enhances
the spatial resolution of stereo images significantly more
than single-image super-resolution methods. The proposed
method is directly applicable to any stereo depth imaging
methods, enabling us to enhance the spatial resolution of
stereo images.

1. Introduction
With recent advances in mobile phones, a dual camera is
more commonly used to estimate depth information, allowing for 3D imaging and augmented reality applications.
While traditional stereo imaging has focused on depth estimation, other applications from stereo have rarely been discussed. In this work, we present a novel method that allows
us to enhance the spatial resolution of stereo images. To
enhance spatial resolution, multiple sampling with subpixel
offsets is necessary [42]. Since we have two images in a
stereo pair, the disparity exists between these images and is
much larger than a pixel. While the disparity in traditional
stereo imaging allows us to estimate depth, per-pixel registration using disparity is insufficient to enhance the spa∗ Corresponding author’s email: minhkim@kaist.ac.kr

Ground truth

Bicubic upsampling

Bhavsar

Our method

PSNR

32.00 dB

26.85 dB

35.90 dB

Figure 1: Compared to a naı̈ve approach of bicubic upsampling, Bhavsar et al. [5] enhance the spatial resolution but
suffer from jaggy aliasing artifacts. The proposed method
can enhance the spatial resolution significantly by taking
advantage of stereo input.
tial resolution of stereo images. We, therefore, propose a
method that learns a subpixel parallax prior to enhance the
spatial resolution of stereo images.
Traditional approaches to enhance spatial resolution utilize multiple source images of low resolution with jittered
subpixel offsets. Multiple shots or sequentially-moving
video frames have been used as input [42]. Recent advances
in enhancing spatial resolution have recovered a highresolution image from a single source image itself by finding similar small patches [20, 52, 24, 53, 36, 43], joint learning [15, 8], or convolutional neural networks [13, 53, 9].
These data-driven approaches are a great success indeed in
enhancing the resolution of a single image. However, no
work looks into stereo images as input for enhancing spatial
resolution, since stereo images are different due to parallax.
In this work, we propose a novel method that takes stereo
images as input to enhance spatial resolution.
A simple solution for enhancing the spatial resolution of
stereo images is to utilize disparity obtained from a depthfrom-stereo algorithm to register pixels in a pair of stereo
images [4, 5, 41]. However, the disparity accuracy obtained
from stereo imaging is significantly lower than the subpixel
precision required for super-resolution reconstruction [42],
in addition to correspondence errors of stereo matching.
Therefore, the reconstructed resolution of prior stereo en11721

