Pose-Guided Photorealistic Face Rotation
Yibo Hu1,2 , Xiang Wu1 , Bing Yu3 , Ran He1,2∗, Zhenan Sun1,2
1

CRIPAC & NLPR & CEBSIT, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Noah’s Ark Laboratory, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

{yibo.hu, xiang.wu}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, yubing5@huawei.com, {rhe, znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Face rotation provides an effective and cheap way for data augmentation and representation learning of face recognition. It is a challenging generative learning problem due
to the large pose discrepancy between two face images.
This work focuses on flexible face rotation of arbitrary head
poses, including extreme profile views. We propose a novel Couple-Agent Pose-Guided Generative Adversarial Network (CAPG-GAN) to generate both neutral and profile
head pose face images. The head pose information is encoded by facial landmark heatmaps. It not only forms a mask
image to guide the generator in learning process but also
provides a flexible controllable condition during inference.
A couple-agent discriminator is introduced to reinforce on
the realism of synthetic arbitrary view faces. Besides the
generator and conditional adversarial loss, CAPG-GAN
further employs identity preserving loss and total variation regularization to preserve identity information and refine local textures respectively. Quantitative and qualitative
experimental results on the Multi-PIE and LFW databases consistently show the superiority of our face rotation
method over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the convolutional neural networks
trained on large-scale face databases [2, 10], the performance of face recognition systems has been significantly improved in recent years. However, pose variations still
pose a great challenge to face recognition in real-world scenarios. The existing methods that address this pose problem can be generally categorized into two classes. The first
one aims to obtain pose-invariant embeddings [2, 22, 28].
The other aims to normalize face images [14, 35] to frontal
views, which can be directly used by general face recogni∗ corresponding author

Figure 1. The framework of CAPG-GAN. The generator incorporates pose information by landmark heatmaps in the learning process. The couple-agent discriminator distinguishes generated pairs
from ground-truth pairs for photorealistic synthesization.

tion methods without retraining the recognition models.
For the first class, metric learning [25] is a common way
to achieve pose-invariant embeddings. Moreover, multiview [19, 30] or multiple pose-specific [21] methods are
also used to obtain pose invariance. However, due to the
imbalanced distributions that characterize a long tail distribution of large pose faces, it is often difficult to achieve
ideal pose-invariance across large pose variations.
The second class is often known as face rotation, which
resorts to computer graphics or deep learning to rotate profile faces to frontal views. Recently, deep learning based
methods have shown impressive capability on face rotation
[17, 27, 39]. Early efforts [34] adopt the mean square loss
to learn a deep regression model from paired training data. Later on, multiple methods have been proposed with
novel network architecture [33, 40, 41] or learning objectives [14, 28, 35]. As a representative method, TP-GAN [14]
adopts a two-pathway architecture along with sophisticated
loss functions to learn photorealistic frontal view synthe-

8398

