CleanNet: Transfer Learning for Scalable Image Classifier Training
with Label Noise
Kuang-Huei Lee1
Xiaodong He2∗
Lei Zhang1
1
2
Microsoft AI and Research
JD AI Research
{kualee,leizhang}@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of learning image
classification models with label noise. Existing approaches
depending on human supervision are generally not scalable as manually identifying correct or incorrect labels is
time-consuming, whereas approaches not relying on human supervision are scalable but less effective. To reduce
the amount of human supervision for label noise cleaning,
we introduce CleanNet, a joint neural embedding network,
which only requires a fraction of the classes being manually verified to provide the knowledge of label noise that
can be transferred to other classes. We further integrate
CleanNet and conventional convolutional neural network
classifier into one framework for image classification learning. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm on both of the label noise detection task and the
image classification on noisy data task on several largescale datasets. Experimental results show that CleanNet
can reduce label noise detection error rate on held-out
classes where no human supervision available by 41.5%
compared to current weakly supervised methods. It also
achieves 47% of the performance gain of verifying all images with only 3.2% images verified on an image classification task. Source code and dataset will be available at
kuanghuei.github.io/CleanNetProject.

1. Introduction
One of the key factors that drive recent advances in largescale image recognition is massive collections of labeled
images like ImageNet [5] and COCO [15]. However, it
is normally expensive and time-consuming to collect largescale manually labeled datasets. In practice, for fast development of new image recognition tasks, a widely used
surrogate is to automatically collect noisy labeled data from
Internet [6, 11, 25]. Yet many studies have shown that label
noise can affect accuracy of the induced classifiers significantly [7, 19, 22, 27], making it desirable to develop algorithms for learning in presence of label noise.
∗ Work performed while working at Microsoft.

xiaodong.he@jd.com

Linjun Yang3∗
3
Facebook
linjuny@fb.com

Learning with label noise can be categorized by type of
supervision: methods that rely on human supervision and
methods that do not. For instance, some of the large-scale
training data were constructed using classifiers trained on
manually verified seed images to remove label noise (e.g.
LSUN [37] and Places [38]). Some studies for learning convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with noise also rely on
manual labeling to estimate label confusion [20, 35]. The
methods using human supervision exhibit a disadvantage in
scalability as they require labeling effort for every class. For
classification tasks with millions of classes [4, 8], it is infeasible to have even one manual annotation per class. In
contrast, methods without human supervision (e.g. model
predictions-based filtering [7] and unsupervised outliers removal [17, 24, 34]) are scalable but often less effective and
more heuristic. Going with any of the existing approaches,
either all the classes or none need to be manually verified.
It is difficult to have both scalability and effectiveness.
In this work, we strive to reconcile this gap. We observe that one of the key ideas for learning from noisy data
is finding “class prototypes” to effectively represent classes.
Methods learn from manually verified seed images like [37]
and methods assume majority correctness like [1] belong to
this category. Inspired by this observation, we develop an
attention mechanism that learns how to select representative seed images in a reference image set collected for each
class with supervised information, and transfer the learned
knowledge to other classes without explicit human supervision through transfer learning. This effectively addresses
the scalability problem of the methods that rely on human
supervision.
Thus, we introduce “label cleaning network” (CleanNet), a novel neural architecture designed for this setting.
First, we develop a reference set encoder with the attention mechanism to encode a set of reference images of a
class to an embedding vector that represents that class. Second, in parallel to reference set embedding, we also build
a query embedding vector for each individual image and
impose a matching constraint in training to require a query
embedding to be similar to its class embedding if the query
is relevant to its class. In other words, the model can tell

5447

