Learning Attribute Representations with Localization
for Flexible Fashion Search
Kenan E. Ak,1,2 Ashraf A. Kassim1 , Joo Hwee Lim 2 , and Jo Yew Tham3
1
National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
ESP xMedia Pte. Ltd., Singapore
emir.ak@u.nus.edu, ashraf@nus.edu.sg, joohwee@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, thamjy@espxmedia.com

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate ways of conducting a detailed fashion search using query images and attributes. A
credible fashion search platform should be able to (1) find
images that share the same attributes as the query image,
(2) allow users to manipulate certain attributes, e.g. replace collar attribute from round to v-neck, and (3) handle region-specific attribute manipulations, e.g. replacing
the color attribute of the sleeve region without changing the
color attribute of other regions. A key challenge to be addressed is that fashion products have multiple attributes and
it is important for each of these attributes to have representative features. To address these challenges, we propose the
FashionSearchNet which uses a weakly supervised localization method to extract regions of attributes. By doing so,
unrelated features can be ignored thus improving the similarity learning. Also, FashionSearchNet incorporates a new
procedure that enables region awareness to be able to handle region-specific requests. FashionSearchNet outperforms
the most recent fashion search techniques and is shown to
be able to carry out different search scenarios using the dynamic queries.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, there has been remarkable
progress in fashion related research, which includes recognition [14, 31, 36], attribute discovery [19, 42], recommendation [4, 20, 35], retrieval [10, 18, 36] and human/fashion
parsing [29, 34, 43]. While the key issue addressed in mainstream image retrieval research is in cross-domain retrieval,
a major challenge is managing situations where there are
many attributes.
It is especially difficult to conduct a search by changing
a certain attribute of the query image since it may be hard to
find a balance between "maintaining the current attributes"

Figure 1: Given a query image, two different fashion search scenarios are conducted. Each attribute manipulation operation provides the desired attribute, that redefines the representation of the
query image. The proposed FashionSearchNet then retrieves the
most similar three images by incorporating the query image with
the requested manipulations as shown.

and "adding a new attribute". In [46], this problem is defined as attribute manipulation and a solution is provided by
combining features of the query image with a representation
of the desired attribute. Another approach involves allowing
users to decide which image is more preferred through "relevance feedback" but it can be computationally intensive
[26, 28, 40]. In any case, these methods do not explore the
localization aspect of feature representations which could
help leaving out some artifacts of the unwanted attributes.
This paper introduces the FashionSearchNet which is
able to conduct fashion searches using just query images
and also query images with basic and region-specific attribute manipulations. Figure 1 illustrates two attribute
manipulation scenarios for a given query image. For the
first scenario, the color and collar attributes are changed
to "beige" and "hood" respectively. The second scenario involves, a more specific attribute manipulation which
changes the color of torso region to "red". While for the first
attribute manipulation scenario resulted in suitable matches
17708

