NAG: Network for Adversary Generation
Konda Reddy Mopuri*, Utkarsh Ojha*, Utsav Garg and R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Computational and Data Sciences
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Abstract
Adversarial perturbations can pose a serious threat for
deploying machine learning systems. Recent works have
shown existence of image-agnostic perturbations that can
fool classifiers over most natural images. Existing methods
present optimization approaches that solve for a fooling objective with an imperceptibility constraint to craft the perturbations. However, for a given classifier, they generate
one perturbation at a time, which is a single instance from
the manifold of adversarial perturbations. Also, in order
to build robust models, it is essential to explore the manifold of adversarial perturbations. In this paper, we propose
for the first time, a generative approach to model the distribution of adversarial perturbations. The architecture of
the proposed model is inspired from that of GANs and is
trained using fooling and diversity objectives. Our trained
generator network attempts to capture the distribution of
adversarial perturbations for a given classifier and readily
generates a wide variety of such perturbations. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that perturbations crafted
by our model (i) achieve state-of-the-art fooling rates, (ii)
exhibit wide variety and (iii) deliver excellent cross model
generalizability. Our work can be deemed as an important
step in the process of inferring about the complex manifolds
of adversarial perturbations.

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems are shown [5, 4, 11] to be
vulnerable to adversarial noise: small but structured perturbation added to the input that affects the model’s prediction drastically. Recently, the most successful Deep
Neural Network based object classifiers have also been observed [29, 9, 19, 16, 22] to be susceptible to adversarial attacks with almost imperceptible perturbations. Researchers
have attempted to explain this intriguing aspect via hypothesizing linear behaviour of the models (e.g. [9, 19]), finite
training data (e.g. [3]), etc. More importantly, the adversar* Equal contribution.

ial perturbations exhibit cross model generalizability. That
is, the perturbations learned on one model can fool another
model even if the second model has a different architecture
or has been trained with different dataset [29, 9].
Recent startling findings by Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [18]
and Mopuri et al. [21, 20] have shown that it is possible to
mislead multiple state-of-the-art deep neural networks over
most of the images by adding a single perturbation. That is,
these perturbations are image-agnostic and can fool multiple diverse networks trained on a target dataset. Such perturbations are named “Universal Adversarial Perturbations”
(UAP), because a single adversarial noise can perturb images from multiple classes. On one side, the adversarial
noise poses a severe threat for deploying machine learning
based systems in the real world. Particularly, for the applications that involve safety and privacy (e.g., autonomous
driving and access granting), it is essential to develop robust models against adversarial attacks. On the other side,
it also poses a challenge to our understanding of these models and the current learning practices. Thus, the adversarial
behaviour of the deep learning models to small and structured noise demands a rigorous study now more than ever.
All the existing methods, weather image specific [29, 9,
19, 6, 17] or agnostic [18, 21, 20], can craft only a single perturbation that makes the target classifier susceptible.
Specifically, these methods typically learn a single perturbation (δ) from a possibly bigger set of perturbations (∆)
that can fool the target classifier. It is observed that for a
given technique (e.g., UAP [18], FFF [21]), the perturbations learned across multiple runs are not very different. In
spite of optimizing with a different data ordering or initialization, their objectives end up learning very close perturbations in the space (refer sec. 3.3). In essence, these approaches can only prove that the UAPs exist for a given classifier by crafting one such perturbation (δ). This is very limited information about the underlying distribution of such
perturbations and in turn about the target classifier itself.
Therefore, a more relevant task at hand is to model the distribution of adversarial perturbations. Doing so can help us
better analyze the susceptibility of the models against ad-

742

