InverseFaceNet: Deep Monocular Inverse Face Rendering
Hyeongwoo Kim 1, 2
Justus Thies 4

Michael Zollhöfer 1, 2, 3
Christian Richardt 5

Ayush Tewari 1, 2
Christian Theobalt 1, 2

1

2
Max-Planck-Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
3
4
5
Stanford University
Technical University of Munich
University of Bath
Input

Esimate

Geometry

Error

Input

Esimate

Geometry

Error

10mm

10mm

0mm

0mm

Figure 1. Our single-shot deep inverse face renderer InverseFaceNet obtains a high-quality geometry, reflectance and illumination estimate
from just a single input image. We jointly recover the facial pose, shape, expression, reflectance and incident scene illumination. From left
to right: the input photo, our estimated face model, its geometry, and the pointwise Euclidean geometry error compared to Garrido et al. [19].

Abstract
We introduce InverseFaceNet, a deep convolutional inverse
rendering framework for faces that jointly estimates facial
pose, shape, expression, reflectance and illumination from
a single input image. By estimating all parameters from
just a single image, advanced editing possibilities on a
single face image, such as appearance editing and relighting,
become feasible in real time. Most previous learning-based
face reconstruction approaches do not jointly recover all
dimensions, or are severely limited in terms of visual quality.
In contrast, we propose to recover high-quality facial pose,
shape, expression, reflectance and illumination using a deep
neural network that is trained using a large, synthetically
created training corpus. Our approach builds on a novel loss
function that measures model-space similarity directly in
parameter space and significantly improves reconstruction
accuracy. We further propose a self-supervised bootstrapping
process in the network training loop, which iteratively
updates the synthetic training corpus to better reflect the
distribution of real-world imagery. We demonstrate that
this strategy outperforms completely synthetically trained
networks. Finally, we show high-quality reconstructions and
compare our approach to several state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering aims to reconstruct scene properties such as
geometry, reflectance and illumination from image data. This
reconstruction is fundamentally challenging, as it inevitably
requires inverting the complex real-world image formation
process. It is also an ill-posed problem as certain effects, such

as low-frequency reflectance and illumination, can be indistinguishable [45]. Inverse rendering, for example, enables
relighting of faces by modifying the scene illumination and
keeping the face reflectance and geometry fixed.
Recently, optimization-based approaches for inverse face
rendering were introduced with convincing results [2, 19, 28,
34, 60]. One of the key ingredients that enables to disentangle
pose, geometry (both related to shape and facial expression),
reflectance and illumination are specific priors that constrain
parameters to plausible values and distributions. Formulating
such priors accurately for real faces is difficult, as they are
unknown a priori. The priors could be learned by applying
inverse rendering to a large dataset of real face images, but
this is highly challenging without having the priors a priori.
We take a different approach to solve this chicken-and-egg
problem. Instead of formulating explicit priors, we directly
learn inverse face rendering with a deep neural network
that implicitly learns priors based on the training corpus.
As annotated training data is hard to come by, we train
on synthetic face images with known model parameters
(geometry, reflectance and illumination). This is similar
to existing approaches [46, 47, 52], but the used parameter
distribution does not match that of real-world faces and
environments. As a result, the learned implicit priors are
rather weak and do not generalize well to in-the-wild images.
The approach of Li et al. [38] introduces a self-augmented
procedure for training a CNN to regress the spatially varying
surface appearance of planar exemplars. Our self-supervised
bootstrapping approach extends their training strategy to
handle unknown, varying geometry. In addition, we resample
14625

