GeoNet: Unsupervised Learning of Dense Depth, Optical Flow and Camera Pose
Zhichao Yin and Jianping Shi
SenseTime Research
{yinzhichao, shijianping}@sensetime.com

Abstract
We propose GeoNet, a jointly unsupervised learning
framework for monocular depth, optical flow and egomotion estimation from videos. The three components are
coupled by the nature of 3D scene geometry, jointly learned
by our framework in an end-to-end manner. Specifically, geometric relationships are extracted over the predictions of
individual modules and then combined as an image reconstruction loss, reasoning about static and dynamic scene
parts separately. Furthermore, we propose an adaptive
geometric consistency loss to increase robustness towards
outliers and non-Lambertian regions, which resolves occlusions and texture ambiguities effectively. Experimentation on the KITTI driving dataset reveals that our scheme
achieves state-of-the-art results in all of the three tasks, performing better than previously unsupervised methods and
comparably with supervised ones.

1. Introduction
Understanding 3D scene geometry from video is a fundamental topic in visual perception. It includes many classical computer vision tasks, such as depth recovery, flow
estimation, visual odometry, etc. These technologies have
wide industrial applications, including autonomous driving
platforms [6], interactive collaborative robotics [11], and localization and navigation systems [12], etc.
Traditional Structure from Motion (SfM) methods [34,
42] tackle them in an integrated way, which aim to simultaneously reconstruct the scene structure and camera motion.
Advances have been achieved recently in robust and discriminative feature descriptors [2, 39], more efficient tracking systems [55], and better exploitation of semantic level
information [4], etc. Even though, the proneness to outliers
and failure in non-textured regions are still not completely
eliminated for their inherent reliance on high-quality lowlevel feature correspondences.
To break through these limitations, deep models [35, 45]
have been applied to each of the low-level subproblems and
achieve considerable gains against traditional methods. The

Figure 1. Example predictions by our method on KITTI 2015 [31].
Top to bottom: input image (one of the sequence), depth map and
optical flow. Our model is fully unsupervised and can handle dynamic objects and occlusions explicitly.

major advantage comes from big data, which helps capturing high-level semantic correspondences for low level clue
learning, thus performing better even in ill-posed regions
compared with traditional methods.
Nevertheless, to preserve high performance with more
general scenarios, large corpus of groundtruth data are usually needed for deep learning. In most circumstances,
expensive laser-based setups and differential GPS are required, restricting the data grow to a large scale. Moreover, previous deep models are mostly tailored to solve one
specific task, such as depth [26], optical flow [8], camera
pose [22], etc. They do not explore the inherent redundancy
among these tasks, which can be formulated by geometry
regularities via the nature of 3D scene construction.
Recent works have emerged to formulate these problems
together with deep learning. But all possess certain inherent limitations. For example, they require large quantities
of laser scanned depth data for supervision [48], demand
stereo cameras as additional equipment for data acquisition [15], or cannot explicitly handle non-rigidity and occlusions [50, 56].
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised learning
framework GeoNet for jointly estimating monocular depth,
optical flow and camera motion from video. The foundation
of our approach is built upon the nature of 3D scene geometry (see Sec. 3.1 for details). An intuitive explanation is that
most of the natural scenes are comprised of rigid staic sur11983

