Mask-guided Contrastive Attention Model for Person Re-Identification
Chunfeng Song1,3
Yan Huang1,3
Wanli Ouyang4
Liang Wang1,2,3
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
University of Sydney
{chunfeng.song, yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

1. Introduction
Person Re-identification (ReID) plays an important role
in various surveillance applications, such as pedestrian retrieval and public security event detection. In general, for
a given probe person, ReID is to identify the same person
across multiple cameras. It is still a challenging problem
due to various body poses, view of cameras, illumination,
and cluttered backgrounds. In the past years, numerous of
methods [47, 39, 25, 36, 26, 37, 43, 34] have been proposed
to address this problem. Most of previous methods direct-

mask
body

Person Re-identification (ReID) is an important yet challenging task in computer vision. Due to the diverse background clutters, variations on viewpoints and body poses, it
is far from solved. How to extract discriminative and robust
features invariant to background clutters is the core problem. In this paper, we first introduce the binary segmentation masks to construct synthetic RGB-Mask pairs as inputs,
then we design a mask-guided contrastive attention model
(MGCAM) to learn features separately from the body and
background regions. Moreover, we propose a novel regionlevel triplet loss to restrain the features learnt from different regions, i.e., pulling the features from the full image and
body region close, whereas pushing the features from backgrounds away. We may be the first one to successfully introduce the binary mask into person ReID task and the first
one to propose region-level contrastive learning. We evaluate the proposed method on three public datasets, including
MARS, Market-1501 and CUHK03. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed method is effective and
achieves the state-of-the-art results. Mask and code will be
released upon request.

image

Abstract

(a)
feature space

pull

body

push

full-image

background

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of the binary mask and region-level triplet
loss for contrastive feature learning. (a) Examples of RGB images
and their corresponding masks. The third row shows the body regions extracted directly with the masks. (b) The proposed regionlevel triplet loss can restrain the features learnt from different regions, i.e., pulling the features from the full image and body region
close, whereas pushing the features from backgrounds away.

ly learn features from the whole image, which contains not
only the person body, but also the background clutters. Recently, several deep learning based methods are proposed to
learn identity features from the body parts which are gener-

1179

