Matching Adversarial Networks
Gellért Máttyus and Raquel Urtasun
Uber Advanced Technologies Group and University of Toronto
gmattyus@uber.com, urtasun@uber.com

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) and Conditonal
GANs (CGANs) show that using a trained network as loss
function (discriminator) enables to synthesize highly structured outputs (e.g. natural images). However, applying a
discriminator network as a universal loss function for common supervised tasks (e.g. semantic segmentation, line detection, depth estimation) is considerably less successful.
We argue that the main difficulty of applying CGANs to supervised tasks is that the generator training consists of optimizing a loss function that does not depend directly on
the ground truth labels. To overcome this, we propose to
replace the discriminator with a matching network taking
into account both the ground truth outputs as well as the
generated examples. As a consequence, the generator loss
function also depends on the targets of the training examples, thus facilitating learning. We demonstrate on three
computer vision tasks that this approach can significantly
outperform CGANs achieving comparable or superior results to task-specific solutions and results in stable training.
Importantly, this is a general approach that does not require
the use of task-specific loss functions.

1. Introduction
GANs [10] have become extremely popular due to their
ability to generate sharp, realistic images [2]. GANs train
deep generative models using a minimax game. The idea is
to learn a generator by fooling a discriminator which tries to
distinguish between real and generated examples. CGANs
[22] are an extension to model conditional distributions by
making the generator and the discriminator a function of
the input. This is a very interesting idea showing good results on image generation tasks. However, CGANs do not
work well on common supervised tasks (e.g. semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, line detection), since the
generator is optimized by minimizing a loss function that
does not depend on the training examples. Practitioners try
to tackle this issue by defining and adding a task dependent
loss function to the objective. Unfortunately, it is very dif-

ficult to balance the two loss functions resulting in unstable
and often poor training.
In this paper we propose to replace the discriminator
with a siamese network. The inputs to the siamese network
are the ground truth, the generated output or perturbations
(random transformations) of these. The discriminator then
attempts to predict whether or not the input pair contains the
generated output (fake) or just the ground truth and its perturbations (real). As a consequence, the generator loss depends on the training targets, which results in better, faster
and more robust learning. Applying random perturbations
makes the task of the discriminator more difficult, while, as
we show in the technical section, the generator target still
remains the ground truth. We call our approach Matching
Adversarial Network (MatAN) which can be used as a discriminative model for supervised tasks.
Our experimental evaluation shows that this approach
can achieve very good performance in the tasks of semantic segmentation, road network centerline extraction from
aerial images and instance segmentation. In particular, we
significantly outperform CGANs and achieve comparable
or superior results to supervised approaches that exploit
task-specific solutions. The training of MatAN was stable (not resulting in degenerative output) in all our experiments, even with different generator and discriminator architectures. This is an important advantage over CGANs
which are sensitive to the applied network architectures.

2. Related Work
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10] can create very realistic images; however, the stability of the training is an issue. To overcome this, many methods attempt to
improve the training performance of GANs. Radford et al.
[26] proposed to use specific network architectures, including transposed convolution and leaky ReLu, which result in
better image generation. [28] introduces several practices
for more stable training, e.g. minibatch discrimination. [1]
analyzes the reasons for the instability of GAN training.
[2] proposed the Wasserstein GAN, which achieves better
training by using a discriminator (also called critic) which
estimates the earth mover’s distance between the probabil18024

