Deep Cauchy Hashing for Hamming Space Retrieval
Yue Cao, Mingsheng Long∗, Bin Liu, Jianmin Wang
KLiss, MOE; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Software
Beijing Key Laboratory for Industrial Big Data System and Application
{caoyue10,liubinthss}@gmail.com, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to its computation efficiency and retrieval quality,
hashing has been widely applied to approximate nearest
neighbor search for large-scale image retrieval, while deep
hashing further improves the retrieval quality by end-toend representation learning and hash coding. With compact
hash codes, Hamming space retrieval enables the most efficient constant-time search that returns data points within a
given Hamming radius to each query, by hash table lookups
instead of linear scan. However, subject to the weak capability of concentrating relevant images to be within a small
Hamming ball due to mis-specified loss functions, existing deep hashing methods may underperform for Hamming
space retrieval. This work presents Deep Cauchy Hashing
(DCH), a novel deep hashing model that generates compact
and concentrated binary hash codes to enable efficient and
effective Hamming space retrieval. The main idea is to design a pairwise cross-entropy loss based on Cauchy distribution, which penalizes significantly on similar image pairs
with Hamming distance larger than the given Hamming radius threshold. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
that DCH can generate highly concentrated hash codes and
yield state-of-the-art Hamming space retrieval performance
on three datasets, NUS-WIDE, CIFAR-10, and MS-COCO.

1. Introduction
In the big data era, large-scale and high-dimensional media data has been pervasive in search engines and social
networks. To guarantee retrieval quality and computation
efficiency, approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search has
attracted increasing attention. Parallel to the traditional indexing methods [18] for candidates pruning, another advantageous solution is hashing methods [31] for data compression, which transform high-dimensional media data into
compact binary codes and generate similar binary codes for
similar data items. This paper will focus on the learning
∗ Corresponding author: M. Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn).

to hash methods [31] that build data-dependent hash encoding schemes for efficient image retrieval, which have
shown better performance than the data-independent hashing methods, e.g. Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [10].
Many learning to hash methods have been proposed to
enable efficient ANN search by Hamming ranking of compact hash codes, including both supervised and unsupervised methods [16, 12, 26, 9, 22, 30, 25, 24, 35]. Recently,
deep learning to hash methods [33, 17, 28, 8, 36, 19, 21, 4]
have shown that deep neural networks can enable end-toend representation learning and hash coding with nonlinear
hash functions. These deep learning to hash methods have
shown state-of-the-art search performance. In particular,
they prove it crucial to jointly learn similarity-preserving
representations and control quantization error of converting
continuous representations to binary codes [36, 19, 21, 4].
However, most of the existing methods are tailored to
data compression instead of candidates pruning, i.e. they
are designed to maximize retrieval performance based on
linear scan of hash codes. As linear scan is still costly even
using hash codes, we are somewhat deviating from our original intention with hashing, that is, to maximize speedup
under acceptable accuracy. With the blossom of powerful
hashing methods for linear scan, we should now turn to the
Hamming space retrieval [9], which enables the most efficient constant-time search. In Hamming space retrieval, we
return data points within a given Hamming radius to each
query, by hash table lookups instead of linear scan. Unfortunately, existing hashing methods generally lack the capability of concentrating relevant images to be within a small
Hamming ball due to the mis-specified loss functions, thus
they may underperform for Hamming space retrieval.
This work presents Deep Cauchy Hashing (DCH), a
novel deep hashing model that generates concentrated and
compact hash codes to enable efficient and effective Hamming space retrieval. We propose a pairwise cross-entropy
loss based on Cauchy distribution, which penalizes significantly on similar image pairs with Hamming distance larger
than the given Hamming radius threshold. We further pro-

1229

