Conditional Probability Models for Deep Image Compression
Fabian Mentzer⇤ Eirikur Agustsson⇤
mentzerf@vision.ee.ethz.ch

aeirikur@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Michael Tschannen

Radu Timofte

Luc Van Gool

michaelt@nari.ee.ethz.ch

timofter@vision.ee.ethz.ch

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Abstract
Deep Neural Networks trained as image auto-encoders
have recently emerged as a promising direction for advancing the state-of-the-art in image compression. The key challenge in learning such networks is twofold: To deal with
quantization, and to control the trade-off between reconstruction error (distortion) and entropy (rate) of the latent
image representation. In this paper, we focus on the latter
challenge and propose a new technique to navigate the ratedistortion trade-off for an image compression auto-encoder.
The main idea is to directly model the entropy of the latent
representation by using a context model: A 3D-CNN which
learns a conditional probability model of the latent distribution of the auto-encoder. During training, the auto-encoder
makes use of the context model to estimate the entropy of its
representation, and the context model is concurrently updated to learn the dependencies between the symbols in the
latent representation. Our experiments show that this approach, when measured in MS-SSIM, yields a state-of-theart image compression system based on a simple convolutional auto-encoder.

1. Introduction
Image compression refers to the task of representing images using as little storage (i.e., bits) as possible. While in
lossless image compression the compression rate is limited
by the requirement that the original image should be perfectly reconstructible, in lossy image compression, a greater
reduction in storage is enabled by allowing for some distortion in the reconstructed image. This results in a so-called
rate-distortion trade-off, where a balance is found between
the bitrate R and the distortion d by minimizing d + βR,
where β > 0 balances the two competing objectives. Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) trained as image autoencoders for this task led to promising results, achieving
better performance than many traditional techniques for image compression [19, 20, 17, 4, 2, 9]. Another advantage of
∗ The first two authors contributed equally.

MS-SSIM on Kodak

1.00
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.92

Ours
Rippel & Bourdev
Johnston et al.
BPG
Ballé et al.
JPEG2000
Theis et al.
JPEG

0.90
0.88
0.86
0.0

0.2

0.4 bpp 0.6

0.8

1.0

Figure 1: State-of-the-art performance achieved by our simple compression system composed of a standard convolutional auto-encoder and a 3D-CNN-based context model.
DNN-based learned compression systems is their adaptability to specific target domains such as areal images or stereo
images, enabling even higher compression rates on these
domains. A key challenge in training such systems is to optimize the bitrate R of the latent image representation in the
auto-encoder. To encode the latent representation using a
finite number of bits, it needs to be discretized into symbols
(i.e., mapped to a stream of elements from some finite set
of values). Since discretization is non-differentiable, this
presents challenges for gradient-based optimization methods and many techniques have been proposed to address
them. After discretization, information theory tells us that
the correct measure for bitrate R is the entropy H of the
resulting symbols. Thus the challenge, and the focus of this
paper, is how to model H such that we can navigate the
trade-off d + βH during optimization of the auto-encoder.
Our proposed method is based on leveraging context
models, which were previously used as techniques to im-

4394

