Feature Selective Networks for Object Detection
Yao Zhai1∗
1

Jingjing Fu2

Yan Lu2

University of Science and Technology of China

Houqiang Li1
2

Microsoft Research Asia

zy92918@mail.ustc.edu.cn {jifu, yanlu}@microsoft.com lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid advancement of
deep neural networks, which yields large performance improvements on image classification and detection tasks.
ConvNets [19, 36, 37, 17] designed for image classification
have realized impressive representations of image features,
outperforming traditional handcrafted features [7, 27]. Object detectors adopting these deep ConvNets improve accuracy significantly on various detection benchmarks [9, 24].
R-CNN [15] firstly uses deep ConvNet to extract proposal
region features by initializing parameters from a pre-trained
ImageNet [33] classification model. Fast R-CNN [14] develops a Region-of-Interest(RoI) pooling layer to extract RoI features from the convolutional feature maps of the
∗ This work was done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

RoIA
Feature Selective Network

Objects for detection usually have distinct characteristics in different sub-regions and different aspect ratios.
However, in prevalent two-stage object detection methods,
Region-of-Interest (RoI) features are extracted by RoI pooling with little emphasis on these translation-variant feature
components. We present feature selective networks to reform the feature representations of RoIs by exploiting their disparities among sub-regions and aspect ratios. Our network
produces the sub-region attention bank and aspect ratio attention bank for the whole image. The RoI-based sub-region
attention map and aspect ratio attention map are selectively
pooled from the banks, and then used to refine the original
RoI features for RoI classification. Equipped with a lightweight detection subnetwork, our network gets a consistent
boost in detection performance based on general ConvNet
backbones (ResNet-101, GoogLeNet and VGG-16). Without bells and whistles, our detectors equipped with ResNet101 achieve more than 3% mAP improvement compared to
counterparts on PASCAL VOC 2007, PASCAL VOC 2012
and MS COCO datasets.

Selected RoI
Features

RoI Features

A

B

RoIB

Sub-region
Attention map

Aspect Ratio
Attention map

Figure 1. We generate sub-region attention map and aspect ratio
attention map for each RoI. Specifically, for the same spatial position (the red point) inside different sub-regions (center in RoI A ,
top-center in RoI B ), the sub-region attention map gives different
feature attentions. For the RoIs of different aspect ratios, the aspect ratio attention map also produces distinct feature attentions.

entire image. After that, Faster R-CNN [31] introduces region proposal network (RPN) for generating accurate RoI
proposals and sharing computation with detection subnetwork. Although one-stage object detection frameworks
[30, 25, 23] have been proposed recently, most of stateof-the-art object detectors adopt two-stage framework composed of a proposal generator and a region classifier. Before
RoI classification, RoI features are extracted with the following strategy: firstly generate whole image feature maps
by ConvNets, and then pool the RoI features.
RoI features matter, as object detection relies on the classification and regression of RoI bounding boxes. Therefore,
aside from the progress on deep ConvNets, research has focused on trying to generate powerful and informative RoI
features to boost detection accuracy. To involve multi-scale
features, HyperNet [18] and FPN [22] produce RoI features
by utilizing hierarchical feature maps from different depths of ConvNets. MR-CNN [12] and GBD-net [40] attempt
to build a richer region-wise feature representation inside

4139

