Five-point Fundamental Matrix Estimation for Uncalibrated Cameras
Daniel Barath12
1
Machine Perception Research Laboratory, MTA SZTAKI, Budapest, Hungary
2
Centre for Machine Perception, Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic

Abstract
We aim at estimating the fundamental matrix in two
views from five correspondences of rotation invariant features obtained by e.g. the SIFT detector. The proposed minimal solver1 first estimates a homography from three correspondences assuming that they are co-planar and exploiting
their rotational components. Then the fundamental matrix
is obtained from the homography and two additional point
pairs in general position. The proposed approach, combined with robust estimators like Graph-Cut RANSAC, is
superior to other state-of-the-art algorithms both in terms
of accuracy and number of iterations required. This is validated on synthesized data and 561 real image pairs. Moreover, the tests show that requiring three points on a plane
is not too restrictive in urban environment and locally optimized robust estimators lead to accurate estimates even
if the points are not entirely co-planar. As a potential application, we show that using the proposed method makes
two-view multi-motion estimation more accurate.

1. Introduction
This paper investigates the problem of estimating the
relative motion of two non-calibrated cameras from rotational invariant features. In particular, we are interested
in the minimal case, i.e. to estimate fundamental matrix
F ∈ R3×3 exploiting five point correspondences together
with rotational components obtained by, e.g. SIFT detector [16]. The method requires three points to be co-planar
and two additional ones in arbitrary position (see Fig. 1).
The classical way of estimating F for non-calibrated
cameras is to apply the eight- or seven-point algorithms [10]. They are both widely-used in the literature
and fundamental tools of computer vision applications. The
eight-point algorithm estimates the direct linear transformation induced by the epipolar constraint. The seven-point
algorithm enforces the rank-two constraint by solving the
cubic polynomial equation which it implies. From theo1 Available at http://web.eee.sztaki.hu/ dbarath/

Π
P2
P1
P4

P3

P5
C1

C2

Figure 1: The proposed minimal solver estimates a fundamental matrix between views C1 and C2 . It first estimates a homography from three correspondences of coplanar points (P1 , P2 and P3 ) lying on plane π. The fundamental matrix is then obtained from the homography and
two additional points (P4 and P5 ) in general position.

retical point of view, getting more information exclusively
from point correspondences is not possible. However, of
course, there are approaches to reduce the number of unknowns. For example, knowing the intrinsic parameters of
the cameras (i.e. the principal point, focal length, pixel ratios) enables to enforce the trace constraint. The problem
becomes solvable using six point pairs [14, 13, 23, 25] if all
intrinsics parameters but a common focal length are known,
or five correspondences [19, 15, 5, 13, 9] are enough for
fully calibrated cameras. One can also restrict the camera
movement, e.g. the one point method proposed by Davide
Scaramuzza [22] assumes the cameras to move on a plane
and the so-called non-holonomic constraint to hold.
By looking the other way, it is very rare nowadays to get
solely the point coordinates from the applied feature detector. As an example, the widely-used SIFT detector provides
a rotation and scale besides the coordinates. This additional
information is rarely exploited in state-of-the-art geometric
model estimators and just thrown away at the very beginning. This information is available in most of the cases.
In this paper, we aim at involving these additional affine
parameters, e.g. rotation of the feature, into the process to

235

