Dynamic Video Segmentation Network
Yu-Syuan Xu, Tsu-Jui Fu∗, Hsuan-Kung Yang∗, Student Member, IEEE and Chun-Yi Lee, Member, IEEE
Elsa Lab, Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua Uiversity
{yusean0118, rayfu1996ozig, hellochick}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, cylee@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
In this paper, we present a detailed design of dynamic
video segmentation network (DVSNet) for fast and efficient
semantic video segmentation. DVSNet consists of two convolutional neural networks: a segmentation network and
a flow network. The former generates highly accurate semantic segmentations, but is deeper and slower. The latter
is much faster than the former, but its output requires further processing to generate less accurate semantic segmentations. We explore the use of a decision network to adaptively assign different frame regions to different networks
based on a metric called expected confidence score. Frame
regions with a higher expected confidence score traverse the
flow network. Frame regions with a lower expected confidence score have to pass through the segmentation network. We have extensively performed experiments on various configurations of DVSNet, and investigated a number
of variants for the proposed decision network. The experimental results show that our DVSNet is able to achieve up
to 70.4% mIoU at 19.8 fps on the Cityscape dataset. A high
speed version of DVSNet is able to deliver an fps of 30.4
with 63.2% mIoU on the same dataset. DVSNet is also able
to reduce up to 95% of the computational workloads.

1. Introduction
Fast and accurate semantic segmentation has been a fundamental challenge in computer vision. The goal is to
classify each pixel in an image into one of a given set
of categories. In recent years, semantic image segmentation has achieved an unprecedented high accuracy on various datasets [1, 2, 3, 4] via the use of deep convolutional
neural networks (DCNNs) [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Accurate semantic segmentation enables a number of applications which demand pixel-level precision for their visual perception modules, such as autonomous vehicles [13],
surveillance cameras, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),
and so on. However, due to their real-time requirements,
these applications typically require high frame rates per
second (fps), necessitating short inference latency in the
perception modules. Unfortunately, contemporary state-of∗ Equal contribution

Figure 1: Comparison of frames at timestamps t and t + 10 in two
video sequences

the-art CNN models usually employ deep network architectures to extract high-level features from raw data [14,
15, 16, 17, 18], leading to exceptionally long inference
time. The well-known models proposed for semantic image segmentation, including fully convolutional networks
(FCN) [19], DeepLab [5, 6, 7], PSPNet [8], ResNet-38 [9],
RefineNet [10], dense upsampling convolution (DUC) [11],
etc., are not suitable for real-time semantic video segmentation due to their usage of deep network architectures. These
models usually incorporate extra layers for boosting their
accuracies, such as spatial pyramid pooling (SPP) [6, 7,
8, 20], multi-scale dilated convolution [5, 6, 7, 11, 21],
multi-scale input paths [6, 22, 23, 24], multi-scale feature
paths [5, 10, 12, 25, 26], global pooling [7], and conditional random field (CRF) [5, 6, 22, 27, 28]. These additional layers consume tremendous amount of computational
resources to process every pixel in an image, leading to impractical execution time. In the past decade, semantic video
segmentation focusing on reducing the inference time has
received little attention [29, 30]. With increasing demand
for high accuracy and short inference time, a method for
efficiently reusing the extracted features in DCNNs for semantic video segmentation is becoming urgently necessary.
It is unnecessary to reprocess every single pixel of a
frame by those deep semantic segmentation models in a
video sequence. When comparing the difference between
two consecutive frames, it is common that a large portion
of them is similar. Fig. 1 illustrates an example of the above
observation. The left parts show the video frames at timestamps t and t + 10, respectively. The right part shows the
difference between these two frames. It can be observed
that only a small portion of the frames are apparently different (highlighted by red rectangles), implying that the a large
portion of the feature maps between these frames is invari-

6556

