Look at Boundary: A Boundary-Aware Face Alignment Algorithm
Wenyan (Wayne) Wu ∗1,2 , Chen Qian2 , Shuo Yang3 , Quan Wang2 , Yici Cai1 , Qiang Zhou1
1
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
SenseTime Research
3
Amazon Rekognition
1

wwy15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 1 caiyc@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn 1 zhouqiang@tsinghua.edu.cn
2
{qianchen, wangquan}@sensetime.com 3 shuoy@amazon.com

1. Introduction
Face alignment, which refers to facial landmark detection in this work, serves as a key step for many face applications, e.g., face recognition [75], face verification [48, 49]
and face frontalisation [21]. The objective of this paper
is to devise an effective face alignment algorithm to handle faces with unconstrained pose variation and occlusion
across multiple datasets and annotation protocols.
∗ This work was done during an internship at SenseTime Research.

COFW (29 points)
AFLW (19 points)

We present a novel boundary-aware face alignment algorithm by utilising boundary lines as the geometric structure of a human face to help facial landmark localisation.
Unlike the conventional heatmap based method and regression based method, our approach derives face landmarks
from boundary lines which remove the ambiguities in the
landmark definition. Three questions are explored and answered by this work: 1. Why using boundary? 2. How to
use boundary? 3. What is the relationship between boundary estimation and landmarks localisation? Our boundaryaware face alignment algorithm achieves 3.49% mean error
on 300-W Fullset, which outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin. Our method can also easily integrate
information from other datasets. By utilising boundary information of 300-W dataset, our method achieves 3.92%
mean error with 0.39% failure rate on COFW dataset, and
1.25% mean error on AFLW-Full dataset. Moreover, we
propose a new dataset WFLW to unify training and testing
across different factors, including poses, expressions, illuminations, makeups, occlusions, and blurriness. Dataset
and model are publicly available at https://wywu.
github.io/projects/LAB/LAB.html

300W (68 points)

Abstract

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: The first column shows the face images from different
datasets with different number of landmarks. The second column
illustrates the universally defined facial boundaries estimated by
our methods. With the help of boundary information, our approach
achieves high accuracy localisation results across multiple datasets
and annotation protocols, as shown in the third column.

Different to face detection [45] and recognition [75],
face alignment identifies geometry structure of human face
which can be viewed as modeling highly structured output. Each facial landmark is strongly associated with a
well-defined facial boundary, e.g., eyelid and nose bridge.
However, compared to boundaries, facial landmarks are
not so well-defined. Facial landmarks other than corners
can hardly remain the same semantical locations with large
pose variation and occlusion. Besides, different annotation
schemes of existing datasets lead to a different number of
landmarks [28, 5, 66, 30] (19/29/68/194 points) and annotation scheme of future face alignment datasets can hardly
be determined. We believe the reasoning of a unique facial

2129

