TextureGAN: Controlling Deep Image Synthesis with Texture Patches
Wenqi Xian †1
Patsorn Sangkloy †1
Varun Agrawal 1
Amit Raj 1
Jingwan Lu 2 Chen Fang 2 Fisher Yu 3 James Hays 1,4
1

Georgia Institute of Technology

2

Adobe Research

3

UC Berkeley

4

Argo AI

Figure 1. With TextureGAN, one can generate novel instances of common items from hand drawn sketches and simple texture patches.
You can now be your own fashion guru! Top row: Sketch with texture patch overlaid. Bottom row: Results from TextureGAN.

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate deep image synthesis guided
by sketch, color, and texture. Previous image synthesis
methods can be controlled by sketch and color strokes but
we are the first to examine texture control. We allow a user
to place a texture patch on a sketch at arbitrary locations
and scales to control the desired output texture. Our generative network learns to synthesize objects consistent with
these texture suggestions. To achieve this, we develop a local texture loss in addition to adversarial and content loss
to train the generative network. We conduct experiments using sketches generated from real images and textures sampled from a separate texture database and results show that
our proposed algorithm is able to generate plausible images
that are faithful to user controls. Ablation studies show that
our proposed pipeline can generate more realistic images
than adapting existing methods directly.

1. Introduction
One of the “Grand Challenges” of computer graphics is
to allow anyone to author realistic visual content. The traditional 3d rendering pipeline can produce astonishing and realistic imagery, but only in the hands of talented and trained
artists. The idea of short-circuiting the traditional 3d mod† indicates equal contribution

eling and rendering pipeline dates back at least 20 years
to image-based rendering techniques [33]. These techniques and later “image-based” graphics approaches focus
on re-using image content from a database of training images [22]. For a limited range of image synthesis and editing scenarios, these non-parametric techniques allow nonexperts to author photorealistic imagery.
In the last two years, the idea of direct image synthesis without using the traditional rendering pipeline has gotten significant interest because of promising results from
deep network architectures such as Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [21] and Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [11]. However, there has been little investigation
of fine-grained texture control in deep image synthesis (as
opposed to coarse texture control through “style transfer”
methods [9]).
In this paper we introduce TextureGAN, the first deep
image synthesis method which allows users to control object texture. Users “drag” one or more example textures
onto sketched objects and the network realistically applies
these textures to the indicated objects.
This “texture fill” operation is difficult for a deep network to learn for several reasons: (1) Existing deep
networks aren’t particularly good at synthesizing highresolution texture details even without user constraints.
Typical results from recent deep image synthesis methods
are at low resolution (e.g. 64x64) where texture is not
prominent or they are higher resolution but relatively flat
(e.g. birds with sharp boundaries but few fine-scale de18456

