NeuralNetwork-Viterbi: A Framework for Weakly Supervised Video Learning
Alexander Richard, Hilde Kuehne, Ahsan Iqbal, Juergen Gall
University of Bonn, Germany
{richard,kuehne,iqbalm,gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

c1 → . . . → cN
(annotation)

Abstract

1. Introduction
A continuously growing amount of publicly available
video data on YouTube or video streaming services, an increased interest in applications such as surveillance, and the
need to analyze continuous video streams e.g. in the domain
of autonomous driving has caused an increased interest in
video learning algorithms.
While approaches for action classification on presegmented video clips already perform convincingly
well [27, 35, 4, 7], realistic applications require the segmentation of temporally untrimmed videos that usually contain
a large variety of different actions with different lengths.
Since acquiring frame-level annotations of such videos is
expensive, methods that can learn from less supervision are
of particular interest. A popular type of weak supervision
are transcripts [1, 11, 16, 24, 12, 13], which provide for each
training video an ordered list of actions, but not the frames
where the actions occur in the video.
In order to learn a model for temporal action segmentation with such weak supervision, CNNs or RNNs
have been combined with an explicit model for the intraclass temporal progression, e.g. a hidden Markov model
(HMM), and the inter-class context, e.g. with a finite grammar [24, 12, 13]. While these approaches are particularly
suited for videos that contain complex actions and have a

Viterbi Decoding
L=−
c 1 , ℓ1

···

c N , ℓN

PT

t=1 log p(cn(t) |xt )

(loss)

Forward

p(c|x1 ), . . . , p(c|xT )

Neural Network

Backprop

Video learning is an important task in computer vision
and has experienced increasing interest over the recent
years. Since even a small amount of videos easily comprises several million frames, methods that do not rely on
a frame-level annotation are of special importance. In this
work, we propose a novel learning algorithm with a Viterbibased loss that allows for online and incremental learning
of weakly annotated video data. We moreover show that
explicit context and length modeling leads to huge improvements in video segmentation and labeling tasks and include
these models into our framework. On several action segmentation benchmarks, we obtain an improvement of up to
10% compared to current state-of-the-art methods.

x1 , . . . , x T
(input video)

Figure 1. The input video xT1 is forwarded through the network
and the Viterbi decoding is run on the output probabilities. The
frame labels generated by the Viterbi algorithm are then used to
compute a framewise cross-entropy loss based on which the network gradient is computed.

huge number of distinct classes, they come with the major
problem that their training requires some heuristical ground
truth. They rely on a two-step approach that is iterated
several times. It consists of first generating a segmentation for each training video using the Viterbi algorithm and
then training the neural network as in the fully supervised
case using the generated segmentation as pseudo groundtruth. Consequently, the two-step approach is sensitive to
the initialization of the pseudo ground-truth and the accuracy tends to oscillate between the iterations [24]. In contrast to theses methods, CTC [10] is a framework for weakly
supervised sequence learning. However, this approach does
not allow to include explicit models for the context between
classes and their temporal progression and therefore does
not achieve state-of-the-art performance.
In this work, we propose a novel learning algorithm that
allows for direct learning using the input video and ordered
action classes only. The approach includes the Viterbidecoding as part of the loss function to train the neural network and has several practical advantages compared to the
two-stage approach: it neither suffers from an oscillation
17386

