Going from Image to Video Saliency: Augmenting Image Salience with Dynamic
Attentional Push
Siavash Gorji
James J. Clark
Centre for Intelligent Machines, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
siagorji@cim.mcgill.ca clark@cim.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We present a novel method to incorporate the recent
advent in static saliency models to predict the saliency in
videos. Our model augments the static saliency models
with the Attentional Push effect of the photographer and
the scene actors in a shared attention setting. We demonstrate that not only it is imperative to use static Attentional Push cues, noticeable performance improvement is
achievable by learning the time-varying nature of Attentional Push. We propose a multi-stream Convolutional Long
Short-Term Memory network (ConvLSTM) structure which
augments state-of-the-art in static saliency models with dynamic Attentional Push. Our network contains four pathways, a saliency pathway and three Attentional Push pathways. The multi-pathway structure is followed by an augmenting convnet that learns to combine the complementary
and time-varying outputs of the ConvLSTMs by minimizing the relative entropy between the augmented saliency
and viewers fixation patterns on videos. We evaluate our
model by comparing the performance of several augmented
static saliency models with state-of-the-art in spatiotemporal saliency on three largest dynamic eye tracking datasets,
HOLLYWOOD2, UCF-Sport and DIEM. Experimental results illustrates that solid performance gain is achievable
using the proposed methodology.

1. Introduction
Visual attention is a temporal selection mechanism in
which a subset of available sensory information is chosen
for further processing in the human visual system. Visual
attention tracking- determining where, and to what, people are paying attention while viewing static photographs
or while watching videos and cinematic movies- has attracted much interest recently. Despite the many applications of computational visual attention models for dynamic
stimuli such as visual surveillance [3], human-robot inter-

Figure 1: Attentional Push Cues: (top) Actor gaze shift: Actors
gaze dynamically directs the viewers attention; (middle) Rapid
scene changes: The viewers attention is pushed to the center after
rapid scene changes; (bottom) Bounce of Attention: An attended
actor is moved out of the video frame and pushes the viewers attention to the center.

action [18], video compression [19], and advertising [55],
the majority of the existing models focus on static images
and spatiotemporal visual attention models are a relatively
unexplored problem.
Almost all computational visual attention models are
based on Treisman and Gelades feature integration theory
[61] and the Koch and Ullmans [35] feed-forward neural
model and are inspired by the pioneering work of Itti et
al. [28] where early visual features across multiple scales
are linearly combined into a static saliency map. Traditional spatiotemporal saliency models have also benefited
from employing early visual features or other static handcrafted features, along with various motion-based features
to capture the spatiotemporal nature of dynamic stimuli.
The addition of temporal dimension in videos makes dy17501

