Context Contrasted Feature and Gated Multi-scale Aggregation
for Scene Segmentation
Henghui Ding1
1

Xudong Jiang1

Bing Shuai1

Ai Qun Liu1

Gang Wang2

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Scene segmentation is a challenging task as it need
label every pixel in the image. It is crucial to exploit
discriminative context and aggregate multi-scale features
to achieve better segmentation. In this paper, we first
propose a novel context contrasted local feature that not
only leverages the informative context but also spotlights
the local information in contrast to the context. The proposed context contrasted local feature greatly improves the
parsing performance, especially for inconspicuous objects
and background stuff. Furthermore, we propose a scheme of
gated sum to selectively aggregate multi-scale features for
each spatial position. The gates in this scheme control the
information flow of different scale features. Their values are
generated from the testing image by the proposed network
learnt from the training data so that they are adaptive
not only to the training data, but also to the specific
testing image. Without bells and whistles, the proposed
approach achieves the state-of-the-arts consistently on the
three popular scene segmentation datasets, Pascal Context,
SUN-RGBD and COCO Stuff.

1. Introduction
Scene segmentation has been an essential component
of image understanding and is in intensely demand for
automation devices, virtual reality, self-driving vehicles and
etc. The goal of scene segmentation is parsing a scene
image into a set of coherent semantic regions and labeling
each pixel to one of classes including not only objects but
also stuff (e.g. road, grass, sky). It implicitly involves image
classification, object localization and boundary delineation.
Thus, scene segmentation demands multi-scale and multilevel visual recognition.
The recent success of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN) has greatly improved the performance of
computer vision tasks [20], such as image classification
[53, 55, 22, 39, 24] and object detection [45, 46, 15, 37,

Figure 1: Scene segmentation refers to labeling each pixel
including salient objects, inconspicuous objects and stuff.
However, the various forms of objects/stuff (e.g salient or
inconspicuous, foreground or background) and the existence of
multi-scale objects (e.g the multi-scale cows in third image) make
it challenging to parsing each pixel using DCNN.

16]. However, there are some limitations when applying
DCNN to dense prediction tasks like scene segmentation
[38, 51, 8, 29]. The success of DCNN is closely related
with its inherent invariance to feature deformations [62].
This invariance lets the DCNN learn very abstract feature
representation of the whole image, therefore the network
can obtain information of dominated/salient objects at any
position, which is desirable for image classification. But
for scene segmentation, spatial information is essential and
pixel-level discriminative features are desired. Most stateof-the-arts scene segmentation frameworks are based on
image classification networks pre-trained on [49], but it
remains an open question of how to better adopt DCNN on
scene segmentation. Herein, we mainly consider two handicaps when applying DCNN on dense prediction tasks: the
various forms of objects/stuff (e.g. salient or inconspicuous)
and the existence of multi-scale objects.
First, different from object segmentation and image
classification, scene segmentation aims to labeling every
pixel to one of many classes including stuff and object
classes, thus not only the dominated salient objects but

2393

