A Hybrid ℓ1 -ℓ0 Layer Decomposition Model for Tone Mapping
Zhetong Liang1 , Jun Xu1 , David Zhang1 , Zisheng Cao2 , Lei Zhang1,∗
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 DJI Co.,Ltd
zhetong.liang@connect.polyu.hk, csjunxu@comp.polyu.edu.hk, csdzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
zisheng.cao@dji.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Tone mapping aims to reproduce a standard dynamic
range image from a high dynamic range image with visual
information preserved. State-of-the-art tone mapping algorithms mostly decompose an image into a base layer and a
detail layer, and process them accordingly. These methods
may have problems of halo artifacts and over-enhancement,
due to the lack of proper priors imposed on the two layers. In
this paper, we propose a hybrid ℓ1 -ℓ0 decomposition model
to address these problems. Specifically, an ℓ1 sparsity term is
imposed on the base layer to model its piecewise smoothness
property. An ℓ0 sparsity term is imposed on the detail layer
as a structural prior, which leads to piecewise constant effect.
We further propose a multiscale tone mapping scheme based
on our layer decomposition model. Experiments show that
our tone mapping algorithm achieves visually compelling
results with little halo artifacts, outperforming the stateof-the-art tone mapping algorithms in both subjective and
objective evaluations.

1. Introduction
The real-world scenes could span a luminance dynamic
range that significantly exceeds the response range of most
imaging devices [4]. Thanks to the rapid development of
high dynamic range (HDR) techniques in the past decade, the
intact information of the scene can be recorded in a radiance
map by bracketed exposure fusion technique [2, 7]. However,
most of the display devices have a limited dynamic range and
are not able to reproduce the information in the radiance map
faithfully. Therefore, an effective tone mapping algorithm is
needed to transform the HDR radiance map into a standard
dynamic range (SDR) image without sacrificing the main
visual information.
In the past two decades, a large number of tone mapping
methods have been proposed in the literature. Despite the
diversity in the design methodology, a large part of these
tone mapping methods are based on layer decomposition [8,
∗ This work is supported by HK RGC GRF grant (PolyU 152124/15E),
China NSFC grant (no. 61672446) and DJI donation.

14, 23, 29]. Specifically, an image is decomposed into a base
layer and a detail layer and then processed separately. The
detail layer with fine-grain details is preserved or boosted
[8, 14], and the base layer with large spatial smoothness
and high range variations is compressed. Although most
layer-decomposition-based tone mapping algorithms could
increase the visual interpretability of a radiance map to some
extent, they still have limitations in obtaining natural and
visually pleasing results. A typical problem is the overenhancement of small scale textural details. This is because
the existing works commonly ignore the spatial property
of the detail layer, which has a significant impact on the
tone mapped image. In addition, halo artifacts are also a
problem in some tone mapping algorithms due to the lack of
edge-preserving property for the base layer [14]. In order to
obtain a natural and artifact-free reproduction of the radiance
map, some proper priors must be incorporated into the layer
decomposition framework.
Given the fact that a tremendous amount of information is
recorded in an HDR radiance map, which part of the information should be assigned a high priority for visual perception
is an important question for tone mapping. In psychology,
it was found that human vision is more sensitive to edges
[1, 13]. This visual mechanism facilitates the capturing of
the main semantic information of the scene. In the research
of intrinsic decomposition [3, 6], it is commonly assumed
that the edges in the reflectance layer (a concept similar to
the detail layer) is sparse, which also indicates the high importance of the structural information in an image. In view
of the above observations, a tone mapping operator should
address the structural reproduction in the first place. Since
the spatial property of the detail layer in the layer decomposition framework largely affects the visual appearance of
the tone mapped image, we consider to impose a structural
sparsity prior on the detail layer.
While the use of spatial prior for detail layer has rarely
been reported in tone mapping research, the ℓ1 sparsity prior
has long been adopted in Retinex decomposition [12, 25]
to model the structural sparsity of the reflectance layer. Although the ℓ1 term preserves edges in an image, its piecewise

4758

