Learning Dual Convolutional Neural Networks for Low-Level Vision
Jinshan Pan1 Sifei Liu2 Deqing Sun2 Jiawei Zhang3 Yang Liu4 Jimmy Ren5
Zechao Li1 Jinhui Tang1 Huchuan Lu4 Yu-Wing Tai6 Ming-Hsuan Yang7
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 NVIDIA 3 City University of Hong Kong
4
Dalian University of Technology 5 SenseTime Research 6 Tencent Youtu Lab 7 UC Merced

(a) GT

(b) SRCNN [5]

(c) VDSR with nearest

(d) VDSR with bilinear

(e) VDSR with bicubic

(f) Ours

Figure 1. Visual comparisons of super-resolution results by the VDSR method [17] (×4) with structures recovered by different methods, i.e.,
nearest neighbor, bilinear, and bicubic upsampling. Residual learning algorithms usually take upsampled image as the base structures and
learn the details, the difference between the upsampled and ground truth images. However, residual learning cannot correct low-frequency
errors in the structures, e.g., the structure obtained by nearest neighbor interpolation in (c). In contrast, our algorithm is motivated by the
decomposition of a signal into structures and details, which involves both structure and detail learning and thus leads to better results.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a general dual convolutional
neural network (DualCNN) for low-level vision problems,
e.g., super-resolution, edge-preserving filtering, deraining
and dehazing. These problems usually involve the estimation of two components of the target signals: structures and
details. Motivated by this, our proposed DualCNN consists of two parallel branches, which respectively recovers the
structures and details in an end-to-end manner. The recovered structures and details can generate the target signals
according to the formation model for each particular application. The DualCNN is a flexible framework for low-level
vision tasks and can be easily incorporated into existing CNNs. Experimental results show that the DualCNN can be
effectively applied to numerous low-level vision tasks with
favorable performance against the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Motivated by the success of deep learning in high-level
vision tasks [19, 11, 13, 31, 32], numerous deep models
have been developed for low-level vision tasks, e.g., image
super-resolution [6, 7, 5, 17, 18, 22], inpainting [27, 24],
noise removal [4, 15, 35], image filtering [38, 24], image
deraining [8, 40], and dehazing [28, 2]. Although achieving impressive performance, the network architectures of
these models strongly resemble those developed for high-

level classification tasks.
Existing methods are based on either plain neural networks or residual learning networks. As demonstrated
in [1, 27], plain neural networks cannot outperform state-ofthe-art traditional approaches on a number of low-level vision problems, e.g., super-resolution [34]. Low-level vision
tasks usually involve the estimation of two components,
low-frequency structures and high-frequency details. It is
challenging for a single network to learn both components
simultaneously. As a result, going deeper with plain neural
networks does not always lead to better performance [6].
Residual learning has been shown to be an effective approach to achieve performance gain with a deeper network.
The residual learning algorithms (e.g., [17]) assume that
the main structure is given and mainly focus on estimating
the residual (details) using a deep network. These methods
work well when the recovered structures are perfect or near
perfect. However, when the main structure is not well recovered, these methods do not perform well, because the final result is a combination of the structures and details. Figure 1 shows the image super-resolution results by the VDSR
method [17] with structures recovered by different methods. The residual network cannot correct low-frequency errors
in the structures (Figure 1(b)).
To address this issue, we propose a dual convolutional neural network (DualCNN) that can jointly estimate the

13070

