Dynamic Feature Learning for Partial Face Recognition
Lingxiao He1,2 , Haiqing Li1,2 , Qi Zhang1,2 , and Zhenan Sun1,2,3
1
CRIPAC & NLPR, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{lingxiao.he, hqli, qi.zhang, znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Partial face recognition (PFR) in unconstrained environment is a very important task, especially in video surveillance, mobile devices, etc. However, a few studies have
tackled how to recognize an arbitrary patch of a face image.
This study combines Fully Convolutional Network (FCN)
with Sparse Representation Classification (SRC) to propose
a novel partial face recognition approach, called Dynamic
Feature Matching (DFM), to address partial face images regardless of size. Based on DFM, we propose a sliding loss
to optimize FCN by reducing the intra-variation between
a face patch and face images of a subject, which further
improves the performance of DFM. The proposed DFM is
evaluated on several partial face databases, including LFW,
YTF and CASIA-NIR-Distance databases. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and advantages of DFM
in comparison with state-of-the-art PFR methods.

1. Introduction
Face recognition performance has been improved due
to the rapid development of deep Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs), but it is assumed to have a full face observation as the input of current methods [16, 26, 32, 34, 35, 36].
However, the assumption of face recognition on full and
frontal images is easily violated in real-world applications.
Partial face recognition (PFR) has become an emerging
problem with increasing requirements of identification from
CCTV cameras and embedded vision systems in mobile devices, robots and smart home facilities. However, PFR is
a challenging problem without a solution from traditional
face recognition approaches. Examples of partial face images are illustrated in Fig. 1. Partial face images occur
when a face is 1) occluded by objects such as faces of other
individuals, sunglasses, hats, masks or scarves; 2) captured
in the various pose without user awareness; 3) positioned
partially outside camera’ view. Therefore, only arbitrarysizes face patches are presented in these captured images.
In some situations, surveillance videos are vital clues for

Figure 1. Partial face images are produced in unconstrained environments. A face may be 1) occluded by sunglasses, a hat and a
scarf; 2) captured in various poses; 3) positioned partially out of
cameras filed of view.

case investigation. For example, when a crime takes place,
the surveillance footage often discovers only a partial face
of a criminal suspect because the suspect may want to hide
his/her appearance deliberately. From this perspective, it
is important to develop a face recognition system that can
work for holistic faces as well as partial faces. Excitingly,
many face detection algorithms [4, 19, 22] are available to
detect visible face patches. Therefore, we can effectively
take advantage of these partial information to accomplish
identity authentication.
Existing face recognition algorithms based on deep
networks require fixed-size face images as inputs (e.g.
224 × 224 in VGGFace) because deep networks with fullyconnected layers require fixed-size inputs by their definition. Therefore, most of them cannot directly deal with
partial face images of arbitrary sizes (e.g. 120 × 160).
To handle the problem, traditional methods usually re-scale
arbitrary-size input images to fixed-size face images. However, the performance would suffer from deterioration extremely due to the undesired geometric deformation. The
Multi-Scale Region-based Convolutional Neural Network
17054

