Detect Globally, Refine Locally: A Novel Approach to Saliency Detection
Tiantian Wang1 , Lihe Zhang1 , Shuo Wang1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Gang Yang2 , Xiang Ruan3 , Ali Borji4
1
Dalian University of Technology,2 Northeastern University, China
3
4
Tiwaki Co., Ltd
University of Central Florida, USA
Tiantianwang.ice@gmail.com, zhanglihe@dlut.edu.cn
lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, aliborji@gmail.com

Abstract
Effective integration of contextual information is crucial for salient object detection. To achieve this, most existing methods based on ’skip’ architecture mainly focus
on how to integrate hierarchical features of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). They simply apply concatenation or element-wise operation to incorporate high-level
semantic cues and low-level detailed information. However, this can degrade the quality of predictions because cluttered and noisy information can also be passed through.
To address this problem, we proposes a global Recurrent
Localization Network (RLN) which exploits contextual information by the weighted response map in order to localize salient objects more accurately. Particularly, a recurrent module is employed to progressively refine the inner
structure of the CNN over multiple time steps. Moreover,
to effectively recover object boundaries, we propose a local
Boundary Refinement Network (BRN) to adaptively learn
the local contextual information for each spatial position.
The learned propagation coefficients can be used to optimally capture relations between each pixel and its neighbors. Experiments on five challenging datasets show that
our approach performs favorably against all existing methods in terms of the popular evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Visual saliency has gained a lot of interest in recent
years. It has been shown effective in a wide range of applications including person identification [2], visual tracking [9], image captioning [7, 8], robot navigation [6] and visual question answering [21]. When it comes to the imagebased salient object detection, two major problems need to
be tackled: how to highlight salient objects against the cluttered background and how to preserve the boundaries of
salient objects. However, in view of the fact that salient objects may share some similar visual attributes with the background distractors and sometimes multiple salient objects

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Comparison with the feature integration based method.
(a) Input images. (b) Amulet [33]. (c) Our method. (d) Ground
truth masks.

overlap partly or entirely with each other, saliency detection
still remains challenging in computer vision tasks. The recent CNNs-based approaches [18, 22, 10, 33, 29] have been
successful in mitigating the above issues, and have given
rise to the proliferation of a significant variety of neural network structures. Usually, standard convolutional neural networks are composed of a cascade of repeated convolutional
stages, followed by the spatial pooling. The deeper layers are encoded with richer semantic representation albeit at
the expense of spatial resolution, while the shallower layers contain much finer structures. Existing saliency detection methods [18, 10, 33] attempt to combine hierarchical
features to capture distinctive objectness and detailed information simultaneously. However, these approaches usually
concentrate their analysis on how to combine features effectively in general. What is often overlooked is that directly
applying concatenation or element-wise operation to different feature maps are suboptimal because some maps are too
cluttered which can introduce misleading information when
detecting and segmenting salient objects. The problem is
illustrated in Figure 1.
Therefore, from a global perspective, we propose a novel Recurrent Localization Network (RLN) which consists of
two modules: an inception-like Contextual Weighting Module (CWM) and a Recurrent Module (RM). CWM aims to
4321
3127

