Learning a Discriminative Filter Bank
within a CNN for Fine-grained Recognition

1

Yaming Wang1 , Vlad I. Morariu2∗ , Larry S. Davis1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Adobe Research
{wym, lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Compared to earlier multistage frameworks using CNN
features, recent end-to-end deep approaches for finegrained recognition essentially enhance the mid-level
learning capability of CNNs. Previous approaches achieve
this by introducing an auxiliary network to infuse localization information into the main classification network,
or a sophisticated feature encoding method to capture
higher order feature statistics. We show that mid-level
representation learning can be enhanced within the CNN
framework, by learning a bank of convolutional filters that
capture class-specific discriminative patches without extra
part or bounding box annotations. Such a filter bank is
well structured, properly initialized and discriminatively
learned through a novel asymmetric multi-stream architecture with convolutional filter supervision and a non-random
layer initialization. Experimental results show that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art on three publicly available fine-grained recognition datasets (CUB-200-2011,
Stanford Cars and FGVC-Aircraft). Ablation studies and
visualizations are provided to understand our approach.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained object recognition involves distinguishing
sub-categories of the same super-category (e.g., birds [39],
cars [26] and aircrafts [34]), and solutions often utilize information from localized regions to capture subtle differences. Early applications of deep learning to this task built
traditional multistage frameworks upon convolutional neural network (CNN) features; more recent CNN-based approaches are usually trained end-to-end and can be roughly
divided into two categories: localization-classification subnetworks and end-to-end feature encoding.
Previous multistage frameworks utilize low-level CNN
features to find discriminative regions or semantic parts, and
construct a mid-level representation out of them for classi*The work was done while the author was at University of Maryland.

morariu@adobe.com

fication [24, 44, 35, 41, 53, 42]. These methods achieve
better performance compared to two types of baselines: (i)
they outperform their counterparts with hand-crafted features (e.g., SIFT) by a huge margin, which means that lowlevel CNN features are far more effective than previous
hand-crafted ones; (ii) they significantly outperform their
baselines which finetune the same CNN used for feature
extraction. This further suggests that CNN’s ability to learn
mid-level representations is limited and still has sufficient
room to improve. Based on these observations, end-toend frameworks aim to enhance the mid-level representation learning capability of CNN.
The first category, localization-classification subnetworks, consists of a classification network assisted by
a localization network. The mid-level learning capability
of the classification network is enhanced by the localization
information (e.g. part locations or segmentation masks) provided by the localization network. Earlier works from this
category [51, 29, 50, 18, 43] depend on additional semantic part annotations, while more recent ones [20, 9, 55] only
require category labels. Regardless of annotations, the common motivation behind these approaches is to first find the
corresponding parts and then compare their appearance.
The first step requires the semantic parts (e.g. head and body
of birds) to be shared across object classes, encouraging the
representations of the parts to be similar; but, in order to
be discriminative, the latter encourages the part representations to be different across classes. This subtle conflict implies a trade-off between recognition and localization ability, which might reduce a single integrated network’s classification performance. Such a trade-off is also reflected in
practice, in that training usually involves alternating optimization of the two networks or separately training the two
followed by joint tuning. Alternating or multistage strategies complicate the tuning of the integrated network.
The second category, end-to-end feature encoding [30,
10, 23, 8, 5], enhances CNN mid-level learning by encoding higher order statistics of convolutional feature maps.
The need for end-to-end modeling of higher order statistics became evident when the Fisher Vector encodings of

4148

