Modifying Non-Local Variations Across Multiple Views
Tal Tlusty
Technion, Israel

Tomer Michaeli
Technion, Israel

Tali Dekel
Google Research

Lihi Zelnik-Manor
Technion, Israel

taltlusty@gmail.com

tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

tdekel@google.com

lihi@technion.ac.il

Input

Multiview NLV

Single-image NLV

3D reconstruction

Single-image

Multiview
Figure 1: Gaudi’s Casa Mila is famous for its irregular shapes. Single-image NLV idealizes each image independently,
resulting in utterly different geometries – the building’s facade is flat and some of the porches are straightened only in the top
image. Reconstruction of a corresponding 3D structure completely fails. Conversely, our multiview NLV approach reduces
the irregularities in both images in a synchronized manner and the corresponding 3D shape shows straightened verandas.

Abstract
We present an algorithm for modifying small non-local
variations between repeating structures and patterns in
multiple images of the same scene. The modification is consistent across views, even-though the images could have
been photographed from different view points and under
different lighting conditions. We show that when modifying each image independently the correspondence between
them breaks and the geometric structure of the scene gets
distorted. Our approach modifies the views while maintaining correspondence, hence, we succeed in modifying appearance and structure variations consistently. We demonstrate our methods on a number of challenging examples,
photographed in different lighting, scales and view points.

1. Introduction
Repetition of patterns and structures is a widespread phenomenon, e.g, in the leaves of plants and flowers, animal

furs or rocks and sand dunes. Recurring structures can
be also found in man-made environments, for example, a
row of chairs in a large stadium or a pile of boxes in a
shoe store. In many cases, the recurring structures are not
perfectly identical and sometimes the deviations from an
‘ideal’ structure are small and hard to notice by the naked
eye. Revealing these deviations may be useful in many situations, for example, revealing deformations in a production line or detecting irregular cells in a petri dish. Modifying these variations and correcting them could be useful for
beautification of images.
Recently, a method was devised for revealing the NonLocal Variations (NLV) in a single image [7]. Their method
recovers a simple geometric transformation that can be applied to the input image in order to obtain an ‘ideal’ image
in which the variations between repeated structures are minimal. By applying the inverse transformation, these nonlocal variations can be exaggerated. Their method was used
for several applications such as idealizing images, revealing
object properties and visualizing defects in material inspec16276

