“Zero-Shot” Super-Resolution using Deep Internal Learning
Assaf Shocher∗
∗

Nadav Cohen†

Michal Irani∗

Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Math, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
†
School of Mathematics, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey
Project Website: http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/∼vision/zssr/
Abstract

Deep Learning has led to a dramatic leap in SuperResolution (SR) performance in the past few years. However, being supervised, these SR methods are restricted to
specific training data, where the acquisition of the lowresolution (LR) images from their high-resolution (HR)
counterparts is predetermined (e.g., bicubic downscaling),
without any distracting artifacts (e.g., sensor noise, image
compression, non-ideal PSF, etc). Real LR images, however, rarely obey these restrictions, resulting in poor SR results by SotA (State of the Art) methods. In this paper we introduce “Zero-Shot” SR, which exploits the power of Deep
Learning, but does not rely on prior training. We exploit
the internal recurrence of information inside a single image, and train a small image-specific CNN at test time, on
examples extracted solely from the input image itself. As
such, it can adapt itself to different settings per image. This
allows to perform SR of real old photos, noisy images, biological data, and other images where the acquisition process is unknown or non-ideal. On such images, our method
outperforms SotA CNN-based SR methods, as well as previous unsupervised SR methods. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first unsupervised CNN-based SR method.

1. Introduction
Super-Resolution (SR) from a single image has recently
received a huge boost in performance using Deep-Learning
based methods [4, 10, 9, 12, 13]. The recent SotA (State of
the Art) method [13] exceeds previous non-Deep SR methods (supervised [22] or unsupervised [5, 6, 7]) by a few dBs
– a huge margin! This boost in performance was obtained
with very deep and well engineered CNNs, which were
trained exhaustively on external databases, for lengthy periods of time (days or weeks). However, while these externally supervised1 methods perform extremely well on data
satisfying the conditions they were trained on, their performance deteriorates significantly once these conditions are
not satisfied.
1 We use the term “supervised” for any method that trains on externally supplied examples (even if their generation does not require manual
labelling).

For example, SR CNNs are typically trained on highquality natural images, from which the low-resolution (LR)
images were generated with a specific predefined downscaling kernel (usually a Bicubic kernel with antialiasing
– MATLAB’s default imresize command), without any distracting artifacts (sensor noise, non-ideal PSF, image compression, etc.), and for a predefined SR scaling-factor (usually ×2, ×3 or ×4; assumed equal in both dimensions).
Fig. 2 shows what happens when these conditions are not
satisfied, e.g., when the LR image is generated with a nonideal (non-bicubic) downscaling kernel, or contains aliasing
effects, or simply contains sensor noise or compression artifacts. Fig. 1 further shows that these are not contrived cases,
but rather occur often when dealing with real LR images –
images downloaded from the internet, images taken by an
iPhone, old historic images, etc. In those ‘non-ideal’ cases,
SotA SR methods often produce poor results.
In this paper we introduce “Zero-Shot” SR (ZSSR),
which exploits the power of Deep Learning, without relying on any prior image examples or prior training. We exploit the internal recurrence of information within a single
image and train a small image-specific CNN at test time,
on examples extracted solely from the LR input image itself
(i.e., internal self-supervision). As such, the CNN can be
adapted to different settings per image. This allows to perform SR on real images where the acquisition process is unknown and non-ideal (see example results in Figs. 1 and 2).
On ‘non-ideal’ images, our method outperforms externallytrained SotA SR methods by a large margin.
The recurrence of small pieces of information (e.g.,
small image patches) across scales of a single image,
was shown to be a very strong property of natural images [5, 24]. This formed the basis for many unsupervised image enhancement methods, including unsupervised SR [5, 6, 7], Blind-SR [15] (when the downscaling kernel is unknown), Blind-Deblurring [16, 2], BlindDehazing [3], and more. While such unsupervised methods
can exploit image-specific information (hence are less subject to the above-mentioned supervised restrictions), they
typically rely on simple Eucledian similarity of small image patches, of predefined size (typically 5 × 5), using KWork funded in part by the Israel Science Foundation (Grant No. 931/14).

3118

