Pulling Actions out of Context: Explicit Separation for Effective Combination
Yang Wang and Minh Hoai
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
{wang33, minhhoai}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
The ability to recognize human actions in video has many
potential applications. Human action recognition, however,
is tremendously challenging for computers due to the complexity of video data and the subtlety of human actions.
Most current recognition systems flounder on the inability
to separate human actions from co-occurring factors that
usually dominate subtle human actions.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for training
a human action recognizer, one that can: (1) explicitly factorize human actions from the co-occurring factors; (2) deliberately build a model for human actions and a separate
model for all correlated contextual elements; and (3) effectively combine the models for human action recognition.
Our approach exploits the benefits of conjugate samples of
human actions, which are video clips that are contextually similar to human action samples, but do not contain
the action. Experiments on ActionThread, PASCAL VOC,
UCF101, and Hollywood2 datasets demonstrate the ability
to separate action from context of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
A human action does not occur in an isolated vacuum
tube, and it is not the only thing recorded in a video. A video
clip of a human action is the melting pot of the action and
various other ingredients including the background scene,
the object tools, the camera motion, the lighting condition,
the other body movements and actions. Many of these components are totally unrelated to the action, while some are
contextual elements that frequently co-occur with the category of action in consideration. For example, a cooking
action usually occurs in a kitchen so the kitchen scene is
a relevant context, but the rare incident of a bird landing
on a windowsill that also appears in the video would be
noise. Neither noise nor context corresponds to the actual
content of a human action, but they have different impacts.
Noise always hurts the performance of a recognition system, while context may provide useful cues for recognition.
For example, recognizing the kitchen scene of a cooking

Action sample for AnswerPhone

Conjugate sample for AnswerPhone

Extract
Difference

Extract
Similarity

AnswerPhone content

Context

Figure 1. How do we obtain an action classifier that focuses on
the action components and not the context? Unfortunately, such a
classifier cannot be obtained by the normal supervised learning approach, because training examples of human actions do not generally come with detailed human annotation that delineates the subtle human actions (from the co-occurring context). To address this
problem, we propose to collect video sequences that are contextually similar to the action samples, which will be referred to as
conjugate samples. We propose to use conjugate samples to train
a classifier that deliberately separate action from context. Best
viewed on a digital device.

action will prevent it from being misclassified as an outdoor activity such as surfing or golfing. Thus context is
informative and can be used to aid recognition. But context can also confound recognition algorithms. The existence of context dilutes the actual content of an action and
makes recognition difficult, especially for fine-grain categorization between action categories that share similar or
the same context. For example, a hair-combing action in a
bathroom might be mistakenly recognized as toothbrushing
due to background similarity.
So, how can we recognize a subtle human action in the
presence of noise and context? A typical approach is to
ignore the distinction of these factors and use supervised
machine learning to train a classifier to separate positive
training examples (i.e., video clips containing the action in

7044

