Sparse Photometric 3D Face Reconstruction Guided by Morphable Models
Xuan Cao

Zhang Chen

Anpei Chen
Xin Chen
Shiying Li
ShanghaiTech University
393 Middle Huaxia Road, Pudong, Shanghai, China

Jingyi Yu

{caoxuan,chenzhang,chenap,chenxin2,lishy1,yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Figure 1: Sample results using our sparse PS reconstruction. By using just 5 input images (left), our method can recover very
high quality 3D face geometry with fine geometric details.

Abstract
We present a novel 3D face reconstruction technique
that leverages sparse photometric stereo (PS) and latest advances on face registration / modeling from a single image.
We observe that 3D morphable faces approach [21] provides a reasonable geometry proxy for light position calibration. Specifically, we develop a robust optimization technique that can calibrate per-pixel lighting direction and illumination at a very high precision without assuming uniform surface albedos. Next, we apply semantic segmentation on input images and the geometry proxy to refine hairy
vs. bare skin regions using tailored filter. Experiments on
synthetic and real data show that by using a very small set of
images, our technique is able to reconstruct fine geometric
details such as wrinkles, eyebrows, whelks, pores, etc, comparable to and sometimes surpassing movie quality productions.

1. Introduction
The digitization of photorealistic 3D face is a longstanding problem and can benefit numerous applications,
ranging from movie special effects [2] to face detection
and recognition [17]. Human faces contain both lowfrequency geometry (e.g., nose, cheek, lip, forehead) and

high-frequency details (e.g., wrinkles, eyebrows, beards,
and pores). Passive reconstruction techniques such as stereo
matching [19], multiview geometry [37, 5], structure-frommotion [3], and most recently light field imaging [1] can
now reliably recover low frequency geometry. Recovering high-frequency details is way more challenging. Successful solutions still rely on professional capture systems
such as 3D laser scans or ultra-high precision photometric
stereo such as the USC Light Stage systems [15, 26]. Developing commodity solutions to simultaneously capture lowfrequency and high-frequency face geometry is particularly
important and urgent.
To quickly reiterate the challenges, PS requires knowing
the lighting direction at a very high precision. It is common
practice to position a point light at a far distance to emulate a
directional light source for easy calibration. In reality, such
setups are huge and require strong lighting power. Alternatively, one can use near-field point light sources [40, 9, 28]
to set up a more portable system. However, calibrating the
lighting direction for each face vertex becomes particularly
difficult: one needs to know the relative position between
the light source(s) and the face geometry. The light position can be estimated by using sphere [42, 48, 36] or planar light probes [29, 46]. However, the human face would
have to be positioned at approximately the same location as
the probe. Then the relative position between point lights
and facial vertices can be measured. One may resolve this
14635

