Learning Attentions: Residual Attentional Siamese Network
for High Performance Online Visual Tracking
Qiang Wang1,3∗ , Zhu Teng2∗, Junliang Xing3†, Jin Gao3 , Weiming Hu1,3 , Stephen Maybank4
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Information Systems, Birkbeck College, University of London, UK.
2

{qiang.wang, jlxing, jin.gao, wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn zteng@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline training for object tracking has recently shown
great potentials in balancing tracking accuracy and speed.
However, it is still difficult to adapt an offline trained model
to a target tracked online. This work presents a Residual Attentional Siamese Network (RASNet) for high performance
object tracking. The RASNet model reformulates the correlation filter within a Siamese tracking framework, and introduces different kinds of the attention mechanisms to adapt
the model without updating the model online. In particular,
by exploiting the offline trained general attention, the target adapted residual attention, and the channel favored feature attention, the RASNet not only mitigates the over-fitting
problem in deep network training, but also enhances its discriminative capacity and adaptability due to the separation
of representation learning and discriminator learning. The
proposed deep architecture is trained from end to end and
takes full advantage of the rich spatial temporal information to achieve robust visual tracking. Experimental results
on two latest benchmarks, OTB-2015 and VOT2017, show
that the RASNet tracker has the state-of-the-art tracking accuracy while runs at more than 80 frames per second.

1. Introduction
Online visual tracking of an arbitrary temporally changing object, specified at the first frame, is an extensively studied problem in computer vision [30, 41, 53]. It still remains
very challenging due to practical factors like scale variation, fast motion, occlusions, deformation, and background
clutter [52]. High performance visual tracking algorithms
with good tracking accuracy and efficiency are required by
many applications like visual surveillance [14], traffic monitoring [31], human-computer interaction [32], and video
editing [1], to name a few.
One of the most successful tracking frameworks is Correlation Filter (CF) [3,8,22,27,33,54,55]. Algorithms based
on correlation filtering have demonstrated superior compu∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

sjmaybank@dcs.bbk.ac.uk

tational efficiency and fairly good tracking accuracy. One
notable example is the MOSSE tracker [3] with the running
speed of about 700 frames per second. The main reasons for
its high running speed are the replacement of the exhausted
convolutions with element-wise multiplications using Fast
Fourier Transform, as well as the adoption of relatively
simple image features. For complex tracking scenarios,
however, the performance of CF trackers with hand-crafted
features often drops considerably. Recently, deep learning
models [8,36,43,49], have become an essential oracle to improve the tracking accuracy, mainly due to their large model
capacities and strong feature learning abilities. By extensively training large deep networks on large datasets offline
and aggressively learning the target sequence online, those
trackers have obtained record-breaking results on all recent
benchmarks [51, 52] and challenges [15, 16, 28].
Despite all these significant progress, most deep learning based tracking methods still cannot attain consummate
results. One issue is that the deep feature learned offline
sometimes cannot adapt well to specific target during tracking. If the deep feature extractor is learnt online then it
tends to overfit the target. Moreover, the online learning
of the feature extractor, its updating process, and even its
inference process, are all computationally expensive. This
prevents a tracking algorithm from performing all these operations simultaneously at each frame [2, 12, 21, 44]. Motivated by these considerations, we develop an effective and
efficient deep learning based tracking approach to produce
high performance visual tracking. To this end, we adapt
the model architecture and training objective for more effective feature learning, and also introduce different kinds
of attention mechanisms into the tracking model learning to
produce more adaptive discriminative learning.
In particular, a new end-to-end deep architecture, named
Residual Attentional Siamese Network (RASNet), is designed to learn both effective feature representation and decision discriminators. The backbone of the attention module in the RASNet is an Hourglass-like Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model [37] to learn contextualized
and multi-scaled feature representation. The residual learning within the RASNet further helps to encode more adap-

4854

