Planar Shape Detection at Structural Scales
Hao Fang
Florent Lafarge
Inria – Université Côte d’Azur

Mathieu Desbrun
Caltech

firstname.lastname@inria.fr

mathieu@cms.caltech.edu

Abstract
Interpreting 3D data such as point clouds or surface
meshes depends heavily on the scale of observation. Yet,
existing algorithms for shape detection rely on trial-anderror parameter tunings to output configurations representative of a structural scale. We present a framework to automatically extract a set of representations that capture the
shape and structure of man-made objects at different key
abstraction levels. A shape-collapsing process first generates a fine-to-coarse sequence of shape representations by
exploiting local planarity. This sequence is then analyzed to
identify significant geometric variations between successive
representations through a supervised energy minimization.
Our framework is flexible enough to learn how to detect
both existing structural formalisms such as the CityGML
Levels Of Details, and expert-specified levels of abstraction.
Experiments on different input data and classes of manmade objects, as well as comparisons with existing shape
detection methods, illustrate the strengths of our approach
in terms of efficiency and flexibility.

1. Introduction
Shape detection from raw 3D data is a long-standing
problem whose goal consists in turning a large amount of
geometric data into a higher level representation based on
simple geometric shapes. Instead of reasoning at the scale
of 3D atomic elements such as points, triangular facets or
voxels, it is often more appealing to directly handle larger
geometric shapes in order to both reduce the algorithmic
complexity and analyze objects with a higher representation
level. Most common geometric shapes include lines, planes
and quadrics. In this work, we focus on planar shapes due
to their relevance to man-made environments [17].
Shape detection is typically used as a prior step in a large
variety of vision-related tasks ranging from surface reconstruction [2, 5, 29, 37, 20] to object recognition [4, 22] and
data registration [7, 38]. Existing algorithms typically require two user-specified parameters: (i) a fitting tolerance
ǫ that specifies the maximal distance of a datum to its associated geometric shape, and (ii) a minimal shape size σ

that specifies how large a group of samples must be to be
considered as a geometric primitive—typically, a number
of inliers when dealing with point clouds, or a minimum
area for meshes. Finding parameter values that produce desirable results often involves fastidious manual labor: surprisingly, the incidence of these two parameters on shape
detection has not been formally studied in the literature.
In this work, we propose an efficient exploration of this
(ǫ, σ) space of geometric abstractions to find the structural
scales of an input geometry, i.e., the few simplified representations that are truly meaningful to capture the structure
of man-made objects. From a progressive planarity-driven
coarsening of the input data, we demonstrate that we can
reliably detect structural scales whose characteristics are
learned from training sets of different types of objects such
as buildings, house furniture, or cars.

2. Related work
We first review prior work in three related aspects of our
goal: shape detection, scale-space exploration, and classification of 3D data.
Shape detection.
The automated detection of geometric shapes from 3D measurement data is an instance of
the general problem of fitting mathematical models to data.
Among many successful approaches, region growing based
approaches [26] are very efficient when input data is relatively clean. They proceed by growing a local shape hypothesis in a spatial neighborhood of a seed point while fitting is observed. In presence of outliers, RANSAC-based
algorithms such as [27] typically performs best by iteratively constructing many shape hypotheses from a few samples, verifying them against the input data, and selecting
the shapes with the highest numbers of inliers. Accumulation space methods [6, 12, 1] operate through voting in the
parameter space of the shapes. Gaussian sphere mapping
is a common choice for 3D data but requires a good estimation of normals. More recently, various research efforts
have tried to both detect and regularize shapes according to
geometric relationships such as parallelism or orthogonality [30, 23]. This can also be solved as a labeling prob12965

