Image to Image Translation for Domain Adaptation
Zak Murez1,2

Soheil Kolouri2 David Kriegman1 Ravi Ramamoorthi1 Kyungnam Kim2
1
University of California, San Diego; 2 HRL Laboratories, LLC;
{zmurez,kriegman,ravir}@cs.ucsd.edu, {skolouri,kkim}@hrl.com
Abstract

We propose a general framework for unsupervised
domain adaptation, which allows deep neural networks
trained on a source domain to be tested on a different target domain without requiring any training annotations in
the target domain. This is achieved by adding extra networks and losses that help regularize the features extracted
by the backbone encoder network. To this end we propose
the novel use of the recently proposed unpaired image-toimage translation framework to constrain the features extracted by the encoder network. Specifically, we require that
the features extracted are able to reconstruct the images in
both domains. In addition we require that the distribution
of features extracted from images in the two domains are
indistinguishable. Many recent works can be seen as specific cases of our general framework. We apply our method
for domain adaptation between MNIST, USPS, and SVHN
datasets, and Amazon, Webcam and DSLR Office datasets in
classification tasks, and also between GTA5 and Cityscapes
datasets for a segmentation task. We demonstrate state of
the art performance on each of these datasets.

1. Introduction
The recent unprecedented advances in computer vision
and machine learning are mainly due to: 1) deep (convolutional) neural architectures, and 2) existence of abundant
labeled data. Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[17, 10, 13] trained on large numbers of labeled images
(tens of thousands to millions) provide powerful image representations that can be used for a wide variety of tasks including recognition, detection, and segmentation. On the
other hand, obtaining abundant annotated data remains a
cumbersome and expensive process in the majority of applications. Hence, there is a need for transferring the learned
knowledge from a source domain with abundant labeled
data to a target domain where data is unlabeled or sparsely
labeled. The major challenge for such knowledge transfer
is a phenomenon known as domain shift [8], which refers to
the different distribution of data in the target domain com-

Figure 1. A) Sample image from the synthetic GTA5 dataset. B)
Input image from the real Cityscapes dataset. C) Segmentation
result trained on GTA5 dataset without any domain adaptation. D)
Ours. E) Ground truth. We can see that our adaptation fixes large
areas of simple mistakes on the road and sidewalk and building on
the right. We also partially detect the thin pole on the right. The
mean Intersection Over Union (IOU) values are reported.

14500

