Referring Relationships
Ranjay Krishna† , Ines Chami† , Michael Bernstein, Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University
{ranjaykrishna, chami, msb, feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Images are not simply sets of objects: each image represents a web of interconnected relationships. These relationships between entities carry semantic meaning and help
a viewer differentiate between instances of an entity. For
example, in an image of a soccer match, there may be multiple persons present, but each participates in different
relationships: one is kicking the ball, and the other is
guarding the goal. In this paper, we formulate the task
of utilizing these “referring relationships” to disambiguate
between entities of the same category. We introduce an iterative model that localizes the two entities in the referring
relationship, conditioned on one another. We formulate the
cyclic condition between the entities in a relationship by
modelling predicates that connect the entities as shifts in
attention from one entity to another. We demonstrate that
our model can not only outperform existing approaches on
three datasets — CLEVR, VRD and Visual Genome — but
also that it produces visually meaningful predicate shifts,
as an instance of interpretable neural networks. Finally, we
show that by modelling predicates as attention shifts, we
can even localize entities in the absence of their category,
allowing our model to find completely unseen categories.

1. Introduction
Referring expressions in everyday discourse help identify and locate entities1 in our surroundings. For instance,
we might point to the “person kicking the ball” to differentiate from the “person guarding the goal” (Figure 1).
In both these examples, we disambiguate between the two
persons by their respective relationships with other entities [23]. While one person is kicking the ball, the
other is guarding the goal. The eventual goal is to build
computational models that can identify which entities others are referring to [34].
† = equal contribution
1 We use the term “entities” for what is commonly referred to as

“objects” to differentiate from the term object in <subject-predicateobject> relationships.

Figure 1: Referring relationships disambiguate between instances of the same category by using their relative relationships with other entities. Given the relationship <person
- kicking - ball>, the task requires our model to correctly identify which person in the image is kicking the
ball by understanding the predicate kicking.

To enable such interactions, we introduce referring relationships — a task where, given a relationship, models
should know which entities in a scene are being referred
to by the relationship. Formally, the task expects an input image along with a relationship, which is of the form
<subject - predicate - object>, and outputs localizations of both the subject and object. For example, we can express the above examples as <person kicking - ball> and <person - guarding - goal>
(Figure 1). Previous work has attempted to disambiguate
entities of the same category in the context of referring expression comprehension [28, 24, 41, 42, 11]. Their task expects a natural language input, such as “a person guarding
the goal”, resulting in evaluations that require both natural
language as well as computer vision components. It can be
challenging to pinpoint whether errors made by these models occur from either the language or the visual components.
By interfacing with a structured relationship input, our task
is a special case of referring expressions that alleviates the
need to model language.
16867

