Video Captioning via Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
Xin Wang,

Wenhu Chen,

Jiawei Wu,

Yuan-Fang Wang,

William Yang Wang

University of California, Santa Barbara
{xwang,wenhuchen,jiawei wu,yfwang,william}@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Video captioning is the task of automatically generating a textual description of the actions in a video. Although previous work (e.g. sequence-to-sequence model)
has shown promising results in abstracting a coarse description of a short video, it is still very challenging to
caption a video containing multiple fine-grained actions
with a detailed description. This paper aims to address the
challenge by proposing a novel hierarchical reinforcement
learning framework for video captioning, where a highlevel Manager module learns to design sub-goals and a
low-level Worker module recognizes the primitive actions
to fulfill the sub-goal. With this compositional framework to
reinforce video captioning at different levels, our approach
significantly outperforms all the baseline methods on a
newly introduced large-scale dataset for fine-grained video
captioning. Furthermore, our non-ensemble model has already achieved the state-of-the-art results on the widelyused MSR-VTT dataset.

1. Introduction
For most people, watching a brief video and describing
what happened (in words) is an easy task. For machines,
extracting the meaning from video pixels and generating
natural-sounding description is a very challenging problem. However, due to its wide range of applications such
as intelligent video surveillance and assistance to visuallyimpaired people, video captioning has drawn increasing attention from the computer vision community recently. Different from image captioning which aims at describing a
static scene, video captioning is more challenging in the
sense that a series of coherent scenes need to be understood
in order to jointly generate multiple description segments
(e.g., see Figure 1).
Current video captioning tasks can mainly be divided
into two families, single-sentence generation [38, 16] and
paragraph generation [24]. Single-sentence generation
tends to abstract a whole video to a simple and high-level

Caption #1: A woman ofers her dog some food.
Caption #2: A woman is eating and sharing food with her dog.
Caption #3: A woman is sharing a snack with a dog.

Caption: A person sits on a bed and puts a laptop into a bag.
The person stands up, puts the bag on one shoulder, and
walks out of the room.

Figure 1: Video captioning examples. Top row is an example
from MSR-VTT dataset [38], which is summarized by three single
captions. Bottom row is an example from Charades [28] dataset,
which consists of several dependent human activities and is described by multiple long sentences of complex structure.

descriptive sentence, while paragraph generation tends to
grasp more detailed actions, and generates multiple sentences of descriptions. However, even for paragraph generation, the paragraph is often split into multiple, singlesentence generation scenarios associated with ground truth
temporal video intervals.
In many practical cases, human activities are too complex to be described with short, simple sentences, and the
temporal intervals are hard to be predicted ahead of time
without a good understanding of the linguistic context. For
instance, in the bottom example of Figure 1, there are five
human actions in total: sit on a bed, put a laptop into a bag
are happening simultaneously, and then followed by stand
up, put the bag on one shoulder and walk out of the room
in order. Such fine-grained caption requires a subtle and
expressive mechanism to capture the temporal dynamics of
the video content and associate that with semantic representations in natural language.
In order to tackle this issue, we propose a “divide and
14213

