Fast and Accurate Single Image Super-Resolution via Information Distillation
Network
Zheng Hui, Xiumei Wang∗, Xinbo Gao
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University
Xi’an, China
zheng hui@aliyun.com, wangxm@xidian.edu.cn, xbgao@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have been demonstrated remarkable progress on single image super-resolution. However, as the depth and width of
the networks increase, CNN-based super-resolution methods have been faced with the challenges of computational
complexity and memory consumption in practice. In order
to solve the above questions, we propose a deep but compact convolutional network to directly reconstruct the high
resolution image from the original low resolution image. In
general, the proposed model consists of three parts, which
are feature extraction block, stacked information distillation
blocks and reconstruction block respectively. By combining
an enhancement unit with a compression unit into a distillation block, the local long and short-path features can be effectively extracted. Specifically, the proposed enhancement
unit mixes together two different types of features and the
compression unit distills more useful information for the sequential blocks. In addition, the proposed network has the
advantage of fast execution due to the comparatively few
numbers of filters per layer and the use of group convolution. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
method is superior to the state-of-the-art methods, especially in terms of time performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/Zheng222/IDN-Caffe.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) is a classical problem in low-level computer vision, which reconstructs a
high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR)
image. Actually, an infinite number of HR images can
get the same LR image by downsampling. Hence, the SR problem is inherently ill-posed and no unique solution
exists. In order to mitigate this problem, numerous SISR methods have been proposed in the literature, including
∗ corresponding author

Figure 1. Speed and accuracy trade-off. The average PSNR and
the average inference time for upscaling 3× on Set5. The IDN is
faster than other methods and achieves the best performance at the
same time.

interpolation-based methods, reconstruction-based methods
and example-based methods. Since the former two kinds of
methods usually suffer dramatically drop in restoration performance with larger upscaling factors, the recent SR methods fall into the example-based methods which try to learn
prior knowledge from LR and HR pairs.
Recently, due to the strength of deep convolutional neural network (CNN), many CNN-based SR methods try to
train a deep network to gain better reconstruction performance. Kim et al. propose a 20-layer CNN model known
as VDSR [12], which adopts residual learning and adaptive
gradient clipping to ease training difficulty. To control the
model parameters, the authors construct a deeply-recursive
convolutional network (DRCN) [13] by adopting recursive
layer. To mitigate training difficulty, Mao et al. propose
a very deep residual encoder-decoder network (RED) [17],
which consists of a series of convolutional and subsequent
transposed convolution layers to learn end-to-end mappings
from the LR images to the ground truths. Tai et al. propose

723

