Multi-Scale Weighted Nuclear Norm Image Restoration
Noam Yair and Tomer Michaeli
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
{noamyair@campus, tomer.m@ee}.technion.ac.il

Abstract
A prominent property of natural images is that groups of
similar patches within them tend to lie on low-dimensional
subspaces. This property has been previously used for
image denoising, with particularly notable success via
weighted nuclear norm minimization (WNNM). In this paper, we extend the WNNM method into a general image restoration algorithm, capable of handling arbitrary degradations (e.g. blur, missing pixels, etc.). Our approach is based
on a novel regularization term which simultaneously penalizes for high weighted nuclear norm values of all the patch
groups in the image. Our regularizer is isolated from the
data-term, thus enabling convenient treatment of arbitrary
degradations. Furthermore, it exploits the fractal property
of natural images, by accounting for patch similarities also
across different scales of the image. We propose a variable
splitting method for solving the resulting optimization problem. This leads to an algorithm that is quite different from
“plug-and-play” techniques, which solve image-restoration
problems using a sequence of denoising steps. As we verify through extensive experiments, our algorithm achieves
state of the art results in deblurring and inpainting, outperforming even the recent deep net based methods.

1. Introduction
Removing undesired degradations from images (e.g.
blur, noise, missing parts) is important in a wide range of
applications, and also serves as an ideal test bed for natural
image statistics models. In recent years, this field is seeing
a paradigm shift, as discriminative methods based on convolutional neural nets (CNNs) [7, 48, 49, 15, 44, 27, 14, 13,
30, 37, 29] push aside generative and regularization-based
algorithms [12, 18, 19, 52, 39, 16, 31, 40, 36, 35]. However,
while direct end-to-end training of a CNN is particularly
suitable for image denoising, it is not equally practical for
all image restoration tasks. For example, in deblurring or
inpaining one would need to train a different net for every
possible blur kernel or missing pixels mask. Recent works
suggested to overcome this limitation by using iterative al-

Input

EPLL 25.63 [dB]

GSR 27.60 [dB]

Ground-Truth

FoE 23.04 [dB]

Our 27.87 [dB]

Figure 1. Inpainting with 75% missing pixels. Our algorithm
handles arbitrary degradations within a single simple framework.
It relies on a novel regularization term which encourages similar patches within and across scales of the image to lie on lowdimensional subspaces. This leads to state-of-the-art results in
tasks like inpainting and deblurring. Note how our algorithm produces a naturally looking reconstruction with sharp edges and no
distracting artifacts. This is also supported by the high PSNR values it attains w.r.t. competing approaches.

gorithms, which involve a denoising operation in each step
[42, 38], thus requiring training only a denoising net [49].
Yet, this “plug-and-play” approach does not directly target
the minimization of the mean-square error (MSE) through
end-to-end training, and thus does not exploit the full power
of discriminative methods.
In this work, we demonstrate that a simple regularization based algorithm can achieve state-of-the-art results in
image restoration, improving over all existing methods by a
significant margin (including those based on CNNs). Figure 1 shows an example result of our algorithm in the
task of inpainting. We join together under a single framework several features, which have been previously shown
to be very effective. First, we rely on the tendency of
small patches to recur abundantly within natural images
[6, 17, 12, 50, 45]. More specifically, we use the fact groups
of similar patches typically span low-dimensional subspa-

3165

