Deformable GANs for Pose-based Human Image Generation
Aliaksandr Siarohin1 , Enver Sangineto1 , Stéphane Lathuilière2 , and Nicu Sebe1
1
2
DISI, University of Trento, Italy,
Inria Grenoble Rhone-Alpes, France
{aliaksandr.siarohin,enver.sangineto,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it, stephane.lathuiliere@inria.fr

Abstract
In this paper we address the problem of generating person images conditioned on a given pose. Specifically, given
an image of a person and a target pose, we synthesize a
new image of that person in the novel pose. In order to deal
with pixel-to-pixel misalignments caused by the pose differences, we introduce deformable skip connections in the
generator of our Generative Adversarial Network. Moreover, a nearest-neighbour loss is proposed instead of the
common L1 and L2 losses in order to match the details of
the generated image with the target image. We test our approach using photos of persons in different poses and we
compare our method with previous work in this area showing state-of-the-art results in two benchmarks. Our method
can be applied to the wider field of deformable object generation, provided that the pose of the articulated object can
be extracted using a keypoint detector.

1. Introduction
In this paper we deal with the problem of generating
images where the foreground object changes because of a
viewpoint variation or a deformable motion, such as the articulated human body. Specifically, inspired by Ma et al.
[12], our goal is to generate a human image conditioned on
two different variables: (1) the appearance of a specific person in a given image and (2) the pose of the same person
in another image. The task our networks need to solve is
to preserve the appearance details (e.g., the texture) contained in the first variable while performing a deformation
on the structure of the foreground object according to the
second variable. We focus on the human body which is an
articulated “object”, important for many applications (e.g.,
computer-graphics based manipulations or re-identification
dataset synthesis). However, our approach can be used with
other deformable objects such as human faces or animal
bodies, provided that a significant number of keypoints can
be automatically extracted from the object of interest in order to represent its pose.
Pose-based human-being image generation is motivated

(a) Aligned task

(b) Unaligned task

Figure 1: (a) A typical “rigid” scene generation task, where
the conditioning and the output image local structure is well
aligned. (b) In a deformable-object generation task, the input and output are not spatially aligned.
by the interest in synthesizing videos [18] with non-trivial
human movements or in generating rare poses for human pose estimation [1] or re-identification [22] training
datasets. However, most of the recently proposed, deepnetwork based generative approaches, such as Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [3] or Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [7] do not explicitly deal with the problem of
articulated-object generation. Common conditional methods (e.g., conditional GANs or conditional VAEs) can synthesize images whose appearances depend on some conditioning variables (e.g., a label or another image). For
instance, Isola et al. [4] recently proposed an “image-toimage translation” framework, in which an input image x
is transformed into a second image y represented in another
“channel” (see Fig. 1a). However, most of these methods
have problems when dealing with large spatial deformations between the conditioning and the target image. For
instance, the U-Net architecture used by Isola et al. [4] is
based on skip connections which help preserving local information between x and y. Specifically, skip connections
are used to copy and then concatenate the feature maps of
the generator “encoder” (where information is downsam-

3408

