Perturbative Neural Networks
Felix Juefei-Xu
Carnegie Mellon University

Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
Michigan State University

Marios Savvides
Carnegie Mellon University

felixu@cmu.edu

vishnu@msu.edu

msavvid@ri.cmu.edu

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks are witnessing wide adoption in computer vision systems with numerous applications
across a range of visual recognition tasks. Much of this
progress is fueled through advances in convolutional neural network architectures and learning algorithms even as
the basic premise of a convolutional layer has remained unchanged. In this paper, we seek to revisit the convolutional
layer that has been the workhorse of state-of-the-art visual
recognition models. We introduce a very simple, yet effective,
module called a perturbation layer as an alternative to a
convolutional layer. The perturbation layer does away with
convolution in the traditional sense and instead computes its
response as a weighted linear combination of non-linearly
activated additive noise perturbed inputs. We demonstrate
both analytically and empirically that this perturbation layer
can be an effective replacement for a standard convolutional
layer. Empirically, deep neural networks with perturbation layers, called Perturbative Neural Networks (PNNs),
in lieu of convolutional layers perform comparably with standard CNNs on a range of visual datasets (MNIST, CIFAR-10,
PASCAL VOC, and ImageNet) with fewer parameters.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
overwhelmingly successful across a variety of visual perception tasks. The past several years have witnessed the evolution of many successful CNN architectures such as AlexNet
[14], VGG [27], GoogLeNet [30], ResNet [8, 9], MobileNet
[10], and DenseNet [11], etc. Much of this effort has been
focused on the topology and connectivity between convolutional and other modules while the convolutional layer itself
has continued to remain the backbone of these networks.
Convolutional layers are characterized by two main properties [17, 5], namely, local connectivity and weight sharing,
both of which afford these layers with significant computational and statistical efficiency over densely connected layers.
Ever since the introduction of AlexNet [14], there has been
steady refinements to a standard convolutional layer. While

AlexNet utilized convolutional filters with large receptive
fields (11 × 11, 5 × 5, etc.), the VGG network [27] demonstrated the utility of using convolutional weights with very
small receptive fields (3 × 3) that are both statistically and
computationally efficient for learning deep convolutional
neural networks. As convolutional layers are often the main
computational bottleneck of CNNs, there has been steady
developments in improving the computational efficiency of
convolutional layers. MobileNets [10] introduced efficient
reparameterization of standard 3 × 3 convolutional weights,
in terms of depth-wise convolutions and 1 × 1 convolutions.
Convolutional networks with binary weights [2, 3, 23] have
been proposed to significantly improve the computational
efficiency of CNNs. Recent work has also demonstrated
that sparse convolutional weights [20, 21, 18] perform comparably to dense convolutional weights while also being
computationally efficient. However, across this entire body
of work the basic premise of a convolutional layer itself has
largely remained unchanged.
This paper seeks to rethink the basic premise of the necessity of convolutional layers for the task of image classification. The success of a wide range of approaches that utilize
convolutional layers that have, a) very small receptive fields
(3 × 3), b) sparse convolutional weights, and c) convolutional weights with binary weights, motivates our hypothesis
that one can perhaps completely do away with convolutional
layers for learning high performance image classification
models. We propose a novel module, dubbed the perturbation layer1 , that conforms to our hypothesis and is devoid
of standard convolutional operations. Given an input, the
perturbation layer first perturbs the input additively through
random, but fixed, noise followed by a weighted combination of non-linear activations of the input perturbations. The
weighted linear combinations of activated perturbations are
conceptually similar to 1×1 convolutions, but are not strictly
convolutional since their receptive field is just one pixel, as
opposed to the receptive fields of standard convolutional
weights. This layer is thus an extreme version of sparse
convolutional weights with sparsity of one non-zero element
1 Implementation and future updates will be available at http://
xujuefei.com/pnn.

13310

