Disentangling Structure and Aesthetics for Style-aware Image Completion
Andrew Gilbert1 , John Collomosse1 2 , Hailin Jin2 , and Brian Price2
1

Centre for Vision Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
2
Creative Intelligence Lab, Adobe Research

Abstract
Content-aware image completion or in-painting is a fundamental tool for the correction of defects or removal of
objects in images. We propose a non-parametric in-painting
algorithm that enforces both structural and aesthetic (style)
consistency within the resulting image. Our contributions
are two-fold: 1) we explicitly disentangle image structure
and style during patch search and selection to ensure a visually consistent look and feel within the target image. 2)
we perform adaptive stylization of patches to conform the
aesthetics of selected patches to the target image, so harmonizing the integration of selected patches into the final composition. We show that explicit consideration of visual style
during in-painting delivers excellent qualitative and quantitative results across the varied image styles and content,
over the Places2 scene photographic dataset and a challenging new in-painting dataset of artwork derived from BAM!

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We propose enhancing image completion through explicit
consideration of visual aesthetics (style) alongside structure and
semantics. A deep convnet is used to disentangle patch structure
and style, driving 1) style-aware patch search; 2) a style-aware
optimization for patch selection; 3) stylization of patch content to
enable seamless image completion with coherent visual aesthetic.

Image completion to repair defects or remove unwanted
objects requires missing image data (’holes’) to be filled
in a visually plausible way. Most existing algorithms operate by copying and seamlessly blending patches from elsewhere in the image, hallucinating visually plausible texture
to fill the hole [5, 4, 1]. This idea has been extended to sample patches from auxiliary image collections (AICs) [8] or
domain-specific generative models [31, 10]. One advantage
of using an AIC is greater flexibility and likelihood of finding a suitable match among the millions of images within
the collection. Most methods focus on photographic images
and accordingly are driven by structure or semantic similarity. However, this is not suitable for artistic images as these
methods do not attempt to match on visual style.
In this paper we propose a novel AIC based image completion approach that explicitly considers both structure and
visual style to deliver aesthetically superior in-painting results with a consistent visual look and feel, over a broad
gamut of digital artwork. Specifically, we propose two technical contributions:
1) Style-aware Optimization. First, we explicitly factorize image appearance into structure and style through a

deeply learned representation. This enables us to enforce
style coherence within the patch search and selection optimization. Existing approaches focus upon only the structural
plausibility of the completed image, considering this at both
a low and high level. At a low level, patches are selected
to minimize discontinuities in local edge and texture information in the image. At a high level, images are selected to
ensure semantically similar patches (e.g., to in-fill a waterfall patches are sampled from images containing waterfalls).
However, neither of these structural constraints enforce a
consistent visual aesthetic between the patches selected and
the image to be in-painted. For example, a visually plausible fill of a region of a watercolor painting would require
the sampling of patches from a watercolor image. When
drawing patches from AICs containing many millions of images [8], it is frequently possible to obtain patch candidates
that match the object type and structure but have a very different aesthetic. Such visual inconsistencies are readily perceived by a human who expects a homogeneous aesthetic
style within the completed image.
2) Adaptive Stylization. Second, our optimization adap11848

