Alternating-Stereo VINS: Observability Analysis and Performance Evaluation
Mrinal K. Paul, Stergios I. Roumeliotis
Google Inc.
California, USA
{mrinalkanti, stergiosr}@google.com

Abstract
One approach to improve the accuracy and robustness
of vision-aided inertial navigation systems (VINS) that employ low-cost inertial sensors, is to obtain scale information
from stereoscopic vision. Processing images from two cameras, however, is computationally expensive and increases
latency. To address this limitation, in this work, a novel
two-camera alternating-stereo VINS is presented. Specifically, the proposed system triggers the left-right cameras
in an alternating fashion, estimates the poses corresponding to the left camera only, and introduces a linear interpolation model for processing the alternating right camera
measurements. Although not a regular stereo system, the
alternating visual observations when employing the proposed interpolation scheme, still provide scale information, as shown by analyzing the observability properties of
the vision-only corresponding system. Finally, the performance gain, of the proposed algorithm over its monocular
and stereo counterparts is assessed using various datasets.

1. Introduction and Related Work
With the advent of augmented (AR) and virtual reality (VR), the application of vision-aided inertial navigation systems (VINS) on mobile devices is becoming increasingly popular. As a result, the research focus in
VINS is gradually shifting towards finding accurate, yet efficient, real-time solutions on resource-constrained devices.
Moreover, due to recent improvements in mobile processors (e.g., [3, 4]), and the availability of multiple cameras in certain smart-phones (e.g., [5]) and AR-VR headsets
(e.g., [1, 2]), the interest in more robust multi-camera VINS
is also increasing.
Most existing tightly-coupled (i.e., jointly optimizing
over visual and inertial cost terms) VINS approaches focus
on monocular systems (e.g., [7, 10, 20, 22, 23]). Although
scale is observable in monocular VINS from the inertial
measurement unit (IMU)’s accelerometer, it is typically imprecise as it requires accurately subtracting the dominant

Figure 1. Alternating-stereo VINS.

gravity vector from the noisy acceleration measurements.
Thus, additional scale information from stereo vision is key
to achieving higher accuracy. To this end, Manderson et
al. [18] propose an extension of PTAM [14] where the tracking and mapping pipelines are decoupled. On the other
hand, Leutenegger et al. [16] employ a keyframe-based simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) algorithm
that performs nonlinear optimization. Both [18] and [16],
however, operate in real-time only on desktop CPUs. To
the best of our knowledge, Paul et al. [21] presents the only
tightly coupled stereo VINS that operates in real-time on
a mobile processor. In particular, [21] extends the inverse
square-root sliding-window filter of [23] to two-camera systems and shows that the additional scale information obtained from the stereo visual observations is a key factor
in improving accuracy and robustness. Due to the additional image-processing requirements for the second camera, however, [21] is able to process key-frames at up to
10 Hz, which is not sufficient for tracking fast motions in
low-latency demanding applications such as VR and AR.
To address the limitations of existing stereo systems,
in this paper we present a novel alternating-stereo VINS
which has CPU requirements and latency comparable to
monocular VINS, yet provides scale information from the
visual observations, hence achieving accuracy and robustness comparable to stereo VINS. In the proposed stereo
system, the left-right cameras are triggered in an alternating fashion (see Fig. 1), while estimating the poses of the
camera frame only when the left camera is active (i.e., every other image of the pair). Since, the observations from
the right cameras do not correspond to any cloned frames,1
1 By cloning we refer to the stochastic cloning as in the MSCKF [20]

4729

