Learning a Discriminative Prior for Blind Image Deblurring
Lerenhan Li1,2

Jinshan Pan3
Wei-Sheng Lai2
Changxin Gao1
Nong Sang1∗
Ming-Hsuan Yang2
1
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing,
School of Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Merced
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
We present an effective blind image deblurring method
based on a data-driven discriminative prior. Our work is
motivated by the fact that a good image prior should favor clear images over blurred ones. In this work, we formulate the image prior as a binary classifier which can be
achieved by a deep convolutional neural network (CNN).
The learned prior is able to distinguish whether an input image is clear or not. Embedded into the maximum a posterior
(MAP) framework, it helps blind deblurring in various scenarios, including natural, face, text, and low-illumination
images. However, it is difficult to optimize the deblurring method with the learned image prior as it involves a
non-linear CNN. Therefore, we develop an efficient numerical approach based on the half-quadratic splitting method
and gradient decent algorithm to solve the proposed model.
Furthermore, the proposed model can be easily extended to
non-uniform deblurring. Both qualitative and quantitative
experimental results show that our method performs favorably against state-of-the-art algorithms as well as domainspecific image deblurring approaches.

(a) Blurred image

(b) Xu et al. [38]

(c) Pan et al. [27]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. A deblurred example. We propose a discriminative image prior which is learned from a deep binary classification network for image deblurring. For the blurred image B in (a) and
k∇Ik
its corresponding clear image I, we can get k∇Bk0 = 0.85,
0

kD(I)k0
kD(B)k0

1. Introduction
Blind image deblurring is a classical problem in image
processing and computer vision, which aims to recover a
latent image from a blurred input. When the blur is spatially
invariant, the blur process is usually modeled by
B = I ⊗ k + n,

(1)

where ⊗ denotes convolution operator, B, I, k and n denote the blurred image, latent sharp image, blur kernel, and
noise, respectively. The problem (1) is ill-posed as both I
and k are unknown, and there exist infinite solutions. To
∗ Corresponding author.

(I)
= 0.82 and ff(B)
= 0.03, where ∇, D(·), k · k0 and
f (·) denote the gradient operator [38], the dark channel [27], L0
norm [27, 38] and our proposed classifier, respectively. The prior
is more discriminative than the hand-crafted priors, thus leading
to better deblurred results. (A larger ratio indicates that the prior
responses are closer and cannot be well separated.)

tackle this problem, additional constraints and prior knowledge on both blur kernels and images are required.
The main success of the recent deblurring methods
mainly comes from the development of effective image
priors and edge-prediction strategies. However, the edgeprediction based methods usually involve a heuristic edge
selection step, which do not perform well when strong
edges are not available. To avoid the heuristic edge selection step, numerous algorithms based on natural image pri-

6616

