The iNaturalist Species Classification and Detection Dataset
Grant Van Horn1 Oisin Mac Aodha1
Alex Shepard4 Hartwig Adam2
1

Caltech

2

Google

3

Yang Song2 Yin Cui3 Chen Sun2
Pietro Perona1 Serge Belongie3

Cornell Tech

4

iNaturalist

Abstract
Existing image classification datasets used in computer
vision tend to have a uniform distribution of images across
object categories. In contrast, the natural world is heavily
imbalanced, as some species are more abundant and easier
to photograph than others. To encourage further progress in
challenging real world conditions we present the iNaturalist species classification and detection dataset, consisting of
859,000 images from over 5,000 different species of plants
and animals. It features visually similar species, captured
in a wide variety of situations, from all over the world. Images were collected with different camera types, have varying image quality, feature a large class imbalance, and have
been verified by multiple citizen scientists. We discuss the
collection of the dataset and present extensive baseline experiments using state-of-the-art computer vision classification and detection models. Results show that current nonensemble based methods achieve only 67% top one classification accuracy, illustrating the difficulty of the dataset.
Specifically, we observe poor results for classes with small
numbers of training examples suggesting more attention is
needed in low-shot learning.

1. Introduction
Performance on existing image classification benchmarks such as [32] is close to being saturated by the current generation of classification algorithms [9, 37, 35, 46].
However, the number of training images is crucial. If one
reduces the number of training images per category, typically performance suffers. It may be tempting to try and acquire more training data for the classes with few images but
this is often impractical, or even impossible, in many application domains. We argue that class imbalance is a property
of the real world and computer vision models should be able
to deal with it. Motivated by this problem, we introduce the
iNaturalist Classification and Detection Dataset (iNat2017).
Just like the real world, it exhibits a large class imbalance,
as some species are much more likely to be observed.

Figure 1. Two visually similar species from the iNat2017 dataset.
Through close inspection, we can see that the ladybug on the left
has two spots while the one on the right has seven.

It is estimated that the natural world contains several million species with around 1.2 million of these having already
been formally described [26]. For some species, it may only
be possible to determine the species via genetics or by dissection. For the rest, visual identification in the wild, while
possible, can be extremely challenging. This can be due to
the sheer number of visually similar categories that an individual would be required to remember along with the challenging inter-class similarity; see Fig. 1. As a result, there
is a critical need for robust and accurate automated tools to
scale up biodiversity monitoring on a global scale [4].
The iNat2017 dataset is comprised of images and labels
from the citizen science website iNaturalist1 . The site allows naturalists to map and share photographic observations of biodiversity across the globe. Each observation
consists of a date, location, images, and labels containing
the name of the species present in the image. As of November 2017, iNaturalist has collected over 6.6 million observations from 127,000 species. From this, there are close to
12,000 species that have been observed by at least twenty
1 www.inaturalist.org

8769

