Zoom and Learn: Generalizing Deep Stereo Matching to Novel Domains
Jiahao Pang1 Wenxiu Sun1 Chengxi Yang1 Jimmy Ren1 Ruichao Xiao1 Jin Zeng1 Liang Lin1,2
1
2
SenseTime Research
Sun Yat-sen University
{pangjiahao, sunwenxiu, yangchengxi, rensijie, xiaoruichao, zengjin, linliang}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Despite the recent success of stereo matching with convolutional neural networks (CNNs), it remains arduous to
generalize a pre-trained deep stereo model to a novel domain. A major difficulty is to collect accurate groundtruth disparities for stereo pairs in the target domain. In
this work, we propose a self-adaptation approach for CNN
training, utilizing both synthetic training data (with groundtruth disparities) and stereo pairs in the new domain (without ground-truths). Our method is driven by two empirical
observations. By feeding real stereo pairs of different domains to stereo models pre-trained with synthetic data, we
see that: i) a pre-trained model does not generalize well to
the new domain, producing artifacts at boundaries and illposed regions; however, ii) feeding an up-sampled stereo
pair leads to a disparity map with extra details. To avoid
i) while exploiting ii), we formulate an iterative optimization problem with graph Laplacian regularization. At each
iteration, the CNN adapts itself better to the new domain:
we let the CNN learn its own higher-resolution output; at
the meanwhile, a graph Laplacian regularization is imposed
to discriminatively keep the desired edges while smoothing
out the artifacts. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method in two domains: daily scenes collected by smartphone cameras, and street views captured in a driving car.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching is a classic yet important problem for
many computer vision tasks (e.g., 3D reconstruction [7] and
autonomous vehicles [6]). Particularly, given a rectified image pair captured by stereo cameras, one aims at estimating
the disparity of each pixel between the two images. Traditionally, a stereo matching pipeline starts from matching
cost computation and cost aggregation. Further optimization and refinement lead to the output disparity [13]. Recent
advances in deep learning has inspired a lot of end-to-end
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for stereo matching,
e.g., [18, 23]. Unlike the traditional wisdom, an end-to-end
CNN integrates the stereo matching pipeline into a holistic
deep architecture by learning from the training data. Under

confined scenarios with proper training data (e.g., the KITTI
dataset [6]), the end-to-end deep stereo models achieve unprecedented state-of-the-art performance.
However, it remains difficult to generalize a pre-trained
deep stereo model to a novel scenario. Firstly, the contents in the source domain may have very different characteristics from the target domain. Moreover, real stereo
pairs collected with different stereo modules suffer from
several degenerations—e.g., noise corruption, photometric
distortions, imperfections in rectification—to different extents. Directly feeding a stereo pair of the target domain to a
CNN pre-trained from another domain deteriorates its performance significantly. Consequently, state-of-the-art approaches, e.g., [18, 28], train their models with synthetic
datasets [23], then perform finetuning on a fewer amount
of domain-specific data with ground-truths. Unfortunately,
besides a few public datasets for research purpose, e.g., the
KITTI dataset [6] and the Middlebury dataset [32], it is expensive and troublesome to collect real stereo pairs with accurate ground-truth disparities.
To resolve this dilemma, we propose a self-adaptation
approach to generalize deep stereo matching methods to
novel domains. We utilize synthetic training data and stereo
pairs of the target domain, where only the synthetic data
have known disparity maps. Our approach is compatible
with end-to-end deep stereo methods, e.g., [23, 28], guiding
a pre-trained model to gradually adapt to the target scenario.
We start our explorations by feeding real stereo pairs from
different domains to models pre-trained with synthetic data,
resulting in two empirical observations:
(i) Generalization glitches: a pre-trained model does not
generalize well on the target domain—the produced
disparity maps can be blurry at object edges and erroneous at ill-posed regions;
(ii) Scale diversity: feeding a properly up-sampled stereo
pair (the same stereo pair at a finer scale) leads to
another disparity map with more meaningful details,
e.g., sharper object boundaries, more high-frequency
contents of the scene.
To avoid the issues of (i) while exploiting the benefits of (ii),
12070

