Learning to Find Good Correspondences
Kwang Moo Yi1, * Eduard Trulls 2, * Yuki Ono3
1

Visual Computing Group, University of Victoria
3

Sony Imaging Products & Solutions Inc.

4

2

Vincent Lepetit4

Mathieu Salzmann2

Pascal Fua2

Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology

kyi@uvic.ca, {firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch, yuki.ono@sony.com, lepetit@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We develop a deep architecture to learn to find good correspondences for wide-baseline stereo. Given a set of putative sparse matches and the camera intrinsics, we train
our network in an end-to-end fashion to label the correspondences as inliers or outliers, while simultaneously using them to recover the relative pose, as encoded by the
essential matrix. Our architecture is based on a multi-layer
perceptron operating on pixel coordinates rather than directly on the image, and is thus simple and small. We introduce a novel normalization technique, called Context Normalization, which allows us to process each data point separately while embedding global information in it, and also
makes the network invariant to the order of the correspondences. Our experiments on multiple challenging datasets
demonstrate that our method is able to drastically improve
the state of the art with little training data.

1. Introduction
Recovering the relative camera motion between two images is one of the most basic tasks in Computer Vision, and
a key component of wide-baseline stereo and Structure from
Motion (SfM) pipelines. However, it remains a difﬁcult
problem when dealing with wide baselines, repetitive structures, and illumination changes, as depicted by Fig. 1. Most
algorithms rely on sparse keypoints [19, 2, 24] to establish
an initial set of correspondences across images, then try to
ﬁnd a subset of reliable matches—inliers—which conform
to a given geometric model, and use them to recover the
pose [11]. They rely on combinations of well-established
techniques, such as SIFT [19], RANSAC [10], and the 8point algorithm [18], which have been in use for decades.
With the advent of deep learning, there has been a push
towards reformulating local feature extraction using neural
networks [35, 26]. However, while these algorithms outper* First two authors contributed equally. K.M. Yi was at EPFL during
the development of this project. This work was partially supported by EU
FP7 project MAGELLAN under grant ICT-FP7-611526 and by systems
supplied by Compute Canada.

(a) RANSAC

(b) Our approach

Figure 1. We extract 2k SIFT keypoints from a challenging image
pair and display the inlier matches found with RANSAC (left) and
our approach (right). We draw them in green if they conform to
the ground-truth epipolar geometry, and in red otherwise.

form earlier ones on point-matching benchmarks, incorporating them into pose estimation pipelines may not necessarily translate into a performance increase, as indicated by
two recent studies [25, 3]. This suggests that the limiting
factor may not lie in establishing the correspondences as
much as in choosing those that are best to recover the pose.
This problem has received comparatively little attention
and most algorithms still rely on non-differentiable handcrafted techniques to solve it. DSAC [4] is the only recent
attempt we know of to tackle sparse outlier rejection in a
differentiable manner. However, this method is designed to
mimic RANSAC rather than outperform it. Furthermore, it
is speciﬁc to 3D to 2D correspondences, rather than stereo.
By contrast, we propose a novel approach to ﬁnding geometrically consistent correspondences with a deep network.
Given feature points in both images, and potential correspondences between them, we train a deep network that
simultaneously solves a classiﬁcation problem—retain or
reject each correspondence—and a regression problem—
retrieving the camera motion—by exploiting epipolar constraints. To do so we introduce a differentiable way to com12666

