Gesture Recognition: Focus on the Hands
Pradyumna Narayana, J. Ross Beveridge, Bruce A. Draper
Colorado State University
{prady, ross, draper} @cs.colostate.edu

Abstract
Gestures are a common form of human communication
and important for human computer interfaces (HCI). Recent approaches to gesture recognition use deep learning
methods, including multi-channel methods. We show that
when spatial channels are focused on the hands, gesture
recognition improves significantly, particularly when the
channels are fused using a sparse network. Using this technique, we improve performance on the ChaLearn IsoGD
dataset from a previous best of 67.71% to 82.07%, and on
the NVIDIA dataset from 83.8% to 91.28%.

1. Introduction
Gestures are a natural form of human communication.
When accompanying speech, gestures convey information
about the intentions, interests, feelings and ideas of the
speaker [17]. Gestures are even more important in noisy
environments, at a distance, and for people with hearing
impairments. In these scenarios, gestures replace speech as
the primary means of communication, becoming both more
common and more structured [21].
Automatic gesture recognition is therefore an important domain of computer vision research, with applications
in Human/Computer interfaces (HCI). Not surprisingly, a
large literature has developed on gesture recognition; see
[4, 25, 12, 1] for surveys. A good way to measure progress
in this crowded field is to look at the ChaLearn challenges, which started in 2011 and have continued through
2017 [11, 8, 10, 9, 7, 6]. The current ChaLearn IsoGD [30]
dataset is one of the largest and most varied gesture datasets
available, with 249 gestures from a variety of domains including mudras (Hindu/Buddhist hand gestures), Chinese
numbers, and diving signals. The ChaLearn 2017 challenge
attracted competitors from across the world [29], and the
results of that challenge can be reasonably interpreted as
reflecting the current state of the art.
If there is a downside to the ChaLearn challenge and the
IsoGD dataset, it is that they are not closely tied to any
specific HCI application. For this reason, we also track

progress on the NVIDIA driving gesture dataset [23], which
mimics touch-less interfaces in cars. As shown in Figure 1,
the NVIDIA setting is always the same, and the gestures
are made by drivers exclusively with their right hands. The
NVIDIA dataset is therefore a more focused counterpoint
to the wide-open IsoGD dataset.

Figure 1. Example images from the ChaLearn IsoGD dataset (left)
and NVIDIA dataset (right). NVIDIA gestures are constrained
driving gestures, while IsoGD contains many types of gestures
(mudras, diving gestures, etc.) in unconstrained settings.

This paper presents the best results reported so far on
the IsoGD and NVIDIA datasets. These results are generated by reintroducing an old idea: focus of attention. Gestures have both global and local components. Some involve sweeping motions of the arms and torso, while others
are defined by detailed hand poses. Nonetheless, previous
techniques for the ChaLearn and NVIDIA datasets process
whole images. In contrast, we train multiple nets with specific purposes: global channels to process the whole video
and look for gross motions, and focused channels to detect
and process each hand. By fusing information from these
channels, we raise the state-of-the-art (SOA) for recognition accuracy from 67.71% to 82.07% for IsoGD, and from
83.8% to 91.28% for NVIDIA.
Our architecture, which we call FOANet, builds on previous systems that use multiple channels to process different data modalities, e.g. [22, 31, 34, 23]. Unlike previous
systems, however, FOANet uses spatial focus of attention
(FOA) to restrict some channels to focus on specific body
parts, namely hands. FOANet introduces a separate channel for every focus region (global, right hand, left hand) and
modality (RGB, depth, and two types of flow fields). The
15235

