Beyond Gröbner Bases: Basis Selection for Minimal Solvers
Viktor Larsson
Lund University
Lund, Sweden

Magnus Oskarsson
Lund University
Lund, Sweden

Kalle Åström
Lund University
Lund, Sweden

viktorl@maths.lth.se

magnuso@maths.lth.se

kalle@maths.lth.se

Alge Wallis
University of Bath
Bath, United Kingdom
d.wallis@bath.ac.uk

Zuzana Kukelova
FEE

Tomas Pajdla
CIIRC

kukelzuz@fel.cvut.cz

pajdla@cvut.cz

Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic

Abstract
Many computer vision applications require robust estimation of the underlying geometry, in terms of camera motion
and 3D structure of the scene. These robust methods often
rely on running minimal solvers in a RANSAC framework.
In this paper we show how we can make polynomial solvers
based on the action matrix method faster, by careful selection of the monomial bases. These monomial bases have
traditionally been based on a Gröbner basis for the polynomial ideal. Here we describe how we can enumerate all
such bases in an efficient way. We also show that going beyond Gröbner bases leads to more efficient solvers in many
cases. We present a novel basis sampling scheme that we
evaluate on a number of problems.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we describe a method for automatically
building very fast minimal solvers. This is a core problem
in many computer vision applications, e.g. 3D reconstruction [42, 43], visual odometry [36, 2] and visual localization [38, 48].
During the last years we have seen a large increase in
the variety of available technical platforms, such as mobile devices, UAVs and drones. These are often equipped
with widely different capabilities, in terms of sensors, cameras and computing power. In many applications, e.g.
autonomous navigation, augmented reality or robotics, a
core computer vision task is to make robust estimates of
the surrounding geometry and motion of the device, based
on image data [51, 11, 48, 49, 39] or other sensor data
[24, 41, 3, 23]. Given that these tasks often need to be
performed fast, based on unreliable data containing mismatches, and on devices with limited processing power, effi-

cient implementations of robust estimation schemes such as
RANSAC is paramount. At the core of these algorithms we
have so-called minimal solvers that, based on a small data
sample, estimate a model that can be evaluated on a larger
data set to find a consistent inlier set. Since this has to be
performed many times [14], we need these minimal solvers
to be fast. The image formation process naturally leads to
geometric problems that can be formulated in terms of multivariate polynomial equation systems. In many devices we
have additional sensor measurements, e.g. gyroscope and
accelerometer data, and these measurements should be incorporated in the estimation process [1, 18, 48]. We can
also have different types of camera models and calibration
knowledge [51, 10, 50, 34, 31, 49, 17, 39]. All the aspects
described above, naturally lead to the need for tools for constructing fast solvers of polynomial equations. In addition,
the variety of platforms leads to the need for these methods
to be, to a large extent, automatic.
Many state-of-the-art polynomial solvers are based on
Gröbner bases and the action-matrix method, and there are
now powerful tools available for the automatic generation of
such solvers [26, 29, 30]. In this paper we target a specific
part of this pipeline, namely the choice of monomial basis
in the quotient ring. We will show how careful selection
of the monomial bases can give significant speed-up in the
resulting solvers. Previously, little attention has been paid
to the choice of basis to gain speed in polynomial solvers,
and usually a Gröbner basis is used to select the monomial
basis. We will in the paper describe how we can test all
possible Gröbner bases. We will further show that going
beyond Gröbner bases leads to faster solvers in a number of
cases.
Specifically, our contributions in this paper are:
• Minimizing elimination template size by enumerating
all possible Gröbner bases.
13945

