High Performance Visual Tracking with Siamese Region Proposal Network
Bo Li1,2 , Junjie Yan3 ,Wei Wu1 , Zheng Zhu1,4,5 , Xiaolin Hu3
1
SenseTime Group Limited
2
Beihang University
3
Tsinghua University
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{libo,wuwei}@sensetime.com yanjunjie@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn zhuzheng2014@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Visual object tracking has been a fundamental topic in
recent years and many deep learning based trackers have
achieved state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmarks. However, most of these trackers can hardly get top
performance with real-time speed. In this paper, we propose the Siamese region proposal network (Siamese-RPN)
which is end-to-end trained off-line with large-scale image
pairs. Specifically, it consists of Siamese subnetwork for
feature extraction and region proposal subnetwork including the classification branch and regression branch. In the
inference phase, the proposed framework is formulated as a
local one-shot detection task. We can pre-compute the template branch of the Siamese subnetwork and formulate the
correlation layers as trivial convolution layers to perform
online tracking. Benefit from the proposal refinement, traditional multi-scale test and online fine-tuning can be discarded. The Siamese-RPN runs at 160 FPS while achieving
leading performance in VOT2015, VOT2016 and VOT2017
real-time challenges.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a basic building block in various tasks of computer vision, such as automatic driving
[19] and video surveillance [32]. It is challenging in large
appearance variance caused by illumination, deformation,
occlusion and motion [37, 39]. Besides, the speed is also
important in practical applications [13, 4, 38].
Modern trackers can be roughly divided into two branches. The first branch is based on correlation filter, which
trains a regressor by exploiting the properties of circular
correlation and performing operations in the Fourier domain. It can do online tracking and update the weights of
filters at the same time efficiently. The original version is

Figure 1: Comparisons of our approach with two state-of-the-art trackers. SiamRPN
(short for Siamese-RPN) is able to predict the shape more precisely than SiamFC
(short for Siamese-FC) [4], CCOT [10] when target’s shape is severely changing.

conducted in Fourier domain and is then widely used in the
tracking community [5, 14]. Recent correlation filter based
methods use deep features to improve the accuracy, but it
largely harms the speed during model update [10, 7]. Another branch of methods aims to use very strong deep features and do not update the model [13, 4, 35]. However,
because the domain specific information is not used, performance of these methods is always not as good as correlation
filter based methods.
In this paper, we show that the off-line trained deep
learning based tracker can achieve competitive results compared to the state-of-the-art correlation filter based methods
when properly designed. The key is the proposed Siamese
region proposal network (Siamese-RPN). It consists of a
template branch and a detection branch, which are trained
off-line with large-scale image pairs in an end-to-end manner. Inspired by the state-of-the-art proposal extraction

8971

