Learning a Complete Image Indexing Pipeline
Himalaya Jain1,2 , Joaquin Zepeda3 , Patrick Pérez1,4 , and Rémi Gribonval2
1

Technicolor, Rennes, France 2 Inria, Rennes, France 3 Amazon, Seattle, WA 4 Valeo.ai, Paris, France

Abstract
To work at scale, a complete image indexing system comprises two components: An inverted file index to restrict
the actual search to only a subset that should contain most
of the items relevant to the query; An approximate distance computation mechanism to rapidly scan these lists.
While supervised deep learning has recently enabled improvements to the latter, the former continues to be based
on unsupervised clustering in the literature. In this work, we
propose a first system that learns both components within a
unifying neural framework of structured binary encoding.

1. Introduction
Decades of research have produced powerful means to
extract features from images, effectively casting the visual
comparison problem into one of distance computations in
abstract spaces. Whether engineered or trained using convolutional deep networks, such vector representations are at
the core of all content-based visual search engines. This applies particularly to example-based image retrieval systems
where a query image is used to scan a database for images
that are similar to the query in some way: in that they are
the same image but one has been edited (near duplicate detection), or because they are images of the same object or
scene (instance retrieval), or because they depict objects or
scenes from the same semantic class (category retrieval).
Deploying such systems requires conducting nearest
neighbour search in a high-dimensional feature space. Both
the dimension of this space and the size of the database
can be very large, which imposes severe constraints on storage (memory footprint of database items) and computation
(search complexity). Exhaustive exact search must be replaced by approximate, non-exhaustive search. To this end,
two main complementary methods have emerged, both relying on variants of unsupervised vector quantization (VQ).
The first such method, introduced by Sivic and Zisserman
[25] is the inverted file system that relies on a partition of the
feature space into a set of mutually exclusive bins. Search-

ing thus amounts to first assigning the query image to one or
several such bins, and then ranking the resulting shortlist of
images associated to these bins using the Euclidean distance
(or some other similarity measure) in feature space.
The second method, introduced by Jegou et al. [15], consists of using efficient approximate distance computations
as part of the ranking process. This is enabled by feature
encoders producing compact representations of the feature
vectors that further do not need to be decompressed when
computing the approximate distances. This type of approaches, which can be seen as employing block-structured
binary representations, superseded the (unstructured) binary
hashing schemes that dominated approximate search.
Despite its impressive impact on the design of image representations [11, 1, 10, 23], supervised deep learning is still
limited in what concerns the approximate search system itself. Most recent efforts focus on supervised deep binary
hashing schemes, as discussed in the next section. As an
exception, the work of Jain et al. [13] employs a blockstructured approach inspired by the successful compact encoders referenced above. Yet the binning mechanisms that
enable the usage of inverted files, and hence large-scale
search, have so far been neglected.
In this work we introduce a novel supervised inverted
file system along with a supervised, block-structured encoder that together specify a complete, supervised, image
indexing pipeline. Our design is inspired by the two methods of successful indexing pipelines described above, while
borrowing ideas from [13] to implement this philosophy.
Our main contributions are as follows: (1) We propose
the first, to our knowledge, image indexing system to reap
the benefits of deep learning for both data partitioning and
feature encoding; (2) Our data partitioning scheme, in particular, is the first to replace unsupervised VQ by a supervised approach; (3) We take steps towards learning the feature encoder and inverted file binning mechanism simultaneously as part of the same learning objective; (4) We
establish a wide margin of improvement over the existing
baselines employing state-of-the art deep features, feature
encoders and binning mechanism.
14933

