Learning distributions of shape trajectories from longitudinal datasets:
a hierarchical model on a manifold of diffeomorphisms
Alexandre Bône
Olivier Colliot
Stanley Durrleman
The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Inserm, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France
Inria, Aramis project-team, Paris, France
{alexandre.bone, olivier.colliot, stanley.durrleman}@icm-institute.org

Abstract
We propose a method to learn a distribution of shape trajectories from longitudinal data, i.e. the collection of individual objects repeatedly observed at multiple time-points.
The method allows to compute an average spatiotemporal
trajectory of shape changes at the group level, and the individual variations of this trajectory both in terms of geometry
and time dynamics. First, we formulate a non-linear mixedeffects statistical model as the combination of a generic statistical model for manifold-valued longitudinal data, a deformation model defining shape trajectories via the action
of a finite-dimensional set of diffeomorphisms with a manifold structure, and an efficient numerical scheme to compute parallel transport on this manifold. Second, we introduce a MCMC-SAEM algorithm with a specific approach
to shape sampling, an adaptive scheme for proposal variances, and a log-likelihood tempering strategy to estimate
our model. Third, we validate our algorithm on 2D simulated data, and then estimate a scenario of alteration of
the shape of the hippocampus 3D brain structure during the
course of Alzheimer’s disease. The method shows for instance that hippocampal atrophy progresses more quickly
in female subjects, and occurs earlier in APOE4 mutation
carriers. We finally illustrate the potential of our method for
classifying pathological trajectories versus normal ageing.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
At the interface of geometry, statistics, and computer science, statistical shape analysis meets a growing number of
applications in computer vision and medical image analysis. This research field has addressed two main statistical questions: atlas construction for cross-sectional shape
datasets, and shape regression for shape time series. The
former is the classical extension of a mean-variance analy-

sis, which aims to estimate a mean shape and a covariance
structure from observations of several individual instances
of the same object or organ. The latter extends the concept
of regression by estimating a spatiotemporal trajectory of
shape changes from a series of observations of the same individual object at different time-points. The emergence of
longitudinal shape datasets, which consist in the collection
of individual objects repeatedly observed at multiple timepoints, has raised the need for a combined approach. One
needs statistical methods to estimate normative spatiotemporal models from series of individual observations which
differ in shape and dynamics of shape changes across individuals. Such model should capture and disentangle the
inter-subject variability in shape at each time-point and the
temporal variability due to shifts in time or scalings in pace
of shape changes. Considering individual series as samples
along a trajectory of shape changes, this approach amounts
to estimate a spatiotemporal distribution of trajectories, and
has potential applications in various fields including silhouette tracking in videos, analysis of growth patterns in biology or modelling disease progression in medicine.

1.2. Related work
The central difficulty in shape analysis is that shape
spaces are either defined by invariance properties [21, 40,
41] or by the conservation of topological properties [5, 8,
13, 20, 34], and therefore have intrinsically a structure of
infinite dimensional Riemannian manifolds or Lie groups.
Statistical Shape Models [9] are linear but require consistent
points labelling across observations and have no topology
preservation guarantees. A now usual approach is to use
the action of a group of diffeomorphisms to define a metric
on a shape space [29, 43]. This approach has been used to
compute a “Fréchet mean” together with a covariance matrix in the tangent-space of the mean [1, 16, 17, 33, 44] from
a cross-sectional dataset, and regression from time series of
shape data [4, 15, 16, 18, 26, 32]. In [12, 14, 31], these tools

9271

