Unsupervised Feature Learning via Non-Parametric Instance Discrimination
Zhirong Wu⋆†
⋆
UC Berkeley / ICSI

Yuanjun Xiong†‡
Stella X. Yu⋆
†
Chinese University of Hong Kong

Dahua Lin†
‡
Amazon Rekognition

Abstract
Neural net classifiers trained on data with annotated
class labels can also capture apparent visual similarity
among categories without being directed to do so. We study
whether this observation can be extended beyond the conventional domain of supervised learning: Can we learn a
good feature representation that captures apparent similarity among instances, instead of classes, by merely asking
the feature to be discriminative of individual instances?
We formulate this intuition as a non-parametric classification problem at the instance-level, and use noisecontrastive estimation to tackle the computational challenges imposed by the large number of instance classes.
Our experimental results demonstrate that, under unsupervised learning settings, our method surpasses the stateof-the-art on ImageNet classification by a large margin.
Our method is also remarkable for consistently improving test performance with more training data and better
network architectures. By fine-tuning the learned feature,
we further obtain competitive results for semi-supervised
learning and object detection tasks. Our non-parametric
model is highly compact: With 128 features per image, our
method requires only 600MB storage for a million images,
enabling fast nearest neighbour retrieval at the run time.

1. Introduction
The rise of deep neural networks, especially convolutional neural networks (CNN), has led to several breakthroughs in computer vision benchmarks. Most successful
models are trained via supervised learning, which requires
large datasets that are completely annotated for a specific
task. However, obtaining annotated data is often very costly
or even infeasible in certain cases. In recent years, unsupervised learning has received increasing attention from the
community [5, 2].
Our novel approach to unsupervised learning stems from
a few observations on the results of supervised learning for
object recognition. On ImageNet, the top-5 classification
error is significantly lower than the top-1 error [18], and the
second highest responding class in the softmax output to an

leopard

jaguar

cheetah

lifeboat

shopcart bookcase

Figure 1: Supervised learning results that motivate our unsupervised approach. For an image from class leopard, the classes that
get highest responses from a trained neural net classifier are all
visually correlated, e.g., jaguar and cheetah. It is not the semantic labeling, but the apparent similarity in the data themselves that
brings some classes closer than others. Our unsupervised approach
takes the class-wise supervision to the extreme and learns a feature
representation that discriminates among individual instances.

image is more likely to be visually correlated. Fig. 1 shows
that an image from class leopard is rated much higher by
class jaguar rather than by class bookcase [11]. Such observations reveal that a typical discriminative learning method
can automatically discover apparent similarity among semantic categories, without being explicitly guided to do so.
In other words, apparent similarity is learned not from semantic annotations, but from the visual data themselves.
We take the class-wise supervision to the extreme of
instance-wise supervision, and ask: Can we learn a meaningful metric that reflects apparent similarity among instances via pure discriminative learning? An image is distinctive in its own right, and each could differ significantly
from other images in the same semantic category [23]. If we
learn to discriminate between individual instances, without
any notion of semantic categories, we may end up with a
13733

