Hierarchical Recurrent Attention Networks for Structured Online Maps
Namdar Homayounfar, Wei-Chiu Ma, Shrinidhi Kowshika Lakshmikanth, Raquel Urtasun
Uber ATG Toronto
{namdar,weichiu,klshrinidhi,urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of online road network extraction from sparse 3D point clouds. Our method
is inspired by how an annotator builds a lane graph, by
first identifying how many lanes there are and then drawing
each one in turn. We develop a hierarchical recurrent network that attends to initial regions of a lane boundary and
traces them out completely by outputting a structured polyline. We also propose a novel differentiable loss function
that measures the deviation of the edges of the ground truth
polylines and their predictions. This is more suitable than
distances on vertices, as there exists many ways to draw
equivalent polylines. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method on a 90 km stretch of highway, and show that
we can recover the right topology 92% of the time.

1. Introduction
A self driving car software stack is typically composed of
three main components: perception, prediction and motion
planning. Perception consists of estimating where everyone
is in the scene in 3D given data from the sensors (e.g., LIDAR, cameras, radar, ultrasonic). Prediction is concerned
with predicting the future action of the dynamic objects that
have been identified by perception. Finally, the outputs of
perception and prediction are used by motion planning in
order to decide the trajectory of the ego-car.
Despite several decades of research, these three tasks remain an open problem. To facilitate these tasks, most selfdriving car teams rely on high definition maps, commonly
referred to as HD maps, which contain both geometric and
semantic information about the static environment. For example, planning where to go is easier if we know the geometry of the road (i.e., lane composition). This information
is also very useful to determine the future motion of other
traffic participants. Furthermore, false positives in vehicle
detection can be reduced if we know where the road is.
To create these maps, most self-driving car programs
rely on offline processes where semantic components such
as lanes are extracted with the help of a user in the loop.

Figure 1. Our hierarchical recurrent attention model takes a sparse
point cloud sweep of the road (right) and outputs (left) a structured representation of the road network where each lane boundary
instance is retrieved.

Furthermore, they typically require multiple passes over the
same environment in order to build accurate geometric representations. This is very expensive and requires a dedicated fleet for mapping. It has been estimated that mapping
the US only once will cost over 2 Billion dollars. This approach is not scalable globally and thus it is of fundamental
importance to design online mapping algorithms that do not
require a user in the loop or in the least minimize their involvement to correction tasks.
The most basic information that is required for driving
is to be able to extract the location of the lanes in 3D space
(mapping), and their relationship to the ego-car (localization to the map). In the context of maps, these lanes are
structured objects and are typically represented as a set of
polylines, one per lane boundary. We refer the reader to Fig.
1 for a representation of a lane graph.
Existing automatic approaches to lane extraction have
two major drawbacks. First, they treat the problem as semantic segmentation [26, 27] or lane marking detection
[20, 11, 14]. As a consequence they produce solutions that
are not topologically correct, e.g., a lane might have holes
due to occlusion. This is problematic as most motion planners can only handle lane graphs that are structured and represent the right topology. Second, these methods attempt
to extract lane graphs from camera images [43]. Unfortunately, a good image based lane estimation is not equivalent
to an accurate 3D lane extraction. Due to perspective projection, pixels in image space have different physical widths
13417

