Through-Wall Human Pose Estimation Using Radio Signals
Mingmin Zhao

Tianhong Li Mohammad Abu Alsheikh Yonglong Tian
Antonio Torralba Dina Katabi
MIT CSAIL

Hang Zhao

Figure 1: The figure shows a test example with a single person. It demonstrates that our system tracks the pose as the person enters the room and even
when he is fully occluded behind the wall. Top: Images captured by a camera colocated with the radio sensor, and presented here for visual reference.
Middle: Keypoint confidence maps extracted from RF signals alone, without any visual input. Bottom: Skeleton parsed from keypoint confidence maps
showing that we can use RF signals to estimate the human pose even in the presence of full occlusion.

Abstract
This paper demonstrates accurate human pose estimation through walls and occlusions. We leverage the fact that
wireless signals in the WiFi frequencies traverse walls and
reflect off the human body. We introduce a deep neural network approach that parses such radio signals to estimate
2D poses. Since humans cannot annotate radio signals, we
use state-of-the-art vision model to provide cross-modal supervision. Specifically, during training the system uses synchronized wireless and visual inputs, extracts pose information from the visual stream, and uses it to guide the training
process. Once trained, the network uses only the wireless
signal for pose estimation. We show that, when tested on
visible scenes, the radio-based system is almost as accurate as the vision-based system used to train it. Yet, unlike
vision-based pose estimation, the radio-based system can
estimate 2D poses through walls despite never trained on
such scenarios. Demo videos are available at our website.

1. Introduction
Estimating the human pose is an important task in
computer vision with applications in surveillance, activity recognition, gaming, etc. The problem is defined as

generating 2D skeletal representations of the joints on the
arms and legs, and keypoints on the torso and head. It has
recently witnessed major advances and significant performance improvements [30, 27, 28, 46, 31, 20, 10, 16, 33, 12,
47, 37, 45, 13]. However, as in any camera-based recognition task, occlusion remains a fundamental challenge. Past
work deals with occlusion by hallucinating the occluded
body parts based on the visible ones. Yet, since the human
body is deformable, such hallucinations are prone to errors.
Further, this approach becomes infeasible when the person
is fully occluded, behind a wall or in a different room.
This paper presents a fundamentally different approach
to deal with occlusions in pose estimation, and potentially
other visual recognition tasks. While visible light is easily blocked by walls and opaque objects, radio frequency
(RF) signals in the WiFi range can traverse such occlusions.
Further, they reflect off the human body, providing an opportunity to track people through walls. Recent advances
in wireless systems have leveraged those properties to detect people [5] and track their walking speed through occlusions [19]. Past systems however are quite coarse: they
either track only one limb at any time [5, 4], or generate a
static and coarse description of the body, where body-parts
observed at different time are collapsed into one frame [4].
Use of wireless signals to produce a detailed and accurate
17356

