SketchyGAN: Towards Diverse and Realistic Sketch to Image Synthesis
Wengling Chen
Georgia Institute of Technology

James Hays
Georgia Institute of Technology, Argo AI

wchen342@gatech.edu

hays@gatech.edu

Figure 1: A sample of sketch-to-photo synthesis results from our 50 categories. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
Synthesizing realistic images from human drawn
sketches is a challenging problem in computer graphics and
vision. Existing approaches either need exact edge maps, or
rely on retrieval of existing photographs. In this work, we
propose a novel Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) approach that synthesizes plausible images from 50 categories
including motorcycles, horses and couches. We demonstrate a data augmentation technique for sketches which
is fully automatic, and we show that the augmented data
is helpful to our task. We introduce a new network building block suitable for both the generator and discriminator
which improves the information flow by injecting the input
image at multiple scales. Compared to state-of-the-art image translation methods, our approach generates more realistic images and achieves significantly higher Inception
Scores.

1. Introduction
How can we visualize a scene or object quickly? One of
the easiest ways is to draw a sketch. Compared to photography, drawing a sketch does not require any capture devices
and is not limited to faithfully sampling reality. However,
sketches are often simple and imperfect, so it is challenging
to synthesize realistic images from novice sketches. Sketchbased image synthesis enables non-artists to create realistic
images without significant artistic skill or domain expertise
in image synthesis. It is generally hard because sketches are
sparse, and novice human artists cannot draw sketches that
precisely reflect object boundaries. A real-looking image
synthesized from a sketch should respect the intent of the
artist as much as possible, but might need to deviate from
the coarse strokes in order to stay on the natural image manifold. In the past 30 years, the most popular sketch-based

image synthesis techniques are driven by image retrieval
methods such as Photosketcher [14] and Sketch2photo [6].
Such approaches often require carefully designed feature
representations which are invariant between sketches and
photos. They also involve complicated post-processing procedures like graph cut compositing and gradient domain
blending in order to make the synthesized images realistic.
The recent emergence of deep convolutional neural networks [34, 33, 19] has provided enticing methods for image
synthesis, among which Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [15] have shown great potential. A GAN frames
its training as a zero-sum game between the generator and
the discriminator. The goal of the discriminator is to decide whether a given image is fake or real, while the generator tries to generate realistic images so the discriminator
will misclassify them as real. Sketch-based image synthesis
can be formulated as an image translation problem conditioned on an input sketch. There exist several methods that
use GANs to translate images from one domain to another
[26, 60]. However, none of them is specifically designed for
image synthesis from sketches.
In this paper, we propose SketchyGAN, a GAN-based,
end-to-end trainable sketch to image synthesis approach
that can generate objects from 50 classes. The input is a
sketch illustrating an object and the output is a realistic image containing that object in a similar pose. This is challenging because: (i) paired photos and sketches are difficult
to acquire so there is no massive database to learn from. (ii)
There is no established neural network method for sketch to
image synthesis for diverse categories. Previous works train
models for single or few categories [29, 49].
We resolve the first challenge by augmenting the Sketchy
database [48], which contains nearly 75,000 actual human sketches paired with photos, with a larger dataset of
paired edge maps and photos. This augmentation dataset
is obtained by collecting 2,299,144 Flickr images from 50

9416

