Transparency by Design: Closing the Gap Between Performance and
Interpretability in Visual Reasoning
David Mascharka∗1
Philip Tran2
1
MIT Lincoln Laboratory†

Ryan Soklaski1
Arjun Majumdar∗1
2
Planck Aerosystems‡

{first.last}@ll.mit.edu, phil@planckaero.com

Abstract
Visual question answering requires high-order reasoning about an image, which is a fundamental capability
needed by machine systems to follow complex directives.
Recently, modular networks have been shown to be an effective framework for performing visual reasoning tasks.
While modular networks were initially designed with a degree of model transparency, their performance on complex
visual reasoning benchmarks was lacking. Current stateof-the-art approaches do not provide an effective mechanism for understanding the reasoning process. In this paper,
we close the performance gap between interpretable models
and state-of-the-art visual reasoning methods. We propose
a set of visual-reasoning primitives which, when composed,
manifest as a model capable of performing complex reasoning tasks in an explicitly-interpretable manner. The fidelity
and interpretability of the primitives’ outputs enable an unparalleled ability to diagnose the strengths and weaknesses
of the resulting model. Critically, we show that these primitives are highly performant, achieving state-of-the-art accuracy of 99.1% on the CLEVR dataset. We also show that
our model is able to effectively learn generalized representations when provided a small amount of data containing
novel object attributes. Using the CoGenT generalization
task, we show more than a 20 percentage point improvement over the current state of the art.

1. Introduction
A visual question answering (VQA) model must be capable of complex spatial reasoning over an image. For ex∗ Indicates equal contribution.
† This material is based upon work supported by the Assistant Secretary
of Defense for Research and Engineering under Air Force Contract No.
FA8721-05-C-0002 and/or FA8702-15-D-0001. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Assistant Secretary
of Defense for Research and Engineering.
‡ This work conducted while Philip was at MIT Lincoln Laboratory.

Figure 1. A diagram of a visual question answering task, in which
our proposed Transparency by Design network (TbD-net) composes a series of attention masks that allow it to correctly count
two large metal cylinders in the image.

ample, in order to answer the question “What color is the
cube to the right of the large metal sphere?”, a model must
identify which sphere is the large metal one, understand
what it means for an object to be to the right of another, and
apply this concept spatially to the attended sphere. Within
this new region of interest, the model must find the cube and
determine its color. This behavior should be compositional
to allow for arbitrarily long reasoning chains.
While a wide variety of models have recently been proposed for the VQA task [6, 10, 19, 21, 28, 30], neural module networks [2, 3, 10, 14] are among the most intuitive.
Introduced by Andreas et al. [2], neural module networks
compose a question-specific neural network, drawing from
a set of modules that each perform an individual operation. This design closely models the compositional nature
of visual reasoning tasks. In the original work, modules
were designed with an attention mechanism, which allowed
for insight into the model’s operation. However, the approach did not perform well on complex visual reasoning
tasks such as CLEVR [13]. Modifications by Johnson et
al. [14] address the performance issue at the cost of losing
model transparency. This is problematic, because the ability to inspect each step of the reasoning process is crucial

4942

