Mesoscopic Facial Geometry Inference Using Deep Neural Networks
Loc Huynh1
1

Weikai Chen1

Shunsuke Saito1,2,3 Jun Xing1
Paul Debevec1 Hao Li1,2,3

USC Institute for Creative Technologies

2

Koki Nagano3

University of Southern California

Andrew Jones1
3

Pinscreen

Figure 1: Given a flat-lit facial input textures and a base mesh, our system can synthesize high-resolution facial geometry.

Abstract
We present a learning-based approach for synthesizing
facial geometry at medium and fine scales from diffusely-lit
facial texture maps. When applied to an image sequence,
the synthesized detail is temporally coherent. Unlike current state-of-the-art methods [17, 5], which assume ”dark
is deep”, our model is trained with measured facial detail collected using polarized gradient illumination in a
Light Stage [20]. This enables us to produce plausible
facial detail across the entire face, including where previous approaches may incorrectly interpret dark features as
concavities such as at moles, hair stubble, and occluded
pores. Instead of directly inferring 3D geometry, we propose to encode fine details in high-resolution displacement
maps which are learned through a hybrid network adopting the state-of-the-art image-to-image translation network
[29] and super resolution network [43]. To effectively capture geometric detail at both mid- and high frequencies, we
factorize the learning into two separate sub-networks, enabling the full range of facial detail to be modeled. Results from our learning-based approach compare favorably
with a high-quality active facial scanhening technique, and
require only a single passive lighting condition without a
complex scanning setup.

1. Introduction
There is a growing demand for realistic, animated human
avatars for interactive digital communication in augmented
and virtual reality, but most real-time computer generated
humans continue to be simplistic and stylized or require a

great deal of effort to construct. An important part of creating a realistic, relatable human avatar is skin detail, from
the dynamic wrinkles that form around the eyes, mouth, and
forehead that help express emotion, to the fine-scale texture
of fine creases and pores that make the skin surface look
like that of a real human. Constructing such details on a
digital character can take weeks of effort by digital artists,
and often employs specialized and expensive 3D scanning
equipment to measure skin details from real people. And
the problem is made much more complicated by the fact
that such skin details are dynamic: wrinkles form and disappear, skin pores stretch and shear, and every change provides a cue to the avatar’s expression and their realism.
Scanning the overall shape of a face to an accuracy of
a millimeter or two has been possible since the 1980’s using commercial laser scanners such as a Cyberware system.
In recent years, advances in multiview stereo algorithms
such as [14, 15] have enabled facial scanning using passive
multiview stereo which can be done with an ordinary setup
of consumer digtital cameras. However, recording submillimeter detail at the level of skin pores and fine creases necessary for photorealism remains a challenge. Some of today’s best results are obtained in a professional studio capture setup with specialized lighting patterns, such as the
polarized gradient photometric stereo process of [34, 20].
Other techniques [25, 22, 24] use high-resolution measurements or statistics of a few skin patches and perform texture
synthesis over the rest of the face to imagine what the high4321
8407

