Fight ill-posedness with ill-posedness:
Single-shot variational depth super-resolution from shading
Bjoern Haefner
Yvain Quéau
Thomas Möllenhoff
Daniel Cremers
Department of Informatics, Technical University of Munich, Germany
{bjoern.haefner,yvain.queau,thomas.moellenhoff,cremers}@tum.de

Abstract
We put forward a principled variational approach for
up-sampling a single depth map to the resolution of the
companion color image provided by an RGB-D sensor. We
combine heterogeneous depth and color data in order to
jointly solve the ill-posed depth super-resolution and shapefrom-shading problems. The low-frequency geometric information necessary to disambiguate shape-from-shading
is extracted from the low-resolution depth measurements
and, symmetrically, the high-resolution photometric clues
in the RGB image provide the high-frequency information
required to disambiguate depth super-resolution.
Input: one low-resolution depth map
and its companion high-resolution image

1. Introduction
RGB-D sensors have become very popular for 3Dreconstruction, in view of their low cost and ease of use.
They deliver a colored point cloud in a single shot, but
the resulting shape often misses thin geometric structures.
This is due to noise, quantisation and, more importantly,
the coarse resolution of the depth map. However, superresolution of a solitary depth map without additional constraint is an ill-posed problem.
In comparison, the quality and resolution of the companion RGB image are substantially better. For instance, the
Asus Xtion Pro Live device delivers 1280 × 1024 px2 RGB
images, but only up to 640 × 480 px2 depth maps. Therefore, it seems natural to rely on color to refine depth. Yet,
retrieving geometry from a single color image is another illposed problem, called shape-from-shading. Besides, combining it with depth clues requires the RGB and depth images to have the same resolution.
The resolution of the depth map thus remains a limiting factor in single-shot RGB-D sensing. This work aims
at breaking this barrier by jointly refining and upsampling
the depth map using shape-from-shading. In other words,
we fight the ill-posedness of single depth image superresolution using shape-from shading, and vice-versa.

Our result

Figure 1: We carry out single-shot depth super-resolution
for commodity RGB-D sensors, using shape-from-shading.
By combining low-resolution depth (left) and highresolution color clues (middle), detail-preserving superresolution is achieved (right). All figures best viewed in
the electronic version.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews the single depth image super-resolution and shapefrom-shading problems, in order to motivate their joint solving in the context of RGB-D sensing. Section 3 then introduces a principled Bayesian approach to joint depth superresolution and shape-from shading. This yields a nonconvex variational problem which is solved using a dedicated
ADMM algorithm. Our approach is evaluated against a
broad variety of real-world datasets in Section 4, and our
conclusions are eventually drawn in Section 5.

2. Motivation and related work
Let us first recall the ambiguities arising in single depth
image super-resolution and in shape-from-shading, and how
they have been handled in the literature.
1164

