Self-supervised Learning of Geometrically Stable Features Through
Probabilistic Introspection
David Novotny1,2,∗ Samuel Albanie1,∗ Diane Larlus2
1

Visual Geometry Group
Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{david,albanie,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Computer Vision Group
NAVER LABS Europe
diane.larlus@naverlabs.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
One factor that limits the applicability of deep neural networks to many practical problems is the cost of procuring
a sufficient amount of supervised data for learning. This
explains the increasing interest in techniques that can learn
good deep representations without the use of manual supervision. Methods that rely on self-supervision [6, 24, 28],
in particular, can initialize deep neural networks from unlabeled image collections. The resulting pre-trained networks can then be fine-tuned to solve a desired task with
far fewer manual annotations than would be required if they
were trained from scratch.
While several authors have looked at self-supervision for
tasks such as image classification and segmentation, less
work has been done on tasks that involve understanding
the geometric properties of object categories. In this pa∗ Authors contributed equally.

Predicted pixel-wise
representation

Input image

Synthetic warp

Self-supervision can dramatically cut back the amount
of manually-labelled data required to train deep neural networks. While self-supervision has usually been considered
for tasks such as image classification, in this paper we aim
at extending it to geometry-oriented tasks such as semantic
matching and part detection. We do so by building on several recent ideas in unsupervised landmark detection. Our
approach learns dense distinctive visual descriptors from
an unlabeled dataset of images using synthetic image transformations. It does so by means of a robust probabilistic
formulation that can introspectively determine which image
regions are likely to result in stable image matching. We
show empirically that a network pre-trained in this manner
requires significantly less supervision to learn semantic object parts compared to numerous pre-training alternatives.
We also show that the pre-trained representation is excellent
for semantic object matching.

Andrea Vedaldi1

2

Geometrically
stable features

Robust learning
to match

Warped image

Predicted feature reliability

Figure 1. Our approach leverages correspondences obtained from
synthetic warps in order to self-supervise the learning of a dense
image representation. This results in highly localized and geometrically stable features. The use of a novel robust probabilistic
formulation allows to additionally predict a pixel-level confidence
map that estimates the matching ability of these features.

per, therefore, we propose a self-supervised pre-training
technique that obtains image representations suitable for
geometry-oriented tasks. We consider two representative
problems: semantic part detection and semantic matching,
both of which help to characterize the geometric structure
of objects.
Our specific goal is to pre-train convolutional neural networks suitable for such geometry-oriented tasks given only
a dataset of images of one or more object categories with no
bounding box, part or other types of geometric annotations.
Our approach is based on three ideas. First, we configure
the network to compute a dense field of visual descriptors.
These descriptors are learned to match corresponding object points in different images using a pairwise loss formulation. However, since no labels are given, correspondences
between images are unknown. Thus, the second idea is to
generate image pairs for which correspondences are known
by means of synthetic warps [15, 29, 32, 33]. Learning from
this data results in visual descriptors that are invariant to
image deformations, but that may not be consistent across

3637

