PU-Net: Point Cloud Upsampling Network
Lequan Yu∗ 1,3 Xianzhi Li∗1 Chi-Wing Fu1,3 Daniel Cohen-Or2 Pheng-Ann Heng1,3
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Tel Aviv University
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{lqyu,xzli,cwfu,pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Learning and analyzing 3D point clouds with deep networks is challenging due to the sparseness and irregularity
of the data. In this paper, we present a data-driven point
cloud upsampling technique. The key idea is to learn multilevel features per point and expand the point set via a multibranch convolution unit implicitly in feature space. The expanded feature is then split to a multitude of features, which
are then reconstructed to an upsampled point set. Our network is applied at a patch-level, with a joint loss function
that encourages the upsampled points to remain on the underlying surface with a uniform distribution. We conduct
various experiments using synthesis and scan data to evaluate our method and demonstrate its superiority over some
baseline methods and an optimization-based method. Results show that our upsampled points have better uniformity
and are located closer to the underlying surfaces.

1. Introduction
Point cloud is a fundamental 3D representation that has
drawn increasing attention due to the popularity of various
depth scanning devices. Recently, pioneering works [29,
30, 18] began to explore the possibility of reasoning point
clouds by means of deep networks for understanding geometry and recognizing 3D structures. In these works, the deep
networks directly extract features from the raw 3D point coordinates without using traditional features, e.g., normal and
curvature. These works present impressive results for 3D
object classification and semantic scene segmentation.
In this work we are interested in an upsampling problem:
given a set of points, generate a denser set of points to describe the underlying geometry by learning the geometry of
a training dataset. This upsampling problem is similar in
spirit to the image super-resolution problem [33, 20]; however, dealing with 3D points rather than a 2D grid of pixels
∗ Equal contribution.

dcor@mail.tau.ac.il

poses new challenges. First, unlike the image space, which
is represented by a regular grid, point clouds do not have
any spatial order and regular structure. Second, the generated points should describe the underlying geometry of a
latent target object, meaning that they should roughly lie on
the target object surface. Third, the generated points should
be informative and should not clutter together. Having said
that, the generated output point set should be more uniform
on the target object surface. Thus, simple interpolation between input points cannot produce satisfactory results.
To meet the above challenges, we present a data-driven
point cloud upsampling network. Our network is applied
at a patch-level, with a joint loss function that encourages
the upsampled points to remain on the underlying surface
with a uniform distribution. The key idea is to learn multilevel features per point, and then expand the point set via
a multi-branch convolution unit implicitly in feature space.
The expanded feature is then split to a multitude of features,
which are then reconstructed to an upsampled point set.
Our network, namely PU-Net, learns geometry semantics of point-based patches from 3D models, and applies
the learned knowledge to upsample a given point cloud. It
should be noted that unlike previous network-based methods designed for 3D point sets [29, 30, 18], the number of
input and output points in our network are not the same.
We formulate two metrics, distribution uniformity and
distance deviation from underlying surfaces, to quantitatively evaluate the upsampled point set, and test our method
using variety of synthetic and real-scanned data. We also
evaluate the performance of our method, and compare it
to baseline and state-of-the-art optimization-based methods.
Results show that our upsampled points have better uniformity, and are located closer to the underlying surfaces.
Related work: optimization-based methods. An early
work by Alexa et al. [2] upsamples a point set by interpolating points at vertices of a Voronoi diagram in the local
tangent space. Lipman et al. [24] present a locally optimal
projection (LOP) operator for points resampling and surface

2790

