Temporal Hallucinating for Action Recognition with Few Still Images
Yali Wang1∗ Lei Zhou1,3∗ Yu Qiao1,2†
1
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 SenseTime Group Limited

Abstract
Action recognition in still images has been recently promoted by deep learning. However, the success of these deep
models heavily depends on huge amount of training images
for various action categories, which may not be available
in practice. Alternatively, humans can classify new action
categories after seeing few images, since we may not only
compare appearance similarities between images on hand,
but also attempt to recall importance motion cues from relevant action videos in our memory. To mimic this capacity,
we propose a novel Hybrid Video Memory (HVM) machine,
which can hallucinate temporal features of still images from
video memory, in order to boost action recognition with few
still images. First, we design a temporal memory module
consisting of temporal hallucinating and predicting. Temporal hallucinating can generate temporal features of still
images in an unsupervised manner. Hence, it can be flexibly used in realistic scenarios, where image and video categories may not be consistent. Temporal predicting can
effectively infer action categories for query image, by integrating temporal features of training images and videos
within a domain-adaptation manner. Second, we design a
spatial memory module for spatial predicting. As spatial
and temporal features are complementary to represent different actions, we apply spatial-temporal prediction fusion
to further boost performance. Finally, we design a video
selection module to select strongly-relevant videos as memory. In this case, we can balance the number of images and
videos to reduce prediction bias as well as preserve computation efficiency. To show the effectiveness, we conduct
extensive experiments on three challenging data sets, where
our HVM outperforms a number of recent approaches by
temporal hallucinating from video memory.

1. Introduction
Action recognition in still images has been an active research topic in computer vision, due to its wide applications
∗ Equally-contributed first authors ({yl.wang, lei.zhou}@siat.ac.cn).
† Corresponding author (yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn).

Figure 1. Temporal hallucinating (better view in color). First, we
compare similarities between spatial features of query image and
spatial video memory. Based on this, we hallucinate temporal features of query image from temporal video memory.

in image retrieval, human-computer interaction, and so on
[10]. Recent advances in this task are mainly driven by deep
learning models [2, 7, 8, 18, 41], based on the remarkable
successes of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in image classification [12, 17, 29, 32, 38]. However, the power
of those deep models is built upon huge amounts of training images for various action categories, which may not be
always available for realistic applications.
Alternatively, humans can correctly understand the new
action concept in a query image, after checking out a few
images. Our key insight is that, in the few-image scenario,
humans may not only compare appearance similarity between still images on hand, but also attempt to recall temporal motions of relevant actions from memory. For example, when we see an image about windsurfing in Fig. 1,
we intuitively refresh the surfing motions of relevant actions
which we have ever seen from olympic videos, TV and so
on. Motivated by this, we propose to address action recognition with few images, via hallucinating motion cues of
still images from videos. Recently, several deep learning
models have been proposed to predict optical flow (i.e., an
important motion cue) by RGB video frames [3, 23, 26, 42].

5314

