Probabilistic Joint Face-Skull Modelling for Facial Reconstruction
Dennis Madsen
Marcel Lüthi
Andreas Schneider
Thomas Vetter
{dennis.madsen, marcel.luethi, andreas.schneider, thomas.vetter}@unibas.ch
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Basel

Abstract
We present a novel method for co-registration of two independent statistical shape models. We solve the problem of
aligning a face model to a skull model with stochastic optimization based on Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).
We create a probabilistic joint face-skull model and show
how to obtain a distribution of plausible face shapes given
a skull shape. Due to environmental and genetic factors,
there exists a distribution of possible face shapes arising
from the same skull. We pose facial reconstruction as a conditional distribution of plausible face shapes given a skull
shape. Because it is very difficult to obtain the distribution
directly from MRI or CT data, we create a dataset of artificial face-skull pairs. To do this, we propose to combine
three data sources of independent origin to model the joint
face-skull distribution: a face shape model, a skull shape
model and tissue depth marker information. For a given
skull, we compute the posterior distribution of faces matching the tissue depth distribution with Metropolis-Hastings.
We estimate the joint face-skull distribution from samples of
the posterior. To find faces matching to an unknown skull,
we estimate the probability of the face under the joint faceskull model. To our knowledge, we are the first to provide
a whole distribution of plausible faces arising from a skull
instead of only a single reconstruction. We show how the
face-skull model can be used to rank a face dataset and
on average successfully identify the correct match in top
30%. The face ranking even works when obtaining the face
shapes from 2D images. We furthermore show how the faceskull model can be useful to estimate the skull position in an
MR-image.

1. Introduction
In forensics, facial reconstruction is the process of recreating the face of an unknown individual solely from their
skeletal remains [27]. Forensic artists reconstruct the face
surface by adding layers of muscle fibres and placing tissue depth markers on the unknown skull. However, recon-

structing the face shape from a skull is an ill-posed problem. To begin with, it is commonly known that the facial
reconstruction process is highly artistic and different forensic artists might produce different face predictions [28]. In
addition, many features of a shape are not due to the skull
itself, but due to genetics and environmental factors such as
diet and ageing. As a result, for a given skull there exists
a whole distribution of possible faces. Therefore, instead
of a one-to-one relation between skulls and faces, we assume a one-to-many relationship. We propose to build a
joint distribution of face and skull shape to be able to reconstruct a distribution of faces contrary to a single face in
facial reconstruction. It is difficult to estimate the distribution directly from Computed Tomography (CT) or Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) data as it would be necessary to
capture multiple scans of the same person exposed to different environmental influences and both the face and the
skull are difficult to segment. Instead, we propose to cre-

Figure 1. Illustration of the face-skull model with the face fully
visible, one side visible and fully visible with an opacity of 70%.

ate an artificial dataset of corresponding skulls and faces.
To this end, we combine a statistical shape model of human
faces [18] with a statistical skull shape model. No pointto-point correspondence is assumed. The two models are
independent and contain scans from different individuals.
We compute the posterior distribution of faces given a skull
using a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach. A
sparse set of distance constraints between the surface of the
skull and the surface of the sampled faces is everything the
method needs. The distance constraints are known as tissuedepth markers within facial reconstruction and represent the

5295

