Smooth Neighbors on Teacher Graphs for Semi-supervised Learning
Yucen Luo1
Jun Zhu1∗
Mengxi Li2
Yong Ren1
Bo Zhang1
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., BNRist Lab, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Electronical Engineering, Tsinghua University
{luoyc15, limq14, renyong15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {dcszj, dcszb}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The recently proposed self-ensembling methods have
achieved promising results in deep semi-supervised learning,
which penalize inconsistent predictions of unlabeled data
under different perturbations. However, they only consider
adding perturbations to each single data point, while ignoring the connections between data samples. In this paper,
we propose a novel method, called Smooth Neighbors on
Teacher Graphs (SNTG). In SNTG, a graph is constructed
based on the predictions of the teacher model, i.e., the implicit self-ensemble of models. Then the graph serves as a
similarity measure with respect to which the representations
of “similar” neighboring points are learned to be smooth
on the low-dimensional manifold. We achieve state-of-theart results on semi-supervised learning benchmarks. The
error rates are 9.89%, 3.99% for CIFAR-10 with 4000 labels, SVHN with 500 labels, respectively. In particular, the
improvements are significant when the labels are fewer. For
the non-augmented MNIST with only 20 labels, the error
rate is reduced from previous 4.81% to 1.36%. Our method
also shows robustness to noisy labels.

1. Introduction
As collecting a fully labeled dataset is often expensive and
time-consuming, semi-supervised learning (SSL) has been
extensively studied in computer vision to improve generalization performance of the classifier by leveraging limited
labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data [9]. The
success of SSL relies on the key smoothness assumption, i.e.,
data points close to each other are likely to have the same
label. It has a special case named cluster or low density separation assumption, which states that the decision boundary
should lie in low density regions, not crossing high density
regions [10]. Based on these assumptions, many traditional
methods have been developed [22, 54, 51, 10, 4].
Recently due to the great advances of deep learning [25],
remarkable results have been achieved on SSL [24, 35, 40,
∗ Corresponding author.

27]. Among these works, perturbation-based methods [37,
2, 35, 39, 27] have demonstrated great promise. Adding
noise to the deep model is important to reduce overfitting
and learn more robust abstractions, e.g., dropout [21] and
randomized data augmentation [13]. In SSL, perturbation
regularization aids by exploring the smoothness assumption.
For example, the Manifold Tangent Classifier (MTC) [37]
trains contrastive auto-encoders to learn the data manifold
and regularizes the predictions to be insensitive to local
perturbations along the low-dimensional manifold. PseudoEnsemble [2] and Γ model in Ladder Network [35] evaluate
the classifiers with and without perturbations, which act
as a “teacher” and a “student”, respectively. The student
needs to predict consistently with the targets generated by
the teacher on unlabeled data. Following the same principle,
temporal ensembling, mean teacher and virtual adversarial
training [27, 46, 33] improve the target quality in different
ways to form better teachers. All these approaches aim to
fuse the inputs into coherent clusters by adding noise and
smoothing the mapping function locally [27].
However, these methods only consider the perturbations
around each single data point, while ignoring the connections between data points, therefore not fully utilizing the
information in the unlabeled data structure, such as clusters
or manifolds. An extreme situation may happen where the
function is smooth in the vicinity of each unlabeled point
but not smooth in the vacancy among them. This artifact
could be avoided if the unlabeled data structure is taken into
consideration. It is known that data points similar to each
other (e.g., in the same class) tend to form clusters (cluster
assumption). Therefore, the connections between similar
data points help the fusing of clusters become tighter and
more effective (see Fig. 5 for the visualization of real data).
Motivated by that, we propose Smooth Neighbors on
Teacher Graphs (SNTG) that considers the connections between data points to induce smoothness on the data manifold.
By learning a teacher graph based on the targets generated
by the teacher, our model encourages invariance when some
perturbations are added to the neighboring points on the
graph. Since deep networks have a hierarchical property,

8896

