W2F: A Weakly-Supervised to Fully-Supervised Framework
for Object Detection
Yongqiang Zhang1,2,∗
Yancheng Bai1,3
Mingli Ding2
Yongqiang Li2
Bernard Ghanem1
1
Visual Computing Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
2
School of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT)
3
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
{zhangyongqiang, dingml, liyongqiang}@hit.edu.cn {yancheng.bai, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Weakly-supervised object detection has attracted much
attention lately, since it does not require bounding box annotations for training. Although significant progress has
also been made, there is still a large gap in performance between weakly-supervised and fully-supervised object detection. Recently, some works use pseudo ground-truths which
are generated by a weakly-supervised detector to train a
supervised detector. Such approaches incline to find the
most representative parts of objects, and only seek one
ground-truth box per class even though many same-class
instances exist. To overcome these issues, we propose a
weakly-supervised to fully-supervised framework, where a
weakly-supervised detector is implemented using multiple
instance learning. Then, we propose a pseudo ground-truth
excavation (PGE) algorithm to find the pseudo ground-truth
of each instance in the image. Moreover, the pseudo groundtruth adaptation (PGA) algorithm is designed to further refine the pseudo ground-truths from PGE. Finally, we use
these pseudo ground-truths to train a fully-supervised detector. Extensive experiments on the challenging PASCAL
VOC 2007 and 2012 benchmarks strongly demonstrate the
effectiveness of our framework. We obtain 52.4% and 47.8%
mAP on VOC2007 and VOC2012 respectively, a significant
improvement over previous state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental problem in computer
vision, since it is the basic technology of some advanced
tasks such as object segmentation, object tracking, action
analysis and detection, etc. Recently, many state-of-the-art
methods [11, 12, 5, 20] based on deep Convolutional Neural
∗ This work is done when Yongqiang Zhang was a visiting PhD student
at KAUST.

Figure 1. An illustration of our weakly-supervised to fullysupervised framework for object detection (W2F). Given an image
collection with only image-level labels, we first combine a weakly
supervised deep detection network (WSDDN) with online instance
classifier refinement (OICR) to train a weakly-supervised detector,
and here both tight bounding boxes and discriminative boxes of
object parts are found. Then, we propose a pseudo ground-truth excavation (PGE) algorithm to preserve those tight bounding boxes
as pseudo ground-truth, which is in turn used to train a supervised
detector whose RPN (region proposal network in Faster-RCNN)
makes use of our proposed pseudo ground-truth adaptation (PGA)
algorithm to further fine-tune the pseudo ground-truths.

Networks (CNNs) [22, 15] have been proposed and superior performances have been achieved. The key to their successes is the strong learning ability (i.e. regression ability)
of fully-supervised deep CNN models and the availability
of large scale labeled datasets [30, 25], which include tight
bounding box annotations. However, collecting such accurate annotations are expensive and time-consuming. Moreover, these annotations usually have bias and errors introduced by the subjectivity of annotators, which could lead
the learned models to converge to an undesirable solution.
To address these problems, some weakly-supervised detectors [4, 19, 2] are trained by only utilizing image-level
labels (e.g. ”dog”, ”cat”, etc.) as the supervised information. Building a training dataset with only image-level an-

928

