A Constrained Deep Neural Network for Ordinal Regression
Yanzhu Liu, Adams Wai Kin Kong
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798

Chi Keong Goh
Rolls-Royce Advanced Technology Centre
6 Seletar Aerospace Rise, Singapore, 797575

liuy0109@e.ntu.edu.sg, adamskong@ntu.edu.sg

ChiKeong.Goh@Rolls-Royce.com

Abstract
Ordinal regression is a supervised learning problem
aiming to classify instances into ordinal categories. It is
challenging to automatically extract high-level features for
representing intraclass information and interclass ordinal
relationship simultaneously. This paper proposes a constrained optimization formulation for the ordinal regression problem which minimizes the negative loglikelihood
for multiple categories constrained by the order relationship between instances. Mathematically, it is equivalent to
an unconstrained formulation with a pairwise regularizer.
An implementation based on the CNN framework is proposed to solve the problem such that high-level features can
be extracted automatically, and the optimal solution can be
learned through the traditional back-propagation method.
The proposed pairwise constraints make the algorithm work
even on small datasets, and a proposed efficient implementation make it be scalable for large datasets. Experimental
results on four real-world benchmarks demonstrate that the
proposed algorithm outperforms the traditional deep learning approaches and other state-of-the-art approaches based
on hand-crafted features.

1. Introduction
Ordinal regression, also named as ordinal classification,
lies between multi-class classification and metric regression. Its problem setting is exactly same as that of multiclass classification, which is to predict the category label
for an input instance. However, the categories in the ordinal regression problem have ordinal relationship. Ordinal regression also can be viewed as a discrete version of
metric regression, but the difference is that the number of
categories in ordinal regression is finite and the distances
between categories are undefined. An example of ordinal
regression is movie rating, which grades movies based on
an ordinal scale such as 1 star to 5 stars, and a movie with 4
stars has a better rating than those with 3 stars.
Recently, a number of machine learning approaches have

been proposed for ordinal regression. Most approaches resolve the ordinal regression problem either from regression prospective or from classification prospective. The approaches from regression prospective aim to learn a function mapping the instances to a real line and predict multiple boundaries to discretize the mapped value. For example, the max-margin based approaches [19][4] adapted the
support vector regression to predict contiguous boundaries
splitting the ordinal classes. The approaches from classification prospective embed ordinal information between class
labels into the traditional classification methods. For example, neural network based approaches [8][2] use different
coding schemes to encode the ordinal information of class
labels into the output vectors of the networks. However, few
of existing work combine classification and regression parts
in the optimization objective explicitly.
In literature, most of existing ordinal regression approaches are based on handcrafted features, which are
labor-intensive and highly rely on the prior knowledge. In
these several years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have attracted great attention due to being able to automatically
extract high-level features from raw data and performing
very well on many classification tasks. However, very few
works use DNNs for ordinal regression problem. Niu et al.
(2016) [16] claimed that their method is the first work to
adapt DNNs for ordinal regression. Generally speaking, a
large training dataset is necessary to train a deep neural network, but many real-world ordinal regression problems are
in fact small data problems. For example, for disease rating
in medical images, in many cases large training image sets
are not available because collecting such data is difficult,
expensive and invasive. Learning deep neural networks on
small datasets is challenging, and to design a method suitable for small datasets and also scalable for large datasets at
the same time is another challenging task.
In the traditional deep learning approaches, the learning objectives are formulated as unconstrained optimization
problems. Usually, the objective function is a loss designed
for the task. This paper first formulates the ordinal regression problem as a constrained optimization problem and an

831

