What Makes a Video a Video: Analyzing Temporal Information in Video
Understanding Models and Datasets
De-An Huang1 , Vignesh Ramanathan2 , Dhruv Mahajan2 ,
Lorenzo Torresani2,3 , Manohar Paluri2 , Li Fei-Fei1 , and Juan Carlos Niebles1
1
Stanford University, 2 Facebook, 3 Dartmouth College

Abstract
The ability to capture temporal information has been
critical to the development of video understanding models.
While there have been numerous attempts at modeling motion in videos, an explicit analysis of the effect of temporal information for video understanding is still missing. In
this work, we aim to bridge this gap and ask the following question: How important is the motion in the video for
recognizing the action? To this end, we propose two novel
frameworks: (i) class-agnostic temporal generator and (ii)
motion-invariant frame selector to reduce/remove motion
for an ablation analysis without introducing other artifacts.
This isolates the analysis of motion from other aspects of the
video. The proposed frameworks provide a much tighter estimate of the effect of motion (from 25% to 6% on UCF101
and 15% to 5% on Kinetics) compared to baselines in our
analysis. Our analysis provides critical insights about existing models like C3D, and how it could be made to achieve
comparable results with a sparser set of frames.

1. Introduction
Video understanding has progressed significantly in recent years with the introduction of better models [31, 36,
43] and larger datasets [14, 19, 20]. A common theme
among most approaches is the emphasis on temporal modeling, which is seen as the main difference between videos
and images. This includes works on low-level motion [31,
36, 41, 42], long/short term dependencies [5, 39, 47, 50],
temporal structure [3, 8, 9, 10], and modeling the action as
a sequence of events/states [33, 34, 45].
More specifically, a broad array of deep learning architectures [4, 36, 39] which attempt to capture low-level motion through temporal convolutions achieve state-of-the-art
results [4, 37]. Hand-crafted features like iDT [41] have
also advocated using motion for action recognition. However, the actual impact of modeling low-level motion remains unclear. As seen in Fig. 1, one could argue that the

(a) Original Video

(b) Video generated by matching deep features of (a)

Figure 1. (a) The original video. (b) Video generated by network
visualization [6] from the C3D pool5 features of the video in (a).
The network loses visually perceptible motion as early as pool5.

scene and objects in a frame are almost sufficient to deduce
the action. Recreating the motion in a video by matching
deep features from a C3D [36] model partly validates this
conjecture. We observe that the visible motion in the video
is lost at pool-5 layer in the network, while still preserving the full spatial information. Motivated by such observations, we conduct an in-depth quantitative and qualitative
analysis of the effect of motion in video action recognition.
In particular, we try to analyze if an existing model
trained on videos utilizes motion information while classifying a new video. We could achieve this by drastically
subsampling videos during testing, to the extent of retaining
just a single frame. However, testing a model trained with
full length videos on a single frame is non-trivial. A naive
way of replicating the frame multiple times results in almost
25% performance drop on UCF-101. It is difficult to conclude that this is just due to the lack of motion. We observe
that in addition to removing motion, subsampling results in
two undesired artifacts: (i) significantly alter the temporal
distribution, and (ii) potentially remove critical frames in
the video that are important for recognizing the action.
We propose the following two frameworks to ablate the
motion in a video for analysis while mitigating these undesired effects : (i) class-agnostic temporal generator that
adds a temporal variance to the subsampled frames to bridge

7366

