Learning Globally Optimized Object Detector via Policy Gradient
Yongming Rao1,2,3 , Dahua Lin4 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3 , Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, Tsinghua University
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
4
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
raoyongming95@gmail.com; dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Detector
Detector

Object detection is one of the oldest and most fundamental tasks in computer vision. Compared to the object recognition task, object detection is more challenging because it
requires accurate localization and classification of multiple
objects at the same time. To tackle this problem, most modern object detectors [5, 6, 16, 18, 20, 22] are trained through
a reduction that converts object detection into a multi-task
learning of object classification and localization for each
object independently. This reduction introduces a gap between learning and inference, where the process of learning
only needs to evaluate each possible object proposal (RoIs
in [5], anchors in [16,18,21,22]) and feed back to the detector, but the process of inference is supposed to perform an
optimal selection of redundant candidates to obtain accurate
detection results, which is a global optimization problem
with a constraint on the amount of detections (for instance,

cls
box
…
cls
box

ground truth
boxes

CNN

1. Introduction

CNN

In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective method
to learn globally optimized detector for object detection,
which is a simple modification to the standard cross-entropy
gradient inspired by the REINFORCE algorithm. In our
approach, the cross-entropy gradient is adaptively adjusted
according to overall mean Average Precision (mAP) of the
current state for each detection candidate, which leads to
more effective gradient and global optimization of detection results, and brings no computational overhead. Benefiting from more precise gradients produced by the global
optimization method, our framework significantly improves
state-of-the-art object detectors. Furthermore, since our
method is based on scores and bounding boxes without
modification on the architecture of object detector, it can
be easily applied to off-the-shelf modern object detection
frameworks.

cls
box

mAP
policy gradient

Figure 1. The key idea of our approach. We propose an end-to-end
framework for learning a globally optimized object detector by using the policy gradient method. The figure presents the differences
between the existing object detection framework (on the top) and
our proposed framework (on the bottom). Existing object detection framework assigns each ground truth box to proposals that has
the high IoU value and trains each detection candidate independently. By employing the policy gradient method, our framework
supervises boxes by using the global information and directly improves mAP. Red box represents the set of bounding boxes.

100 for COCO evaluation [17]).
In [5, 6, 16, 18, 20, 22], a method called non-maximum
suppression (NMS) has been used to bridge the gap. NMS
performs a test-time post-processing to merge bounding
boxes that might belong to the same object. This method
greedily selects high scoring bounding boxes and eliminates
near-by bounding boxes that have lower scores since they
are likely to cover the same object. NMS is built on the
assumption that more accurate detection candidates have
higher confident scores, which is not explicitly designed
in the objective of detector training in previous methods.
Unsurprisingly, both our survey and experiments (see Sec16190

