Deep Lesion Graphs in the Wild: Relationship Learning and Organization of
Significant Radiology Image Findings in a Diverse Large-scale Lesion Database
Ke Yan, Xiaosong Wang, Le Lu, Ling Zhang, Adam P. Harrison
Mohammadhadi Bagheri, Ronald M. Summers
Imaging Biomarkers and Computer-Aided Diagnosis Laboratory
National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892
{ke.yan, xiaosong.wang, ling.zhang3, mohammad.bagheri, rms}@nih.gov,
{lel, aharrison}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Radiologists in their daily work routinely find and annotate significant abnormalities on a large number of radiology images. Such abnormalities, or lesions, have collected over years and stored in hospitals’ picture archiving
and communication systems. However, they are basically
unsorted and lack semantic annotations like type and location. In this paper, we aim to organize and explore them by
learning a deep feature representation for each lesion. A
large-scale and comprehensive dataset, DeepLesion, is introduced for this task. DeepLesion contains bounding boxes
and size measurements of over 32K lesions. To model their
similarity relationship, we leverage multiple supervision information including types, self-supervised location coordinates, and sizes. They require little manual annotation effort
but describe useful attributes of the lesions. Then, a triplet
network is utilized to learn lesion embeddings with a sequential sampling strategy to depict their hierarchical similarity structure. Experiments show promising qualitative
and quantitative results on lesion retrieval, clustering, and
classification. The learned embeddings can be further employed to build a lesion graph for various clinically useful
applications. An algorithm for intra-patient lesion matching
is proposed and validated with experiments.

1. Introduction
Large-scale datasets with diverse images and dense annotations [9, 12, 22] play an important role in computer vision and image understanding, but often come at the cost of
vast amounts of labeling. In computer vision, this cost has
spurred efforts to exploit weak labels [48, 19, 5], e.g., the
enormous amount of weak labels generated everyday on the
web. A similar situation exists in the medical imaging domain, except that annotations are even more time consum-

ing and require extensive clinical training, which precludes
approaches like crowd-sourcing. Fortunately, like web data
in computer vision, a vast, loosely-labeled, and largely untapped data source does exist in the form of hospital picture archiving and communication systems (PACS). These
archives house patient images and accompanying radiological reports, markings, and measurements performed during
clinical duties. However, data is typically unsorted, unorganized, and unusable in standard supervised machine learning approaches. Developing means to fully exploit PACS
radiology database becomes a major goal within the field of
medical imaging.
This work contributes to this goal of developing an approach to usefully mine, organize, and learn the relationships between lesions found within computed tomography
(CT) images in PACS. Lesion detection, characterization,
and retrieval is an important task in radiology [46, 11, 23,
21]. The latest methods based on deep learning and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved significantly better results than conventional hand-crafted image
features [15, 23]. However, large amounts of training data
with high quality labels are often needed. To address this
challenge, we develop a system designed to exploit the routine markings and measurements of significant findings that
radiologists frequently perform [10]. These archived measurements are potentially highly useful sources of data for
computer-aided medical image analysis systems. However,
they are basically unsorted and lack semantic labels, e.g.,
lung nodule, mediastinal lymph node.
We take a feature embedding and similarity graph approach to address this problem. First, we present a new
dataset: DeepLesion, which was collected from the PACS
of a major medical institute. It contains 32,120 axial CT
slices from 10,594 CT imaging studies of 4,427 unique patients. There are 1–3 lesions in each image with accompanying bounding boxes and size measurements. The lesions
are diverse but unorganized. Our goal is to understand them
19261

