3D Registration of Curves and Surfaces using Local Differential Information
Carolina Raposo1,2 and João P. Barreto1,2
1

Institute of Systems and Robotics, University of Coimbra, Portugal,
{carolinaraposo,jpbar}@isr.uc.pt
2

Perceive3D, Coimbra, Portugal

Pre-Operative

Abstract
This article presents for the first time a global method
for registering 3D curves with 3D surfaces without requiring an initialization. The algorithm works with 2-tuples
point+vector that consist in pairs of points augmented with
the information of their tangents or normals. A closed-form
solution for determining the alignment transformation from
a pair of matching 2-tuples is proposed. In addition, the
set of necessary conditions for two 2-tuples to match is derived. This allows fast search of correspondences that are
used in an hypothesise-and-test framework for accomplishing global registration. Comparative experiments demonstrate that the proposed algorithm is the first effective solution for curve vs surface registration, with the method
achieving accurate alignment in situations of small overlap and large percentage of outliers in a fraction of a second. The proposed framework is extended to the cases of
curve vs curve and surface vs surface registration, with the
former being particularly relevant since it is also a largely
unsolved problem.

Intra-Operative

3D
Registration

1. Introduction
Finding the rigid transformation that aligns two 3D models is a fundamental problem in computer vision with applications in multiple fields, ranging from robotics [15] to
medicine [4], and passing by augmented reality [20]. This
article is motivated by medical applications in general and
surgical navigation in orthopaedics in particular [13]. The
workflow of surgical navigation is usually a two step process. First, the surgeon uses a pre-operative 3D image of
the targeted anatomy, e.g. a CT or MRI, to plan the procedure. Second, an intra-operative system performs optical tracking of fiducial markers attached to instruments and
bones for determining their 3D pose in real-time, that are
used to guide the surgical execution according to what was

Figure 1. 3D registration for Computer Aided Orthopaedic Surgery
(CAOS).

established in advance. For this purpose the system must
overlay the plan with the actual patient’s anatomy in the
OR, which passes by using a registration algorithm to align
intra-operative 3D data with the pre-operative CT or MRI
(Fig. 1).
Thus, 3D registration is a crucial step in surgical navigation and a common approach consists in asking the surgeon
to pin-point a number of recognisable anatomical land19300

