Improvements to context based self-supervised learning
T. Nathan Mundhenk1 , Daniel Ho1,2 , Barry Y. Chen1
1
Computational Engineering Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California
2
EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California
mundhenk1@llnl.gov, daniel.ho@berkeley.edu, chen52@llnl.gov

Abstract
We develop a set of methods to improve on the results
of self-supervised learning using context. We start with a
baseline of patch based arrangement context learning and
go from there. Our methods address some overt problems
such as chromatic aberration as well as other potential
problems such as spatial skew and mid-level feature neglect. We prevent problems with testing generalization on
common self-supervised benchmark tests by using different datasets during our development. The results of our
methods combined yield top scores on all standard selfsupervised benchmarks, including classification and detection on PASCAL VOC 2007, segmentation on PASCAL VOC
2012, and “linear tests” on the ImageNet and CSAIL Places
datasets. We obtain an improvement over our baseline
method of between 4.0 to 7.1 percentage points on transfer
learning classification tests. We also show results on different standard network architectures to demonstrate generalization as well as portability. All data, models and
programs are available at: https://gdo-datasci.
llnl.gov/selfsupervised/.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning has opened an intriguing new
avenue into unsupervised learning. It is intellectually satisfying due to the way it resembles gestalt-like mechanisms
of learning in visual cortical formation. It is also appealing for that fact that it can be implemented with standard
off-the-shelf neural networks and toolkits.
Self-supervised learning methods create a protocol
whereby the computer can learn to teach itself a supervised
task. For instance, in [9] a convolutional neural network
(CNN) was taught to learn the arrangement of patches in an
image. By learning the relative position of these patches,
the network would be forced to also learn the features and
semantics that underlie the image. Although the network is
trained to learn patch positions, the final goal was to generalize the learned representation to solve other tasks. For

instance, the self-supervised network was trained on a transfer task (fine-tuned) to classify objects in the PASCAL VOC
dataset [13], and compared with a CNN trained on a supervised task, such as learning to classify the ImageNet dataset
[7]. If the self-supervised network learned good generalizations of image features and semantics, it should perform as
well as a supervised network on transfer learning.
Over the last few years, several methods of selfsupervised learning have been introduced. For instance,
[12] trained a CNN to recognize which transformation had
been performed on an image. Since then, methods have
been introduced that use context arrangement of image
patches [9, 31], image completion [36], image colorization
[48, 47, 24], motion segmentation [35], motion frame ordering [43, 44, 25], object counting [33] and a multi-task
ensemble of many models [10, 21].
Each method has relative strengths and weaknesses. For
instance, [48] uses a customized “split-brain” architecture
that makes it less off-the-shelf than other solutions which
frequently use a standard network such as AlexNet [23].
[43, 44, 25, 35] all use motion cues, but have the downside of being constrained to video data. Many patch based
methods use a Siamese network architecture which incurs
extra memory demands [9, 31, 33, 25]. However, every selfsupervised method suffers the drawback of still being very
short of supervised methods in terms of transfer learning
performance.
Our intent in this work is to improve the performance
of self-supervised learning. We present a variety of techniques we hope are applicable to other approaches as well.
We will demonstrate generalizability of these techniques by
running them on several different neural network architectures and many kinds of datasets and tasks. For instance, as
we will discuss, one dataset we wish to add to the corpus
of standard self-supervised tests, the Caltech-UCSD Birds
200 set (CUB) [45] is excellent for finding potential short
comings of techniques designed to address the well-known
chromatic aberration problem [9]. We will suggest this is
due to the importance of color patterns in bird classification
[6].
19339

