Context-aware Synthesis for Video Frame Interpolation
Simon Niklaus
Portland State University

Feng Liu
Portland State University

sniklaus@pdx.edu

fliu@cs.pdx.edu

Abstract
Video frame interpolation algorithms typically estimate
optical flow or its variations and then use it to guide the
synthesis of an intermediate frame between two consecutive original frames. To handle challenges like occlusion,
bidirectional flow between the two input frames is often
estimated and used to warp and blend the input frames.
However, how to effectively blend the two warped frames
still remains a challenging problem. This paper presents a
context-aware synthesis approach that warps not only the
input frames but also their pixel-wise contextual information and uses them to interpolate a high-quality intermediate frame. Specifically, we first use a pre-trained neural network to extract per-pixel contextual information for input
frames. We then employ a state-of-the-art optical flow algorithm to estimate bidirectional flow between them and prewarp both input frames and their context maps. Finally, unlike common approaches that blend the pre-warped frames,
our method feeds them and their context maps to a video
frame synthesis neural network to produce the interpolated
frame in a context-aware fashion. Our neural network is
fully convolutional and is trained end to end. Our experiments show that our method can handle challenging scenarios such as occlusion and large motion and outperforms
representative state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation is one of the basic video processing techniques. It is used to generate intermediate
frames between any two consecutive original frames. Video
frame interpolation algorithms typically estimate optical
flow or its variations and use them to warp and blend original frames to produce interpolation results [1, 24, 33].
The quality of frame interpolation results depends heavily on that of optical flow. While these years have observed
great progress in research on optical flow, challenges such
as occlusion and large motion still remain. As reported
in recent work, the optical flow accuracy decreases as the
http://graphics.cs.pdx.edu/project/ctxsyn

First frame, I1

Second frame, I2

Bidirectional flow-guided blending

MDP-Flow2 [50]

SepConv - LF [34]

Ours - LF

Figure 1: A challenging example. Compared to existing
frame interpolation methods, our approach can better handle large motion, significant occlusion, and motion blur.
motion increases [4, 17]. Therefore, many frame interpolation methods estimate bidirectional optical flow between
two input frames and use them to handle inaccuracies of
motion estimation and occlusion [15, 37, 52]. Some of the
recent bidirectional approaches, such as [52], also estimate
weight maps to adaptively blend the optical flow-guided
warped frames. However, as shown in Figure 1, blending
the warped frames sometimes is limited in handling occlusion and inaccuracies of optical flow, as it requires accurate
pixel-wise correspondence between the warped frames.
11701

