Triplet-Center Loss for Multi-View 3D Object Retrieval
Xinwei He

Yang Zhou∗
Zhichao Zhou
Song Bai
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

{eriche.hust, zhouyangvcc}@gmail.com

Abstract
Most existing 3D object recognition algorithms focus on
leveraging the strong discriminative power of deep learning models with softmax loss for the classification of 3D
data, while learning discriminative features with deep metric learning for 3D object retrieval is more or less neglected.
In the paper, we study variants of deep metric learning
losses for 3D object retrieval, which did not receive enough
attention from this area. First , two kinds of representative
losses, triplet loss and center loss, are introduced which
could learn more discriminative features than traditional
classification loss. Then, we propose a novel loss named
triplet-center loss, which can further enhance the discriminative power of the features. The proposed triplet-center
loss learns a center for each class and requires that the distances between samples and centers from the same class are
closer than those from different classes. Extensive experimental results on two popular 3D object retrieval benchmarks and two widely-adopted sketch-based 3D shape retrieval benchmarks consistently demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed loss, and significant improvements
have been achieved compared with the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, 3D shape analysis has received
extensive attention from both computer vision and graphics communities. Especially, many new attempts have been
made to this field, thanks to the powerful deep learning approaches and the large scale 3D model benchmarks such
as ShapeNet [7]. 3D object retrieval is a fundamental issue in shape analysis that is the most crucial for processing and analyzing 3D data. However, most deep learning
based approaches focus on leveraging the strong discriminative power of deep learning models for the classification
of 3D data, e.g., [33, 14, 25], only a few novel deep learning based approaches specifically designed for 3D object
∗ Corresponding author.

Xiang Bai

{zhichaozhou,songbai,xbai}@hust.edu.cn

retrieval in large scale have been presented.
With a long history in the community, 3D object retrieval may be coarsely divided into two categories: viewbased and model-based methods. View-based methods [1,
33] extract or learn the shape features from a set of 2D
view projections, where 2D convolutional neural networks
(CNN) are often adopted to process such projection images.
Model-based methods [11, 38] obtain the 3D shape features directly from the original 3D representations so that
3D CNN is preferred. Until now, view-based methods usually outperform model-based ones in term of retrieval accuracy, as reported in the recent competitions of large scale
3D SHape REtrieval Contest (SHREC) [4, 27, 28].
One well-known example of 3D object retrieval is MultiView Convolutional Neural Networks (MVCNN) [33], a
combination of multiple 2D projection features learned by
CNN within an end-to-end trainable fashion. Similar to
MVCNN, great efforts have been made to build a unified
deep learning model that can simultaneously perform the
tasks of 3D object classification and retrieval. These approaches including MVCNN believe that a strong classification model trained with deep learning, often can meanwhile
provide a faithful similarity for 3D object retrieval.
In fact, deep learning approaches for 3D object retrieval
are quite similar to those for image or other object retrieval,
where several loss functions such as contrastive loss [8] and
triplet loss [29] have been introduced for training CNN, in
order to learn a metric or an embedding space that makes
the instances from the same category closer to each other
than those from different categories. In particular, training a plain CNN model with the triplet loss for end-to-end
metric learning has shown its advantages in face recognition [29] and person re-identification (re-ID) [12]. Though
the remarkable progresses in the tasks of re-ID in 2D image
sets have been achieved using such loss functions, they are
more or less neglected by the area of 3D object retrieval. Indeed most existing deep learning approaches for 3D shape
retrieval focus on designing the sophisticated architectures
of deep neural networks or exploiting different representations of 3D object.
In contrast to most existing algorithms, in this paper we

1945

