KIPPI: KInetic Polygonal Partitioning of Images
Jean-Philippe Bauchet
Florent Lafarge
Inria – Université Côte d’Azur
Firstname.Lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Recent works showed that floating polygons can be
an interesting alternative to traditional superpixels, especially for analyzing scenes with strong geometric signatures, as man-made environments. Existing algorithms produce homogeneously-sized polygons that fail to capture thin
geometric structures and over-partition large uniform areas. We propose a kinetic approach that brings more flexibility on polygon shape and size. The key idea consists
in progressively extending pre-detected line-segments until
they meet each other. Our experiments demonstrate that
output partitions both contain less polygons and better capture geometric structures than those delivered by existing
methods. We also show the applicative potential of the
method when used as preprocessing in object contouring.

1. Introduction
Algorithms for decomposing images into superpixels,
i.e. small groups of connected pixels, are now standard
tools in computer vision. They are typically used as preprocessing to reduce the algorithmic complexity of subsequent tasks while enforcing the spatial consistency between
pixels. Some recent works [2, 9, 14] demonstrated the benefit of handling floating polygons instead of superpixels for
scalability, storage and region connectivity reasons. Such
resolution-independent representations are particularly appealing for analyzing scenes with strong geometric signatures, as man-made environments. Examples of applications include image rendering [31], urban reconstruction
[10] or scene illumination [12].
Existing strategies for generating such polygonal partitions are based either on the vectorization of superpixel boundaries [2], or on the construction of geometric
data-structures that conform to pre-detected line-segments
[9, 14]. The former easily introduces approximation errors when turning superpixels into polygons and requires
a good superpixel connectivity which is difficult to guarantee in practice. The latter, which focuses on positioning polygons on each side of line-segments, is globally

Figure 1. Kinetic partitioning into polygons. Our algorithm decomposes an image (left) into a partition of convex polygons
(right). While superpixel-based methods impose homogeneouslysized regions, our polygons are more meaningful, capturing both
large components and thin lineic structures that compose, for instance, urban scenes.

more robust and comes with some geometric guarantees but
produces less accurate results. In particular, line-segment
based methods poorly deal with potential intersections of
line-segments that might occur in a spatial neighborhood.
They assume that pre-detected line-segments constitute entire or almost entire lineic components of an object. In practice, we observe a line-segment is often a small part of such
a component, and needs to be extended to properly capture
the underlying structure. We also observe that imposing
homogeneously-sized polygons does not allow the capture
of meaningful polygons as line-segments are not uniformly
distributed on the image domain.
Based on these observations, we propose a kinetic approach for partitioning an image into polygons. The key
idea consists in progressively extending pre-detected linesegments until they meet each other. We then decide
whether line-segments must keep extending based on image
gradient considerations and a user-defined number of collisions. This strategy allows us to both recover better junctions in lineic structures and describe objects with polygons
more meaningful than superpixel-based polygons. Figure 1
shows an example of such a partition generated from an image exhibiting man-made objects.
The contributions of this work are (i) a computationally efficient kinetic framework able to process big im13146

