Two-Step Quantization for Low-bit Neural Networks
Peisong Wang1,2 , Qinghao Hu1,2 , Yifan Zhang1,2 , Chunjie Zhang1,2 , Yang Liu4 , and Jian Cheng1,2,3∗
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
4
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Every bit matters in the hardware design of quantized
neural networks. However, extremely-low-bit representation usually causes large accuracy drop. Thus, how to train
extremely-low-bit neural networks with high accuracy is of
central importance. Most existing network quantization approaches learn transformations (low-bit weights) as well as
encodings (low-bit activations) simultaneously. This tight
coupling makes the optimization problem difficult, and thus
prevents the network from learning optimal representations.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective Two-Step
Quantization (TSQ) framework, by decomposing the network quantization problem into two steps: code learning
and transformation function learning based on the learned
codes. For the first step, we propose the sparse quantization
method for code learning. The second step can be formulated as a non-linear least square regression problem with
low-bit constraints, which can be solved efficiently in an iterative manner. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-10 and
ILSVRC-12 datasets demonstrate that the proposed TSQ
is effective and outperforms the state-of-the-art by a large
margin. Especially, for 2-bit activation and ternary weight
quantization of AlexNet, the accuracy of our TSQ drops only
about 0.5 points compared with the full-precision counterpart, outperforming current state-of-the-art by more than 5
points.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been
widely studied for a variety of applications including computer vision [20, 25], speech recognition, natural language
processing and so on. By learning a hierarchical representation, DNNs have achieved state-of-the-art performance
among many of these tasks. However, the computational
complexity of DNNs is also increasing drastically. This
∗ The corresponding author.

presents a significant challenge to the network deployment
on resource limited devices, such as mobile phones and
tablets.
To make DNNs less resource-intensive, several approaches have been developed by the community, such as
network pruning [22, 10], low-rank approximation [7, 17,
18], architecture design [15, 12, 35], etc. A recent work
[9] shows that full-precision representations are not necessary for networks to achieve high performance. The network storage can be dramatically reduced if low-bit weights
are utilized. In [5, 4], it is also shown that, the internal representations of deep neural networks can also be turned into
low-bit format. In this way, both the weights and activations
are quantized, and the expensive floating-point multiplyaccumulate operations (MACs) can be replaced by low-bit
multiply-accumulate operations, or even without multiplications (in the case of binary or ternary quantization). Thus
both storage and computational complexity can be reduced
using low-bit quantized neural networks.
Low-bit representation can also benefit hardware accelerators like FPGAs and neural network oriented chips. Under this circumstance, the bit-width is of vital importance,
i.e., lowering one bit usually means saving lots of hardware
resources as well as chip area. It also dramatically simplifies the hardware design when using fewer bits. However,
the problem is that when extremely-low-bit representations
are utilized, the accuracy of the quantized neural network
drops a lot compared with the full-precision counterpart.
This is due to the noise introduced during the network quantization stage, which makes the gradient descent method
hard to converge. The problem can be more severe when
both weights and activations are quantized using extremelylow-bit representations. In this case, the quantized network
has to learn the optimal hidden layer encodings as well as
the transformation functions between adjacent layers simultaneously.
In this paper, we propose a Two-Step Quantization
(TSQ) framework for low-bit quantized neural networks:
code learning and transformation function learning based

4376

