Stochastic Downsampling for Cost-Adjustable Inference and
Improved Regularization in Convolutional Networks
Jason Kuen1 , Xiangfei Kong1 , Zhe Lin2 , Gang Wang3 , Jianxiong Yin4 , Simon See4 , Yap-Peng Tan1
1
2
3
4
Nanyang Technological University
Adobe Research
Alibaba AI Labs
NVIDIA
{jkuen001,xfkong,eyptan}@ntu.edu.sg, zlin@adobe.com,
gangwang6@gmail.com, {jianxiongy,ssee}@nvidia.com

Abstract
It is desirable to train convolutional networks (CNNs) to
run more efficiently during inference. In many cases however, the computational budget that the system has for inference cannot be known beforehand during training, or
the inference budget is dependent on the changing real-time
resource availability. Thus, it is inadequate to train just
inference-efficient CNNs, whose inference costs are not adjustable and cannot adapt to varied inference budgets. We
propose a novel approach for cost-adjustable inference in
CNNs - Stochastic Downsampling Point (SDPoint). During
training, SDPoint applies feature map downsampling to a
random point in the layer hierarchy, with a random downsampling ratio. The different stochastic downsampling configurations known as SDPoint instances (of the same model)
have computational costs different from each other, while
being trained to minimize the same prediction loss. Sharing network parameters across different instances provides
significant regularization boost. During inference, one may
handpick a SDPoint instance that best fits the inference budget. The effectiveness of SDPoint, as both a cost-adjustable
inference approach and a regularizer, is validated through
extensive experiments on image classification.

1. Introduction
Convolutional networks (CNNs) [7] have greatly accelerated the progress of many computer vision areas and applications in recent years. Despite their powerful visual representational capabilities, CNNs are bottlenecked by their
immense computational demands. Recent CNN architectures such as Residual Networks (ResNets) [10, 11] and
Inception [36] require billions of floating-point operations
(FLOPs) to perform inference on just one single input image. Furthermore, as the amount of visual data grows, we
need increasingly higher-capacity (thus higher complexity)
CNNs which have shown to better utilize these large visual
data compared to their lower-capacity counterparts [35].
There have been works which tackle the efficiency issues of deep CNNs, mainly by lowering numerical precisions (quantization) [16, 29, 43], pruning network weights

[8, 23, 41, 12, 25], or adopting separable convolutions [18,
3, 40]. These methods result in more efficient models which
have fixed inference costs (measured in floating-point operations or FLOPs). Models with fixed inference costs cannot
work effectively in certain resource-constrained vision systems, where the computational budget that can be allocated
to CNN inference depends on the real-time resource availability. When the system is lower in resources, it is preferable to allocate a lower budget for more efficient or cheaper
inference, and vice versa. Moreover, in some cases, the exact inference budget cannot be known beforehand during
training time.
As a simple solution to such a concern, one could train
several CNN models such that each has a different inference
cost, and then select the one that matches the given budget at
inference time. However, it is extremely time-consuming to
train many models, not to mention the computational storage required to store the weights of many models. In this
work, we focus on CNNs whose computational costs are
dynamically adjustable at inference time. A CNN with costadjustable inference only has to be trained once, and it allows users to control the trade-off of inference cost against
network accuracy/performance. The different inference instances (each with different inference cost) are all derived
from the same model parameters.
For cost-adjustable inference in CNNs, we propose a
novel training method - Stochastic Downsampling Point
(SDPoint). A SDPoint instance is a network configuration
consisting of a unique downsampling point (layer index) in
the network layer hierarchy as well as a unique downsampling ratio. As illustrated in Fig. 1, at every training iteration, a SDPoint instance is randomly selected (from a list of
instances), and downsampling happens based on the downsampling point and ratio of that instance. The earlier the
downsampling happens, the lower the total computational
costs will be, given that spatially smaller feature maps are
cheaper to process.
During inference, a SDPoint instance can be deterministically handpicked (among the SDPoint instances seen during training) to match the given inference budget. Existing
approaches [22, 38, 20] to achieve cost-adjustable inference
17929

