A Deeper Look at Power Normalizations
Piotr Koniusz∗,1,2
Hongguang Zhang∗,2,1
Fatih Porikli2
1
Data61/CSIRO, 2 Australian National University
firstname.lastname@{data61.csiro.au1 , anu.edu.au2 }
Abstract
Power Normalizations (PN) are very useful non-linear
operators in the context of Bag-of-Words data representations as they tackle problems such as feature imbalance. In
this paper, we reconsider these operators in the deep learning setup by introducing a novel layer that implements PN
for non-linear pooling of feature maps. Specifically, by using a kernel formulation, our layer combines the feature
vectors and their respective spatial locations in the feature maps produced by the last convolutional layer of CNN.
Linearization of such a kernel results in a positive definite
matrix capturing the second-order statistics of the feature
vectors, to which PN operators are applied. We study two
types of PN functions, namely (i) MaxExp and (ii) Gamma,
addressing their role and meaning in the context of nonlinear pooling. We also provide a probabilistic interpretation of these operators and derive their surrogates with
well-behaved gradients for end-to-end CNN learning. We
apply our theory to practice by implementing the PN layer
on a ResNet-50 model and showcase experiments on four
benchmarks for fine-grained recognition, scene recognition,
and material classification. Our results demonstrate stateof-the-part performance across all these tasks.

1. Introduction
Second-order statistics of data features have played a
pivotal role in advancing the state of the art on several problems in computer vision, including object recognition, texture categorization, action representation, and human tracking, to name a few of applications [54, 47, 58, 38, 16, 9, 34].
For example, in the popular region covariance descriptors [54], a covariance matrix, which is computed over
multi-modal features from image regions, is used as an object representation for recognition and tracking, and has
been extended to several other applications [54, 47, 58, 38,
16]. Given Bag-of-Words histograms or local descriptor
vectors from an image, a second-order co-occurrence pool∗ Both authors contributed equally.

ing of these vectors captures the occurrences of two features together. Such a strategy has been recently shown to
result in a superior performance in semantic segmentation
and visual concept detection, compared to their first-order
counterparts [9, 33, 34]. A natural extension led to higherorder pooling operators [33, 34, 30] on third-order supersymmetric tensors which improve results over the secondorder descriptors over 7% MAP on PASCAL VOC07.
However, second and higher-order statistics require appropriate aggregation and pooling mechanisms to obtain the
highest classification results [9, 33, 34]. Once the statistics
are captured in the matrix form, they undergo next a nonlinearity such as Power Normalization [35] which role is to
reduce/boost contributions from frequent/infrequent visual
stimuli in an image, respectively. A significant progress
made by the Bag-of-Words model provides numerous insights into the role played by pooling during the aggregation
step. The theoretical relation between Average and Maxpooling was studied in [7]. A detailed likelihood-based
analysis of feature pooling was conducted in [8] which
led to a theoretical expectation of Max-pooling, improving
overall classification results. Power Normalization has also
been applied to Average pooling by Fisher Kernels [46].
Max-pooling has been recognized as a lower bound of the
likelihood of ‘at least one particular visual word being
present in an image’ [42]. According to an evaluation [35],
these pooling methods are all closely related. However,
evaluations [35] do not consider the second-order pooling
scenario or end-to-end learning. In the context of secondorder pooling, element-wise and eigenvalue Power Normalization (ePN) were both first proposed in [33] in 2013.
In this paper, we aim to revisit the above pooling methods in end-to-end setting and shed further light on their interpretation in the context of second-order matrices. Firstly,
we propose a kernel formulation which combines feature vectors collected from the last convolutional layer of
ResNet-50 together with so-called spatial location vectors,
previously explored in [31, 35, 33] around 2011–2013,
which contain spatial locations corresponding to feature
vectors in the CNN feature maps. A linearization of such
a kernel results in a second-order matrix which contains ag15774

