Compressed Video Action Recognition
Chao-Yuan Wu1,5∗

Manzil Zaheer2,5∗

Hexiang Hu3,5∗

R. Manmatha4

cywu@cs.utexas.edu

manzil@cmu.edu

hexiangh@usc.edu

manmatha@a9.com

1

Alexander J. Smola5

Philipp Krähenbühl1

smola@amazon.com

philkr@cs.utexas.edu

The University of Texas at Austin, 2 Carnegie Mellon University,
3
University of Southern California, 4 A9, 5 Amazon

Abstract
Training robust deep video representations has proven to
be much more challenging than learning deep image representations. This is in part due to the enormous size of raw
video streams and the high temporal redundancy; the true
and interesting signal is often drowned in too much irrelevant data. Motivated by that the superfluous information
can be reduced by up to two orders of magnitude by video
compression (using H.264, HEVC, etc.), we propose to train
a deep network directly on the compressed video.
This representation has a higher information density,
and we found the training to be easier. In addition, the signals in a compressed video provide free, albeit noisy, motion
information. We propose novel techniques to use them effectively. Our approach is about 4.6 times faster than Res3D
and 2.7 times faster than ResNet-152. On the task of action
recognition, our approach outperforms all the other methods on the UCF-101, HMDB-51, and Charades dataset.

1. Introduction
Video commands the lion’s share of internet traffic at
70% and rising [24]. Most cell phone cameras now capture
high resolution videos in addition to images. Many realworld data sources are video based, ranging from inventory
systems at warehouses to self-driving cars or autonomous
drones. Video is also arguably the next frontier in computer
vision, as it captures a wealth of information still images
cannot convey. Videos carry more emotion [32], allow us to
predict the future to a certain extent [23], provide temporal
context and give us better spatial awareness [26]. Unfortunately, very little of this information is currently exploited.
State-of-the-art deep learning models for video analysis
are quite basic. Most of them naı̈vely use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) designed for images to parse a video
frame by frame. They often demonstrate results no better
∗ Part of this work performed while interning at Amazon.

Traditional CNN

Decoded
Stream

Codec

Compressed
Stream

I-frame

P-frame

P-frame

P-frame

Our CNN

Figure 1: Traditional architectures first decode the video
and then feed it into a network. We propose to use the compressed video directly.
than hand-crafted techniques [16, 42]. So, why did deep
learning not yet make as transformative of an impact on
video tasks, such as action recognition, as it did on images?
We argue that the reason is two-fold. First, videos have
a very low information density, as 1h of 720p video can
be compressed from 222GB raw to 1GB. In other words,
videos are filled with boring and repeating patterns, drowning the ‘true’ and interesting signal. The redundancy makes
it harder for CNNs to extract meaningful information, and
makes the training much slower. Second, with only RGB
images, learning temporal structure is difficult. A vast
body of literature attempts to process videos as RGB image sequences, either with 2D CNNs, 3D CNNs, or recurrent neural networks (RNNs), but has yielded limited success [16, 40]. Using precomputed optical flow almost always boosts the performance [2].

6026

