End-to-end Convolutional Semantic Embeddings
Quanzeng You
Microsoft
One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA

Zhengyou Zhang
Tencent
Shenzhen, China

Jiebo Luo
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY

quyou@microsoft.com

zhengyou@tencent.com

jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Semantic embeddings for images and sentences have
been widely studied recently. The ability of deep neural networks on learning rich and robust visual and textual representations offers the opportunity to develop effective semantic embedding models. Currently, the state-of-the-art
approaches in semantic learning first employ deep neural
networks to encode images and sentences into a common
semantic space. Then, the learning objective is to ensure
a larger similarity between matching image and sentence
pairs than randomly sampled pairs. Usually, Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) are employed for learning image and sentence representations, respectively. On one hand, CNNs are known to
produce robust visual features at different levels and RNNs
are known for capturing dependencies in sequential data.
Therefore, this simple framework can be sufficiently effective in learning visual and textual semantics. On the other
hand, different from CNNs, RNNs cannot produce middlelevel (e.g. phrase-level in text) representations. As a result, only global representations are available for semantic learning. This could potentially limit the performance
of the model due to the hierarchical structures in images
and sentences. In this work, we apply Convolutional Neural Networks to process both images and sentences. Consequently, we can employ mid-level representations to assist global semantic learning by introducing a new learning
objective on the convolutional layers. The experimental results show that our proposed textual CNN models with the
new learning objective lead to better performance than the
state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved
significant success on a wide range of computer vision
tasks [21]. Meanwhile, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
have also been extensively deployed to model sequential
data, such as machine translation [1, 32] and speech recog-

L ocal Semantic

a man surfing
some waves on
his white
surfboard .

Global Semantic

Figure 1. Motivation of using CNNs for semantic embeddings.
CNNs can produce hierarchical feature representations, which can
be exploited for semantic learning.

nition [8]. Until recently, CNNs are applied to natural language processing tasks and show competitive performance
on several tasks, including sentence classification [16] and
machine translation [7]. Part of the success can be attributed to their ability in modeling complex hierarchical
structures of languages. In semantic embedding learning,
we are also interested in the structures presented in images
and sentences [28] for understanding of their semantic relations at different levels. However, the state-of-the-art approaches usually use RNNs for language modeling due to
their success on processing sequential data, including sentences. However, RNNs have their limitations. On one
hand, structural representations cannot be obtained from
RNNs. On the other hand, they are known for their incapability of capturing long range dependencies in sequential data. To solve this issue, different variants, such as
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [11] and Gated Recurrent Units [3], are carefully designed to keep the information propagate smoothly and robustly. However, there still
exist the possibility of unstable gradients.
Different from RNNs, CNNs can represent visual content in multiple levels, from low-level filters to middle-level
parts and the whole objects [35]. This kind of multiple level
representations offers opportunity for visual and textual se15735

