Mining on Manifolds: Metric Learning without Labels
Ahmet Iscen1

Giorgos Tolias1

Yannis Avrithis2

1 VRG, FEE, CTU in Prague

Ondřej Chum1

2 Inria Rennes

Abstract
In this work we present a novel unsupervised framework
for hard training example mining. The only input to the
method is a collection of images relevant to the target application and a meaningful initial representation, provided e.g.
by pre-trained CNN. Positive examples are distant points
on a single manifold, while negative examples are nearby
points on different manifolds. Both types of examples are
revealed by disagreements between Euclidean and manifold
similarities. The discovered examples can be used in training with any discriminative loss.
The method is applied to unsupervised fine-tuning of pretrained networks for fine-grained classification and particular object retrieval. Our models are on par or are outperforming prior models that are fully or partially supervised.

1. Introduction
The success of deep neural networks on large-scale problems has been first demonstrated on the task of supervised classification [26]. It was shown that embeddings,
typically provided by the convolutional layers of a network, are applicable beyond classification tasks. These
tasks include particular object retrieval [15], local descriptor learning [17], ranking [62], and nearest-neighbor regression [6]. A common practice is to start with a pre-trained
network [50, 55, 19] and apply metric learning [9, 62, 18]
to fine-tune the network for a particular task.
To improve over the initial network, novel training samples are sought for which the initial network performs
poorly. Such training samples are used to re-train the network using loss functions alternative to cross-entropy (e.g.
contrastive [9], triplet [62] or batch-level [36]). The approaches to obtain relevant training data range from further
human supervision [3, 36] to instance clustering [44, 32, 5],
exploiting the temporal dimension in video [64, 65], predicting the spatial layout of image patches [11], or using
existing computer vision pipelines to match unstructured
image collections pairwise [15, 42].
Most recent deep metric learning approaches can learn
powerful embeddings but still use class labels. This is
unsatisfying not only because we miss the opportunity of

(a) Euclidean NN (orange)

(b) Manifold NN (purple)

(c) Hard positives (green)

(d) Hard negatives (red)

Figure 1. Given an anchor point (black) and its k nearest Euclidean
(NNek ) and manifold (NNm
k ) neighbors in a dataset, we choose pose
e
m
itive samples as NNm
k \ NNk , and negative as NNk \ NNk . Data
is unlabeled and the selection is fully unsupervised, including anchors.

learning from unlabeled data, but learned representations
of each class are unimodal [44]. Therefore, whatever the
loss function [62, 36]) or sampling [18, 34], the problem remains supervised classification. On the other hand, conventional nonlinear dimension reduction or manifold learning
methods exploit the manifold structure of the data starting
from nearest neighbor graphs and are otherwise unsupervised [56, 45, 7]. However, most do not learn an explicit
mapping from the input to the embedding space and have
difficulties in generalizing to new data.
We attempt to bridge this gap in this work. In particular,
we propose a novel method of hard training sample mining
in a fully unsupervised manner, simply from an unordered
collection of images relevant to the final task. We observe
that a similarity between two images is improved by considering all, even unlabelled, available data. In particular,
we exploit similarity measured on a manifold estimated by
a random walk process [21].
The learning starts from the initial representation space
of unlabeled data. Given an anchor point that is part of
the data, neighbors on the manifold that are not Euclidean
neighbors are considered positive samples. In the new
learned representation space, the positive sample should be
attracted to the anchor to reflect the similarity measured
on the manifold. Conversely, Euclidean neighbors that are
not neighbors on the manifold are considered negative and
should be repelled. The idea is illustrated in Figure 1.
17642

