Guided Proofreading of Automatic Segmentations for Connectomics
Daniel Haehn∗1 , Verena Kaynig1 , James Tompkin2 , Jeff W. Lichtman1 , and Hanspeter Pfister1
1

Harvard University

2

Brown University

Abstract
Automatic cell image segmentation methods in connectomics produce merge and split errors, which require correction through proofreading. Previous research has identified
the visual search for these errors as the bottleneck in interactive proofreading. To aid error correction, we develop two
classifiers that automatically recommend candidate merges
and splits to the user. These classifiers use a convolutional
neural network (CNN) that has been trained with errors
in automatic segmentations against expert-labeled ground
truth. Our classifiers detect potentially-erroneous regions
by considering a large context region around a segmentation boundary. Corrections can then be performed by a
user with yes/no decisions, which reduces variation of information 7.5× faster than previous proofreading methods.
We also present a fully-automatic mode that uses a probability threshold to make merge/split decisions. Extensive
experiments using the automatic approach and comparing
performance of novice and expert users demonstrate that our
method performs favorably against state-of-the-art proofreading methods on different connectomics datasets.

1. Introduction
In connectomics, neuroscientists annotate neurons and
their connectivity within 3D volumes to gain insight into
the functional structure of the brain. Rapid progress in automatic sample preparation and electron microscopy (EM)
acquisition techniques has made it possible to image large
volumes of brain tissue at nanometer resolution. With a
voxel size of 4 × 4 × 40 nm3 , a cubic millimeter volume is
one petabyte of data. With so much data, manual annotation is not feasible, and automatic annotation methods are
needed [13, 22, 25, 18].
Automatic annotation by segmentation and classification
of brain tissue is challenging [1] and all available methods
make errors, so the results must be proofread by humans.
This crucial task serves two purposes: 1) to correct errors in
∗ Corresponding author, haehn@seas.harvard.edu

Initial!
Segmentation

Merge- and Split!
Errors

Correct!
Borders

Fixed!
Segmentation

Figure 1: The most common proofreading corrections are
fixing split errors (red arrows) and merge errors (yellow
arrow). A fixed segmentation matches the cell borders.
the segmentation, and 2) to increase the body of labeled data
from which to train better automatic segmentation methods.
Recent proofreading tools provide intuitive user interfaces to
browse segmentation data in 2D and 3D and to identify and
manually correct errors [30, 14, 20, 9]. Many kinds of errors
exist, such as inaccurate boundaries, but the most common
are split errors, where a single segment is labeled as two,
and merge errors, where two segments are labeled as one
(Fig. 1). With user interaction, split errors can be joined,
and the missing boundary in a merge error can be defined
with manually-seeded watersheds [9]. However, the visual
inspection to find errors takes the majority of the time, even
with semi-automatic correction tools [26].
Our goal is to automatically detect potential split and
merge errors to reduce visual inspection time. Further, to
reduce correction time, we propose corrections to the user to
accept or reject. We call this process guided proofreading.
We train a classifier for split error detection with a convolutional neural network (CNN). This takes as input patches
of membrane segmentation probabilities, cell segmentation
masks, and boundary masks, and outputs a split-probability
score. As we must process large data, this classifier only
operates on cell boundaries, which reduces computation over
methods that analyze every pixel. For merge errors, we invert and reuse the split classification network, and ask it to
rate a set of generated boundaries that hypothesize a split.
19319

