CBMV: A Coalesced Bidirectional Matching Volume for Disparity Estimation
Konstantinos Batsos

Changjiang Cai

Philippos Mordohai

kbatsos@stevens.edu

ccai1@stevens.edu

mordohai@cs.stevens.edu

Stevens Institute of Technology
Abstract
Recently, there has been a paradigm shift in stereo matching with learning-based methods achieving the best results
on all popular benchmarks. The success of these methods
is due to the availability of training data with ground truth;
training learning-based systems on these datasets has allowed them to surpass the accuracy of conventional approaches based on heuristics and assumptions. Many of
these assumptions, however, had been validated extensively
and hold for the majority of possible inputs. In this paper,
we generate a matching volume leveraging both data with
ground truth and conventional wisdom. We accomplish this
by coalescing diverse evidence from a bidirectional matching
process via random forest classifiers. We show that the resulting matching volume estimation method achieves similar
accuracy to purely data-driven alternatives on benchmarks
and that it generalizes to unseen data much better. In fact, the
results we submitted to the KITTI and ETH3D benchmarks
were generated using a classifier trained on the Middlebury
2014 dataset.

1. Introduction
The most important recent development in stereo matching is the prevalent use of machine learning techniques that
have led to dramatic improvements in accuracy by taking
advantage of datasets with ground truth. Methods based on
learning are effective because they replace assumptions and
hand-crafted rules with data-driven, optimized decision rules
and predictions. Classifiers are used to contribute in various
stages of the disparity estimation process; several authors
have trained classifiers to predict whether two image patches
are likely to match [4, 20, 26, 39, 47, 49, 50, 51], while others have used classifiers to replace hand-crafted rules in other
stages of the process [8, 27, 29, 30, 37, 38, 41, 42]. A quick
inspection of the most active binocular stereo benchmarks
[7, 23, 34] reveals that learning the matching function, in
particular the work of Žbontar and LeCun [51], has been
the primary enabling technology behind the majority of the
top-ranked algorithms.

In addition to the above approaches that propose learningbased components integrated into the stereo matching
pipeline, there are a few deep learning architectures that
allow end-to-end training [14, 16, 21, 25]. While end-to-end
training has the advantage that it avoids suboptimal configurations, which often occur when intermediate objectives are
optimized separately from final disparity map accuracy, its
downside is that these methods tend to over-specialize in the
training domain. As anecdotal evidence for this statement
we provide the observation that very few results from endto-end architectures have been submitted to the Middlebury
2014 benchmark [34], which contains images of various resolutions and disparity ranges. Specialization is a desirable
property in many applications, such as autonomous driving.
In this paper, we aim to create a general approach that can
be effective on a broad range of input imagery.
In contrast to end-to-end architectures, deep learning
methods that learn the matching likelihood of image patches
have shown better generalization properties, but they cannot be trained in an end-to-end manner. For example, the
MC-CNN method of Žbontar and LeCun [50, 51] uses a
Siamese CNN to estimate the matching volume, that contains the matching likelihood/cost for each allowable disparity of every pixel, and conventional steps to optimize the
volume and extract the final disparity map. Their pipeline
resembles the last three steps of the conventional pipeline
according to Scharstein and Szeliski [35]: cost aggregation,
disparity optimization and disparity refinement. MC-CNN
has been widely adopted as the cost function by a number of authors who have presented state-of-the-art results

Djembe

CBMV disparity map

Figure 1. The left view of Djembe stereo dataset [34] along with
the disparity map computed by CBMV

12060

