End-to-End Learning of Motion Representation for Video Understanding
Lijie Fan∗2 , Wenbing Huang∗1 , Chuang Gan3 , Stefano Ermon4 , Boqing Gong1 , Junzhou Huang1
1
Tencent AI Lab, 2 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
MIT-Watson Lab, 4 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
flj14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hwenbing@126.com, ganchuang1990@gmail.com
ermon@cs.stanford.edu, boqinggo@outlook.com, jzhuang@uta.edu

Abstract
Despite the recent success of end-to-end learned representations, hand-crafted optical flow features are still widely
used in video analysis tasks. To fill this gap, we propose
TVNet, a novel end-to-end trainable neural network, to learn
optical-flow-like features from data. TVNet subsumes a specific optical flow solver, the TV-L1 method, and is initialized
by unfolding its optimization iterations as neural layers.
TVNet can therefore be used directly without any extra learning. Moreover, it can be naturally concatenated with other
task-specific networks to formulate an end-to-end architecture, thus making our method more efficient than current
multi-stage approaches by avoiding the need to pre-compute
and store features on disk. Finally, the parameters of the
TVNet can be further fine-tuned by end-to-end training. This
enables TVNet to learn richer and task-specific patterns
beyond exact optical flow. Extensive experiments on two
action recognition benchmarks verify the effectiveness of the
proposed approach. Our TVNet achieves better accuracies
than all compared methods, while being competitive with the
fastest counterpart in terms of features extraction time.

1. Introduction
Deep learning and especially Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have revolutionized image-based tasks, e.g.,
image classification [16] and objective detection [32]. However, the progress on video analysis is still far from satisfactory, reflecting the difficulty associated with learning
representations for spatiotemporal data. We believe that the
major obstacle is that the distinctive motion cues in videos
demand some new network designs, which are yet to be
found and tested.
While there have been some attempts [36] to learn features by convolution operations over both spatial and temporal dimensions, optical flow is still widely and effectively

Action Representation Learning

Optical-flow

TVNet feature without training

TVNet feature after training

Figure 1. Visualization results of optical-flow-like motion features
by TV1 [42], TVNet (without training) and TVNet (with training).

used for video analysis [28, 9, 10, 40, 15, 29]. The optical
flow, as the name implies, captures the displacements of
pixels between two consecutive frames [42]. Thus, applying
the optical flow to the video understanding tasks enables
one to model the motion cues explicitly, conveniently, but
inefficiently. It is often computationally expensive to estimate the optical flows. A currently successful example
of applying optical flow to video understanding is the twostream model [33], where a CNN is trained on the optical
flow data to learn action patterns. Various extensions of the
two-stream model have been proposed and achieved state-ofthe-art results on serval tasks including action recognition
[28, 9, 10, 40] and action detection [15, 29].
Despite the remarkable performance, current optical-flowbased approaches have notable drawbacks:
• Training is a two-stage pipeline. In the first stage,
the optical flow for every two consecutive frames is
extracted via the optimization-based method (e.g. TVL1 [42]). In the second stage, a CNN is trained on the
extracted flow data. These two stages are separated and
the information (e.g. gradients) from the second stage
cannot be used to adjust the process of the first stage.
• Optical flow extraction is expensive in space and
time. The extracted optical flow has to be written to

∗ indicates equal contributions. This work was conducted when Lijie
Fan was served as a research intern in Tencent AI Lab.

6016

