Multi-Level Fusion based 3D Object Detection from Monocular Images
Bin Xu, Zhenzhong Chen∗
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, China
{ysfalo,zzchen}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present an end-to-end multi-level fusion based framework for 3D object detection from a single monocular image. The whole network is composed of
two parts: one for 2D region proposal generation and another for simultaneously predictions of objects’ 2D locations, orientations, dimensions, and 3D locations. With the
help of a stand-alone module to estimate the disparity and
compute the 3D point cloud, we introduce the multi-level
fusion scheme. First, we encode the disparity information
with a front view feature representation and fuse it with the
RGB image to enhance the input. Second, features extracted
from the original input and the point cloud are combined
to boost the object detection. For 3D localization, we introduce an extra stream to predict the location information
from point cloud directly and add it to the aforementioned
location prediction. The proposed algorithm can directly
output both 2D and 3D object detection results in an endto-end fashion with only a single RGB image as the input.
The experimental results on the challenging KITTI benchmark demonstrate that our algorithm significantly outperforms monocular state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the development of technologies in
computer vision and deep learning, numerous impressive
methods are proposed for accurate 2D object detection. The
results of 2D detection indicate the accurate locations for
each object in image coordinate system and the object class
for it. However, in several scenarios like robotic application
and autonomous driving, it is not enough to describe objects
in the 3D real world scene with 2D detection results only.
The focus of this paper is on 3D object detection utilizing only monocular images. We aim at extending existing 2D object detectors for accurate 3D object detection in
the context of self-driving cars, without any help of expensive LIDAR systems, stereo information or hand-annotated
∗ Corresponding author: Zhenzhong Chen

maps of the environment. For 2D object detection, since
the success of region-based convolutional neural networks
(R-CNNs) [13], the advanced promising works like SPPNet [17], Fast R-CNN [12], Faster R-CNN [31], R-FCN [7]
and Mask R-CNN [16] mostly apply deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) to learn features from region candidates over the image for accurate 2D object recognition.
Here we would like to extend the existing image-based 2D
detection algorithms for 3D object detection. Usually, a 2D
object is described by its location in the image, which is
quite different from the representation of a 3D object. Typically, a 3D object like a car in the real world is represented
by its pose, 3D dimension and localization of its center in
the camera coordinate system. It is much more complicated
for 3D object detection with only monocular images. However, since the existence of imaging mechanism and geometric constraints, all the descriptors of a 3D object still
have compact relations to the projected image content, it
is possible to handle the 3D detection problem with only
monocular images.
To deal with this, we propose a framework for 3D object detection by estimating the object class, 2D location,
orientation, dimension, and 3D location based on a single monocular image in an end-to-end fashion. A region
proposal network (RPN) is utilized to generate 2D proposals in the image, as RPN provides strong objectness confidence regions of interest (RoIs) with CNN features and
it can share weights with the down-stream detection network [31, 36, 37, 19]. With features learned from the proposals, both object class confidence and 2D bounding box
offset to the proposal are predicted, just like most regionbased 2D object detectors. Two more branches are added
for jointly learning of orientation and dimension. In addition, another module is introduced to estimate the disparity
information and adopt multi-level fusion method for accurate 3D localization, constituting our 3D object detection
procedure.
In this work, to get the pose of a 3D object, we follow
a similar idea as the MultiBin architecture described in [26]
by adopting discrete-continuous formulation for orientation
estimation. For 3D object dimension, typical sizes made

2345

