Camera Style Adaptation for Person Re-identification
Zhun Zhong†§ , Liang Zheng§ , Zhedong Zheng§ , Shaozi Li†∗, Yi Yang§
†
§

Cognitive Science Department, Xiamen University, China

Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, Australia

{zhunzhong007,liangzheng06,zdzheng12,yee.i.yang}@gmail.com szlig@xmu.edu.cn

Camera 1

Abstract

Person re-identification (re-ID) [43] is a cross-camera retrieval task. Given a query person-of-interest, it aims to retrieve the same person from a database collected from multiple cameras. In this task, a person image often undergoes
intensive changes in appearance and background. Capturing images by different cameras is a primary cause of such
variations (Fig. 1). Usually, cameras differ from each other
regarding resolution, environment illumination, etc.
In addressing the challenge of camera variations, a previous body of the literature chooses an implicit strategy. That
is, to learn stable feature representations that have invari∗ Corresponding author.

This work was done when Zhun Zhong was a visiting student at University of Technology Sydney.

real
transferred

Style
Transfer

real

1. Introduction

(a) Example images under two cameras from Market-1501

transferred

Being a cross-camera retrieval task, person reidentification suffers from image style variations caused by
different cameras. The art implicitly addresses this problem by learning a camera-invariant descriptor subspace.
In this paper, we explicitly consider this challenge by introducing camera style (CamStyle) adaptation. CamStyle
can serve as a data augmentation approach that smooths
the camera style disparities. Specifically, with CycleGAN,
labeled training images can be style-transferred to each
camera, and, along with the original training samples,
form the augmented training set. This method, while increasing data diversity against over-fitting, also incurs a
considerable level of noise. In the effort to alleviate the
impact of noise, the label smooth regularization (LSR) is
adopted. The vanilla version of our method (without LSR)
performs reasonably well on few-camera systems in which
over-fitting often occurs. With LSR, we demonstrate consistent improvement in all systems regardless of the extent of over-fitting. We also report competitive accuracy
compared with the state of the art. Code is available at:
https://github.com/zhunzhong07/CamStyle

Camera 6

(b) Examples of camera-aware style transfer between two cameras

Figure 1. (a) Example images from Market-1501 [42]. (b) Examples of camera-aware style transfer between two cameras using our
method. Images in the same column represent the same person.

ance property under different cameras. Examples in traditional approaches include KISSME [16], XQDA [20], DNS
[39], etc. Examples in deep representation learning methods include IDE [43], SVDNet [29], TripletNet [11], etc.
Comparing to previous methods, this paper resorts to
an explicit strategy from the view of camera style adaptation. We are mostly motivated by the need for large data
volume in deep learning based person re-ID. To learn rich
features which are robust to camera variations, annotating
large-scale datasets is useful but prohibitively expensive.
Nevertheless, if we can add more samples to the training set
that are aware of the style differences between cameras, we
are able to 1) address the data scarcity problem in person reID and 2) learn invariant features across different cameras.
Preferably, this process should not cost any more human labeling, so that the budget is kept low.
Based on the above discussions, we propose a camera style (CamStyle) adaptation method to regularize CNN
training for person re-ID. In its vanilla version, we learn
image-image translation models for each camera pair with
CycleGAN [51]. With the learned CycleGAN model, for a
training image captured by a certain camera, we can gener-

5157

