Fully Convolutional Adaptation Networks for Semantic Segmentation∗
Yiheng Zhang † , Zhaofan Qiu † , Ting Yao ‡ , Dong Liu † , and Tao Mei ‡
†
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{yihengzhang.chn, zhaofanqiu}@gmail.com, {tiyao, tmei}@microsoft.com, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The recent advances in deep neural networks have convincingly demonstrated high capability in learning vision
models on large datasets. Nevertheless, collecting expert
labeled datasets especially with pixel-level annotations is
an extremely expensive process. An appealing alternative
is to render synthetic data (e.g., computer games) and generate ground truth automatically. However, simply applying the models learnt on synthetic images may lead to high
generalization error on real images due to domain shift. In
this paper, we facilitate this issue from the perspectives of
both visual appearance-level and representation-level domain adaptation. The former adapts source-domain images
to appear as if drawn from the “style” in the target domain
and the latter attempts to learn domain-invariant representations. Specifically, we present Fully Convolutional Adaptation Networks (FCAN), a novel deep architecture for semantic segmentation which combines Appearance Adaptation Networks (AAN) and Representation Adaptation Networks (RAN). AAN learns a transformation from one domain to the other in the pixel space and RAN is optimized
in an adversarial learning manner to maximally fool the
domain discriminator with the learnt source and target representations. Extensive experiments are conducted on the
transfer from GTA5 (game videos) to Cityscapes (urban
street scenes) on semantic segmentation and our proposal
achieves superior results when comparing to state-of-theart unsupervised adaptation techniques. More remarkably,
we obtain a new record: mIoU of 47.5% on BDDS (drivecam videos) in an unsupervised setting.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have successfully proven highly
effective for learning vision models on large-scale datasets. To date in the literature, there are various datasets (e.g.,
ImageNet [26] and COCO [14]) that include well-annotated
∗ This work was performed at Microsoft Research Asia.

Frames from
Video Games

FCN

(a) FCN Result

Frame from
Street-View Videos
Adaptation

(b) FCAN Result

Figure 1. Semantic segmentation on one example frame in streetview videos by (a) directly applying FCN trained on images from
video games and (b) domain adaptation of FCAN in this work.

images available for developing deep models to a variety of
vision tasks, e.g., recognition [8, 27, 29], detection [6, 24],
captioning [34] and semantic segmentation [1, 16]. Nevertheless, given a new dataset, the typical solution is still
to perform intensive manual labeling despite expensive efforts and time-consuming process. An alternative is to utilize synthetic data which is largely available from computer
games [25] and the ground truth could be freely generated
automatically. However, many previous experiences have
also shown that reapplying a model learnt on synthetic data
may hurt the performance in real data due to a phenomenon
known as “domain shift” [35]. Take the segmentation results of one frame from real street-view videos in Figure
1 (a) as an example, the model trained on synthetic data
from video games fails to properly segment the scene into semantic categories such as road, person and car. As a
result, unsupervised domain adaptation would be desirable
on addressing this challenge, which aims to utilize labeled
examples from the source domain and a large number of unlabeled examples in the target domain to reduce a prediction
error on the target data.
A general practice in unsupervised domain adaptation
is to build invariance across domains by minimizing the
measure of domain shift such as correlation distances [28]
or maximum mean discrepancy [32]. We novelly consider the problem from the viewpoint of both appearancelevel and representation-level invariance. The objective of

6810

