Trust your Model: Light Field Depth Estimation with inline Occlusion Handling
Hendrik Schilling, Maximilian Diebold, Carsten Rother, Bernd Jähne
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing (HCI)
hendrik.schilling@posteo.de

Abstract
We address the problem of depth estimation from lightfield images. Our main contribution is a new way to handle
occlusions which improves general accuracy and quality
of object borders. In contrast to all prior work we work
with a model which directly incorporates both depth and
occlusion, using a local optimization scheme based on the
PatchMatch algorithm. The key benefit of this joint approach
is that we utilize all available data, and not erroneously
discard valuable information in pre-processing steps. We
see the benefit of our approach not only at improved object
boundaries, but also at smooth surface reconstruction, where
we outperform even methods which focus on good surface
regularization. We have evaluated our method on a public
light-field dataset, where we achieve state-of-the-art results
in nine out of twelve error metrics, with a close tie for the
remaining three.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation from multiple images is a central task
in computer vision, with a long-standing history. Depending
on the application area, different types of depth sensors are
utilized, ranging from stereo cameras, over depth cameras, to
light field cameras. If depth accuracy is the most important
factor, compared to e.g. financial budget or portability, then
light field cameras are the best choice. This is true for various
application scenarios, such as special effects for movies.
Light-field imaging allows for highly accurate depth estimation, by sampling a scene from many viewpoints. The
oversampling increases depth accuracy and the large number
of viewpoints reduce the chance of encountering a sample
which is occluded in all other views. As for related tasks,
such as stereo and optical flow, proper occlusion handling
is essential for obtaining high-quality depth reconstructions.
An inaccurate occlusion model will immediately reduce the
reconstruction quality, since foreground and background
samples are confused within the data-term around object
boundaries. This is a well-known problem and virtually all
state-of-the-art methods for light-field depth estimation im-

(a) Center view

(b) Ground truth disparity

(c) OURS

(d) SPO-MO, Sheng et al. [8]

Figure 1: Improved reconstruction through our inline occlusion handling approach, in comparison with Sheng et al.
[8, SPO-MO]. Note the considerably improved reconstruction of the partially occluded content within the box and on
the right side of the box. The improvement can also be measured quantitatively by the percentage of bad pixels (error
> 0.07 px), here 10.8 for ours and 15.5 for Sheng et al.

plement some form of occlusion handling. However, they
differ in the way how they perform this. Proper occlusion
handling is the main topic of this work.
One may think of three different paradigms to handle
occlusion, each with a different level of complexity. At
one end of the spectrum there would be approaches which
formulate an elaborate model for jointly estimating depth
and occlusions, ideally for all views jointly. This explicit
joint optimization has been formulated by Kolmogorov and
Zabih [5], however their approach is prohibitively slow with
existing solvers, even when restricting the problem to stereo
14530

