Categorizing Concepts with Basic Level for Vision-to-Language
Hanzhang Wang
Hanli Wang ∗
Kaisheng Xu
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, P. R. China
Key Laboratory of Embedded System and Service Computing, Ministry of Education,
Tongji University, Shanghai, P. R. China

Abstract
Vision-to-language tasks require a unified semantic understanding of visual content. However, the information
contained in image/video is essentially ambiguous on two perspectives manifested on the diverse understanding
among different persons and the various understanding
grains even for the same person. Inspired by the basic level
in early cognition, a Basic Concept (BaC) category is proposed in this work that contains both consensus and proper level of visual content to help neural network tackle the
above problems. Specifically, a salient concept category is
firstly generated by intersecting the labels of ImageNet and
the vocabulary of MSCOCO dataset. Then, according to
the observation from human early cognition that children
make fewer mistakes on the basic level, the salient category is further refined by clustering concepts with a defined
confusion degree which measures the difficulty for convolutional neural network to distinguish class pairs. Finally,
a pre-trained model based on GoogLeNet is produced with
the proposed BaC category of 1,372 concept classes. To
verify the effectiveness of the proposed categorizing method
for vision-to-language tasks, two kinds of experiments are
performed including image captioning and visual question
answering with the benchmark datasets of MSCOCO, Flickr30k and COCO-QA. The experimental results demonstrate
that the representations derived from the cognition-inspired
BaC category promote representation learning of neural
networks on vision-to-language tasks, and a performance
improvement is gained without modifying standard models.

∗ Corresponding author (H. Wang, E-mail: hanliwang@tongji.edu.cn).
This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grants 61622115 and 61472281, Program for Professor of
Special Appointment (Eastern Scholar) at Shanghai Institutions of Higher
Learning (No. GZ2015005), Shanghai Engineering Research Center of
Industrial Vision Perception & Intelligent Computing (17DZ2251600), and
IBM Shared University Research Awards Program.

1. Introduction
For human being, basic level [39] is an abstraction that
plays a primary role in the form of early cognition. It contains several objects that are firstly perceived [39] and faster
being named by children, then other subordinate concepts are learned afterwards [45]. In the taxonomic hierarchy,
basic level is located on the middle which represents midlevel generality (e.g., bird, chair), oppose to more general
concepts (e.g., vertebrate, furniture) and more specific concepts (e.g., sparrow, recliner). It also has been found that
children make fewer mistakes at basic level on matching
and sorting tasks [41, 4] as well as simple decision making
on adults. The annotation of ESP dataset [48] is accomplished through an online game which demands two players independently propose labels to one image for matching as many words as possible in a certain time limit. It
is demonstrated that humans tend to label visual objects at
an easily accessible semantic level termed as the basic level [3]. Similar observations can also be obtained on other human annotated datasets such as the image captioning
dataset MSCOCO [24] which limits each description in 16
words. This limitation on time and length will impel people
to use simple but cognitive useful words for expression.
Vision-to-Language (V2L) includes high-level semantic
tasks which demand automatically transferring visual information into human language. Recently, a number of approaches [7, 14, 47] treat V2L as translation tasks using
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) as encoder while
employing Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) [9] as decoder to directly translate an image to a sentence. In the
predominant neural network based approaches, it seems that
each partial network has an explicit objective function to
learn, however the real evaluation of the generated results
is highly subjective which makes V2L challenging both on
realization and evaluation.
The main problems which V2L faces to are two folds.
First, the understanding of one image varies for different
people. The diversity of thinking habit, attention and even
expression leads to different explanations of visual content.
In the MSCOCO dataset, each image is associated with 5
14962

