ICE-BA: Incremental, Consistent and Efficient Bundle Adjustment for
Visual-Inertial SLAM
Haomin Liu1
1

Mingyu Chen1
Guofeng Zhang2
Hujun Bao2
Yingze Bao1
2
Baidu
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

{liuhaomin,chenmingyu01,baoyingze}@baidu.com

{zhangguofeng,bao}@cad.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Modern visual-inertial SLAM (VI-SLAM) achieves
higher accuracy and robustness than pure visual SLAM,
thanks to the complementariness of visual features and inertial measurements. However, jointly using visual and inertial measurements to optimize SLAM objective functions
is a problem of high computational complexity. In many VISLAM applications, the conventional optimization solvers
can only use a very limited number of recent measurements for real time pose estimation, at the cost of suboptimal localization accuracy. In this work, we renovate the
numerical solver for VI-SLAM. Compared to conventional
solvers, our proposal provides an exact solution with significantly higher computational efficiency. Our solver allows us to use remarkably larger number of measurements
to achieve higher accuracy and robustness. Furthermore,
our method resolves the global consistency problem that
is unaddressed by many state-of-the-art SLAM systems: to
guarantee the minimization of re-projection function and inertial constraint function during loop closure. Experiments
demonstrate our novel formulation renders lower localization error and more than 10x speedup compared to alternatives. We release the source code of our implementation to
benefit the community 1 .

1. Introduction
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) is a
classic but ongoing research problem in many applications.
In recent years, due to the mass availability of imaging and
inertial sensors, visual-inertial SLAM (VI-SLAM) is increasingly adopted in products such as mobile augmented
reality, drones, autonomous driving, robotics etc. Similar to
pure visual SLAM, VI-SLAM extracts and establishes feature correspondences across image frames. But it further
utilizes inertial measurement (e.g. acceleration and angular
1 https://github.com/baidu/ICE-BA

Figure 1: Our SLAM trajectory overlaid with an apartment floor
map. The temporal sliding window (green solid line) for our real
time pose solver is significantly longer than other methods. Our
novel algorithm allows us to use remarkably higher number of
measurements without surrendering efficiency. The black dashed
line is the full trajectory that is globally optimized and consistent
with local optimization.

velocity readings) as constraints in motion estimation. Inertial measurements are very effective for motion estimation
especially when the motion is rapid and irregular, which is
notoriously challenging for visual feature matching. Given
sufficient computation capacity, state-of-the-arts VI-SLAM
[22, 26] have shown excellent results in terms of 6 degree of
freedom (DOF) accuracy by using a large number of measurements.
Since most applications of SLAM are mobile and time
critical, the computational complexity of VI-SLAM also deserves great attention. Only a minority of VI-SLAM systems [24, 28, 11] can be deployed onto embedded devices.
Improving the efficiency of VI-SLAM computation is inevitably the key to popularizing its applications. There are
two major computational tasks in VI-SLAM: front-end task
and solver task. Front-end task includes visual feature extraction and matching. Front-end tasks are generally parallelizable, and thus can be accomplished efficiently using
modern heterogeneous computing architecture. The goal of

1974

