Multi-shot Pedestrian Re-identification via Sequential Decision Making
Jianfu Zhang1 , Naiyan Wang2 and Liqing Zhang1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University∗ , 2 TuSimple

c.sis@sjtu.edu.cn,winsty@gmail.com,zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-shot pedestrian re-identification problem is at the
core of surveillance video analysis. It matches two tracks of
pedestrians from different cameras. In contrary to existing
works that aggregate single frames features by time series
model such as recurrent neural network, in this paper, we
propose an interpretable reinforcement learning based approach to this problem. Particularly, we train an agent to
verify a pair of images at each time. The agent could choose
to output the result (same or different) or request another
pair of images to verify (unsure). By this way, our model
implicitly learns the difficulty of image pairs, and postpone
the decision when the model does not accumulate enough
evidence. Moreover, by adjusting the reward for unsure
action, we can easily trade off between speed and accuracy.
In three open benchmarks, our method are competitive with
the state-of-the-art methods while only using 3% to 6% images. These promising results demonstrate that our method
is favorable in both efficiency and performance.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian Re-identification (re-id) aims at matching pedestrians in different tracks from multiple cameras. It helps
to recover the trajectory of a certain person in a broad area
across different non-overlapping cameras. Thus, it is a fundamental task in a wide range of applications such as video surveillance for security and sports video analysis. The
most popular setting for this task is single shot re-id, which
judges whether two persons at different video frames are
the same one. This setting has been extensively studied in
recent years[7, 1, 16, 28, 17]. On the other hand, multi-shot
re-id (or a more strict setting, video based re-id) is a more
realistic setting in practice, however it is still at its early age
∗ Representing Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for
Intelligent Interaction and Cognitive Engineering, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

Figure 1: Examples to demonstrate the motivation of our
work. For most tracks, several even only one pair of images
are enough to make confident prediction. However, in other
hard cases, it is necessary to use more pairs to alleviate the
influence of these samples of bad quality.
compared with single shot re-id task.
Currently, the main stream of solving multi-shot re-id
task is first to extract features from single frames, and then
aggregate these image level features. Consequently, the key
lies in how to leverage the rich yet possibly redundant and
noisy information resided in multiple frames to build track
level features from image level features. A common choice
is pooling[37] or bag of words[38]. Furthermore, if the input tracks are videos (namely, the temporal order of frames
is preserved), optical flow[5] or recurrent neural network
(RNN)[24, 39] are commonly adopted to utilize the motion
cues. However, most of these methods have two main problems: the first one is that it is computationally inefficient
to use all the frames in each track due to the redundancy.
The second one is there could be noisy frames caused by
occlusion, blur or incorrect detections. These noisy frames
may significantly deteriorate the performance.
To solve the aforementioned problems, we formulate
multi-shot re-id problem as a sequential decision making
task. Intuitively, if the agent is confident enough about existing evidences, it could output the result immediately. Otherwise, it needs to ask for another pair to verify. To model
such human like decision process, we feed a pair of ima16781

