Reconstruction Network for Video Captioning
Bairui Wang‡
Lin Ma†∗
Wei Zhang‡∗
Wei Liu†
†
‡
Tencent AI Lab
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University
{bairuiwong,forest.linma}@gmail.com

davidzhang@sdu.edu.cn

wliu@ee.columbia.edu

Abstract
In this paper, the problem of describing visual contents
of a video sequence with natural language is addressed.
Unlike previous video captioning work mainly exploiting
the cues of video contents to make a language description, we propose a reconstruction network (RecNet) with
a novel encoder-decoder-reconstructor architecture, which
leverages both the forward (video to sentence) and backward (sentence to video) flows for video captioning. Specifically, the encoder-decoder makes use of the forward flow
to produce the sentence description based on the encoded
video semantic features. Two types of reconstructors are
customized to employ the backward flow and reproduce the
video features based on the hidden state sequence generated by the decoder. The generation loss yielded by the
encoder-decoder and the reconstruction loss introduced by
the reconstructor are jointly drawn into training the proposed RecNet in an end-to-end fashion. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed
reconstructor can boost the encoder-decoder models and
leads to significant gains in video caption accuracy.

1. Introduction
Describing visual contents with natural language automatically has received increasing attention in both the computer vision and natural language processing communities.
It can be applied in various practical applications, such as
image and video retrieval [33, 44, 22], answering questions
from images [21], and assisting people who suffer from vision disorders [43].
Previous work predominantly focused on describing still
images with natural language [15, 41, 42, 28, 13, 5]. Recently, researchers have strived to generate sentences to describe video contents [48, 8, 39, 40, 25]. Compared to image captioning, describing videos is more challenging as the
amount of information (e.g., objects, scenes, actions, etc.)
contained in videos is much more sophisticated than that
∗ Corresponding authors

Figure 1. The proposed RecNet with an encoder-decoderreconstructor architecture. The encoder-decoder relies on the forward flow from video to caption (blue dotted arrow), in which the
decoder generates caption with the frame features yielded by the
encoder. The reconstructor exploiting the backward flow from
caption to video (green dotted arrow), takes the hidden state sequence of the decoder as input and reproduces the visual features
of the video.

in still images. More importantly, the temporal dynamics
within video sequences need to be adequately captured for
captioning, besides the spatial content modeling.
Recently, the encoder-decoder architecture, has been
widely adopted for video captioning [8, 27, 14, 49, 9, 34, 24,
25, 19], as shown in Fig. 1. However, the encoder-decoder
architecture only relies on the forward flow (video to sentence), but does not consider the information from sentence
to video, named as backward flow. Usually the encoder is
a convolutional neural network (CNN) capturing the image
structure to yield its semantic representation. For a given
video sequence, the yielded semantic representations by the
CNN are further fused together to exploit the video temporal dynamics and generate the video representation. The

7622

