VITON: An Image-based Virtual Try-on Network
Xintong Han, Zuxuan Wu, Zhe Wu, Ruichi Yu, Larry S. Davis
University of Maryland, College Park
{xintong,zxwu,zhewu,richyu,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
We present an image-based VIirtual Try-On Network
(VITON) without using 3D information in any form, which
seamlessly transfers a desired clothing item onto the corresponding region of a person using a coarse-to-fine strategy. Conditioned upon a new clothing-agnostic yet descriptive person representation, our framework first generates a
coarse synthesized image with the target clothing item overlaid on that same person in the same pose. We further
enhance the initial blurry clothing area with a refinement
network. The network is trained to learn how much detail
to utilize from the target clothing item, and where to apply
to the person in order to synthesize a photo-realistic image
in which the target item deforms naturally with clear visual patterns. Experiments on our newly collected Zalando
dataset demonstrate its promise in the image-based virtual
try-on task over state-of-the-art generative models.1

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the increasing demands of
online shopping for fashion items. Online apparel and accessories sales in US are expected to reach 123 billion in
2022 from 72 billion in 2016 [1]. Despite the convenience
online fashion shopping provides, consumers are concerned
about how a particular fashion item in a product image
would look on them when buying apparel online. Thus, allowing consumers to virtually try on clothes will not only
enhance their shopping experience, transforming the way
people shop for clothes, but also save cost for retailers. Motivated by this, various virtual fitting rooms/mirrors have
been developed by different companies such as TriMirror,
Fits Me, etc. However, the key enabling factor behind them
is the use of 3D measurements of body shape, either captured directly by depth cameras [40] or inferred from a 2D
image using training data [4, 45]. While these 3D modeling techniques enable realistic clothing simulations on the
1 Dataset and code are available at https://github.com/
xthan/VITON

Figure 1: Virtual try-on results generated by our
method. Each row shows a person virtually trying on different clothing items. Our model naturally renders the items
onto a person while retaining her pose and preserving detailed characteristics of the target clothing items.
person, the high costs of installing hardwares and collecting
3D annotated data inhibit their large-scale deployment.
We present an image-based virtual try-on approach, relying merely on plain RGB images without leveraging any
3D information. Our goal is to synthesize a photo-realistic
new image by overlaying a product image seamlessly onto
the corresponding region of a clothed person (as shown in
Figure 1). The synthetic image is expected to be perceptually convincing, meeting the following desiderata: (1) body
parts and pose of the person are the same as in the original
image; (2) the clothing item in the product image deforms
naturally, conditioned on the pose and body shape of the
person; (3) detailed visual patterns of the desired product
are clearly visible, which include not only low-level features
like color and texture but also complicated graphics like embroidery, logo, etc. The non-rigid nature of clothes, which
are frequently subject to deformations and occlusions, poses
a significant challenge to satisfying these requirements simultaneously, especially without 3D information.

7543

