Geometry-Aware Scene Text Detection with Instance Transformation Network
Fangfang Wang1∗ Liming Zhao1∗ Xi Li1† Xinchao Wang2 Dacheng Tao3
1
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
3
SIT, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia

Abstract
Localizing text in the wild is challenging in the situations
of complicated geometric layout of the targets like random
orientation and large aspect ratio. In this paper, we propose
a geometry-aware modeling approach tailored for scene
text representation with an end-to-end learning scheme. In
our approach, a novel Instance Transformation Network
(ITN) is presented to learn the geometry-aware representation encoding the unique geometric configurations of scene
text instances with in-network transformation embedding,
resulting in a robust and elegant framework to detect words
or text lines at one pass. An end-to-end multi-task learning
strategy with transformation regression, text/non-text classification and coordinates regression is adopted in the ITN.
Experiments on the benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in detecting scene text
in various geometric configurations.

1. Introduction
As an important and challenging problem in computer
vision, scene text detection aims at accurately localizing
text regions within an image of natural scene, and has a wide
range of applications such as image retrieval, scene parsing,
and blind-navigation. Despite the advanced techniques in
documental and digital text detection, scene text detection
is still challenging since text in the wild often appears to be
in the forms of complicated geometric layout like random
orientation and large aspect ratio.
In recent literature, various convolutional neural network
(CNN) based methods [20, 9, 30, 32, 26, 22] have been
proposed to detect scene text. Most of these works are
built on successful generic object detection frameworks,
such as proposal based two-stage frameworks like FasterRCNN [24] and end-to-end one stage detectors like SSD [19], taking words or text lines as a special case of object.
∗ Authors contributed equally, {fangfangliana,zhaoliming}@zju.edu.cn
† Corresponding author, xilizju@zju.edu.cn

Figure 1. Demonstration of regular representation and geometryaware representation. For clear illustration of physical location,
we use input images to represent feature maps. The first row shows
the fixed receptive fields on feature maps of regular representations
(yellow and red dotted grids). The second row shows the adaptive
receptive fields of geometry-aware representations.

Different from generic objects, scene text usually possesses
some particular geometric configurations such as large aspect ratio, random orientation, ranging scale, etc. To this
point, proposal based detection frameworks use extensive
proposals with limited geometric configurations to recall
text, which face an enormous search space and lack generalization ability. One-stage end-to-end detectors usually
generate feature maps through a fully convolutional neural network and produce representations through standard
convolution with a fixed receptive field on the feature maps
for all text instances. Such modeling is usually not suitable for scene text since it is incapable of well encoding
their drastically varying geometric distributions. Therefore,
how to effectively perform adaptive geometry-aware modeling for scene text representation with an end-to-end learning
scheme is a key issue to solve.
Motivated by the above observations, we propose an
adaptive geometry-aware representation learning scheme
customized for scene text and incorporate it into a novel end-to-end network, Instance Transformation Network
(ITN), to effectively detect multi-scale, multi-oriented and
multi-lingual scene text. As illustrated in Figure 1, a regular representation is generated by standard 7 × 7 convolution operation with fixed receptive field, while a geometry11381

