Attention Clusters: Purely Attention Based
Local Feature Integration for Video Classification

1

Xiang Long1 , Chuang Gan2∗, Gerard de Melo3 , Jiajun Wu4 , Xiao Liu5 , Shilei Wen5
Tsinghua University , 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab , 3 Rutgers University , 4 MIT, 5 Baidu IDL
{longx13, ganc13}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gdm@demelo.org
jiajunwu@mit.edu, {liuxiao12, wenshilei}@baidu.com

Abstract
Recently, substantial research effort has focused on how
to apply CNNs or RNNs to better capture temporal patterns
in videos, so as to improve the accuracy of video classification. In this paper, however, we show that temporal information, especially longer-term patterns, may not be necessary to achieve competitive results on common trimmed
video classification datasets. We investigate the potential of
a purely attention based local feature integration. Accounting for the characteristics of such features in video classification, we propose a local feature integration framework
based on attention clusters, and introduce a shifting operation to capture more diverse signals. We carefully analyze
and compare the effect of different attention mechanisms,
cluster sizes, and the use of the shifting operation, and also
investigate the combination of attention clusters for multimodal integration. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework on three real-world video classification datasets.
Our model achieves competitive results across all of these.
In particular, on the large-scale Kinetics dataset, our framework obtains an excellent single model accuracy of 79.4%
in terms of the top-1 and 94.0% in terms of the top-5 accuracy on the validation set.

1. Introduction
Video classification remains one of the prime challenges
in computer vision as well as machine learning. It has received a substantial amount of attention in recent years,
owing not least to its numerous potential use cases, such
as video tagging, surveillance, autonomous driving, and
stock footage search. Thanks to recent large datasets, e.g.
YouTube-8M [1] and Kinetics [4], the recognition accuracy
in video classification has advanced considerably, although
the current state-of-the-art remains subpar in comparison
with human performance.
∗ Corresponding author.

High
High Degree
Degree of
of Similarity
Similarity

local Identifiability

Approximate Unorderedness

Multi-component

Figure 1. Example of RGB frames sampled from videos. The
bottom ones are shown in a randomly permuted temporal order.
We observe several important characteristics of local features of a
video: high degree of similarity, local identifiability, approximate
unorderedness, and multi-component inputs.

Most of the existing effective video classification methods are based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
CNNs have shown their powerful representation learning
abilities in various image classification tasks. Convolutional
and pooling layers together essentially act as potent feature
extractors, which are able to mine local features from different regions of an image. Unsurprisingly, CNNs can also be
used as a feature extractor for local feature extraction from
videos, extracting a sequence of features for relevant video
frames in accordance with their temporal order.
Many existing methods use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) or recurrent neural networks (RNNs) based
on such local feature sequences to capture the temporal interactions within a video. The latter are particularly often
considered for their ability to capture longer-term temporal
patterns by retaining pertinent state information across time.
In this paper, however, we cast some doubt on whether temporal patterns, especially long-term ones, are truly indispensable for common trimmed video classification tasks.

7834

