Parallel Attention: A Unified Framework for Visual Object Discovery
through Dialogs and Queries
Bohan Zhuang∗, Qi Wu∗, Chunhua Shen†, Ian Reid, Anton van den Hengel
University of Adelaide, Australia; Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{bohan.zhuang,qi.wu01,chunhua.shen,ian.reid,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
CNN

Recognising objects according to a pre-defined fixed set
of class labels has been well studied in the Computer Vision.
There are a great many practical applications where the
subjects that may be of interest are not known beforehand,
or so easily delineated, however. In many of these cases natural language dialog is a natural way to specify the subject
of interest, and the task achieving this capability (a.k.a, Referring Expression Comprehension) has recently attracted
attention. To this end we propose a unified framework, the
ParalleL AttentioN (PLAN) network, to discover the object
in an image that is being referred to in variable length natural expression descriptions, from short phrases query to
long multi-round dialogs. The PLAN network has two attention mechanisms that relate parts of the expressions to both
the global visual content and also directly to object candidates. Furthermore, the attention mechanisms are recurrent, making the referring process visualizable and explainable. The attended information from these dual sources are
combined to reason about the referred object. These two attention mechanisms can be trained in parallel and we find
the combined system outperforms the state-of-art on several
benchmarked datasets with different length language input,
such as RefCOCO, RefCOCO+ and GuessWhat?!.

object
Is it a person?
Yes, Is the
person a boy?
Yes…

LSTM
(a) One-step Reasoning

Is is a person? Yes

LSTM

Is the person a boy? Yes

LSTM

⨂

object

…

…

…

(b) Region-wise & Step-wise reasoning

Figure 1: One-step reasoning vs. our proposed regionwise&step-wise reasoning framework for the task of referring expression. In conventional frameworks (a), visual and
language features are embedded into a joint space for onestep reasoning. However, in our approach (b), we propose
to recurrently discover the target with a parallel attention
mechanism, with region and step-wised query.

1. Introduction
Despite the fact that Object Detection has become a figurehead challenge in Computer Vision, the number of applications of the technology is limited by the fact that it
demands a pre-defined set of class labels and large number of pre-prepared training images for each. This means
not only that the list of objects of interest is fixed, and determined long in advance, but also that their appearance
must remain fixed. The limitations of this approach are
visible in the rise of mediation strategies such as Domain
Adaptation [9, 22], Transfer Learning [28, 32], Zero-Shot
∗ First two authors contributed equally to this work.
† C. Shen is the corresponding author.

learning [31, 46], and a subset of the Meta-Learning approaches [34]. More fundamentally, the traditional Machine
Learning approach whereby the problem and training data
are specified before the solution is devised, and then trained,
inherently implies that every instance of the target class is
of interest, in every image it processes.
A more flexible, and practically applicable approach is
to define the subject of interest at test time, not least because it allows instance-level detection. It also supports the
specification of subjects of interest that were not possible
at training time. Better even than a system that allows testtime specification of the subject of interest, however, is one
that will interactively cooperate towards an accurate detec-

4252

