Learning Semantic Concepts and Order for Image and Sentence Matching
Yan Huang1,3
Qi Wu4
Chunfeng Song1,3
Liang Wang1,2,3
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide
{yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Image and sentence matching has made great progress
recently, but it remains challenging due to the large visualsemantic discrepancy. This mainly arises from that the representation of pixel-level image usually lacks of high-level
semantic information as in its matched sentence. In this
work, we propose a semantic-enhanced image and sentence
matching model, which can improve the image representation by learning semantic concepts and then organizing
them in a correct semantic order. Given an image, we first
use a multi-regional multi-label CNN to predict its semantic
concepts, including objects, properties, actions, etc. Then,
considering that different orders of semantic concepts lead
to diverse semantic meanings, we use a context-gated sentence generation scheme for semantic order learning. It simultaneously uses the image global context containing concept relations as reference and the groundtruth semantic order in the matched sentence as supervision. After obtaining
the improved image representation, we learn the sentence
representation with a conventional LSTM, and then jointly
perform image and sentence matching and sentence generation for model learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our learned semantic concepts and order, by achieving the state-of-the-art results on two public
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
The task of image and sentence matching refers to measuring the visual-semantic similarity between an image and
a sentence. It has been widely applied to the application
of image-sentence cross-modal retrieval, e.g., given an image query to find similar sentences, namely image annotation, and given a sentence query to retrieve matched images,

 Semantic concepts:

chasing

cheetah
quick
running
gazelle
young
running
grass
green

Objects:

Properties:

Actions:

cheetah
gazelle
grass

quick
young
green

chasing
running
running

 Semantic order:

cheetah chasing gazelle grass

…

 Matched sentence:

A quick cheetah is chasing a young
gazelle on grass.

Figure 1. Illustration of the semantic concepts and order (best
viewed in colors).

namely text-based image search.
Although much progress in this area has been achieved,
it is still nontrivial to accurately measure the similarity between image and sentence, due to the existing huge visualsemantic discrepancy. Taking an image and its matched
sentence in Figure 1 for example, main objects, properties
and actions appearing in the image are: {cheetah, gazelle,
grass}, {quick, young, green} and {chasing, running}, respectively. These high-level semantic concepts are the essential content to be compared with the matched sentence,
but they cannot be easily represented from the pixel-level
image. Most existing methods [12, 16, 23] jointly represent all the concepts by extracting a global CNN [30] feature vector, in which the concepts are tangled with each other. As a result, some primary foreground concepts tend to
be dominant, while other secondary background ones will
probably be ignored, which is not optimal for fine-grained
image and sentence matching. To comprehensively predict all the semantic concepts for the image, a possible way
is to adaptively explore the attribute learning frameworks
[6, 21, 35, 37]. But such a method has not been well investigated in the context of image and sentence matching.
In addition to semantic concepts, how to correctly organize them, namely semantic order, plays an even more

6163

