Revisiting Deep Intrinsic Image Decompositions
Jiaolong Yang2 Gang Hua2 Baoquan Chen3,4 David Wipf2
1
Shandong University 2 Microsoft Research
3
Shenzhen Research Institute, Shandong University 4 Peking University

Qingnan Fan∗1

fqnchina@gmail.com, {jiaoyan,ganghua,davidwip}@microsoft.com, baoquan@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
While invaluable for many computer vision applications,
decomposing a natural image into intrinsic reflectance and
shading layers represents a challenging, underdetermined
inverse problem. As opposed to strict reliance on conventional optimization or filtering solutions with strong prior
assumptions, deep learning based approaches have also
been proposed to compute intrinsic image decompositions
when granted access to sufficient labeled training data.
The downside is that current data sources are quite limited, and broadly speaking fall into one of two categories:
either dense fully-labeled images in synthetic/narrow settings, or weakly-labeled data from relatively diverse natural scenes. In contrast to many previous learning-based approaches, which are often tailored to the structure of a particular dataset (and may not work well on others), we adopt
core network structures that universally reflect loose prior
knowledge regarding the intrinsic image formation process
and can be largely shared across datasets. We then apply
flexibly supervised loss layers that are customized for each
source of ground truth labels. The resulting deep architecture achieves state-of-the-art results on all of the major
intrinsic image benchmarks, and runs considerably faster
than most at test time.

1. Introduction
The decomposing of natural images into multiple intrinsic layers can serve a variety of high-level vision tasks such
as 3D object compositing, surface re-texturing, and relighting [3]. In this regard, the core intrinsic image model we
consider here is predicated on an ideal diffuse environment,
in which an input image I is the pixel-wise product of an
albedo or reflectance image R and a shading image S, i.e.,
I ≈ R ⊙ S.

(1)

The albedo layer indicates how object surface materials reflect light, while shading accounts for illumination effects
∗ This work was done when Qingnan Fan was an intern at MSR.

due to geometry, shadows, and interreflections. While obviously useful, estimating such a decomposition is a fundamentally ill-posed problem as there exist infinitely many
feasible solutions to (1). Fortunately though, prior information, often instantiated via specially tailored image smoothing filters or energy terms, allows us to constrain the space
of feasible solutions [1, 2, 3, 7, 17, 20]. For example,
the albedo image will usually be approximately piecewise
constant, with a finite number of levels reflecting a discrete set of materials and boundaries common to natural
scenes. In contrast, the shading image is often assumed to
be greyscale, and is more likely to contain smooth gradations quantified by small directional derivatives except at
locations with cast shadows or abrupt changes in scene geometry [13].
On the other hand, given access to ground truth intrinsic
image decompositions, deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN), at least in principle, provide a data-driven candidate
for solving this ill-posed inverse problem with fewer potentially heuristic or hand-crafted assumptions. However,
ground truth data that sufficiently covers the rich variety
inherent to natural scenes, and includes dense intrinsic labels across entire images, is extremely difficult to acquire.
Consequently, existing databases are each limited in various different ways, and thus far, state-of-the-art deep network models built using them likewise display a high degree
of dataset-dependent architectural variance, i.e., to achieve
the best results, significantly different network architectures
have been applied that compensate for each nuanced data
source.
For instance, the MIT intrinsic dataset [11] is limited to
images of single, specialized objects, which lacks diversity
and scene-level realism for training a network that generalizes to broader scenarios. On the other hand, the MPISintel benchmark is rendered on an open source animation
movie [4]. Their rendered images often lack realism, and
traditional deep networks trained on these data may perform poorly on more natural examples [19]. Finally then,
to overcome the above downsides, the Intrinsic Images in
the Wild (IIW) dataset was created from real-world photos
18944

