MapNet: An Allocentric Spatial Memory for Mapping Environments
João F. Henriques
Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{joao,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Figure 1: Results on real data (AVD [1], left) and game footage (ResearchDoom [14], right). Best seen in color. Our
method predicts a joint heatmap of the camera position and orientation in absolute coordinates (shown separately). This is
done online while creating a deep embedding of the surrounding environment, which was not seen during training.

Abstract
Autonomous agents need to reason about the world beyond their instantaneous sensory input. Integrating information over time, however, requires switching from an egocentric representation of a scene to an allocentric one, expressed in the world reference frame. It must also be possible to update the representation dynamically, which requires localizing and registering the sensor with respect to
the world reference. In this paper, we develop a differentiable module that satisfies such requirements, while being
robust, efficient, and suitable for integration in end-to-end
deep networks. The module contains an allocentric spatial
memory that can be accessed associatively by feeding to it
the current sensory input, resulting in localization, and then
updated using an LSTM or similar mechanism. We formulate efficient localization and registration of sensory information as a dual pair of convolution/deconvolution operators in memory space. The map itself is a 2.5D representation of an environment storing information that a deep neural network module learns to distill from RGBD input. The
result is a map that contains multi-task information, different from classical approaches to mapping such as structurefrom-motion. We present results using synthetic mazes, a
dataset of hours of recorded gameplay of the classic game
Doom, and the very recent Active Vision Dataset of real images captured from a robot.

1. Introduction
Machine learning nowadays plays a crucial role in most
computer vision tasks. Compared to hand-crafted solutions,
a key advantage of approaches such as deep learning is
their ability to acquire automatically very efficient and robust representations of the data. Successes in image-centric
tasks such as classification, segmentation, and object detection provide the clearest demonstration of the benefits of
this approach [19, 6, 20]. Beyond static data, recurrent architectures such as LSTMs can be used to great effect in the
analysis of temporal data streams as well [22].
Despite these successes, however, several aspects of image understanding remain difficult to approach directly using deep distributed representations. One of them is reasoning about 3D space and geometry, particularly in relation to
large environments. Traditional SLAM techniques offer a
reliable approach to the analysis of such data [15]. For example, these methods can build incrementally large maps of
the world simply by observing video streams. Nevertheless,
the representations built into these systems are still based
on primitives such as 3D point clouds and image patches.
While this may work well, it does not provide a natural fit
for learnable representations such as deep neural networks.
Given the success of the latter in so many areas of image
analysis, it is then natural to ask whether deep, distributed,
and effective representations of geometry are possible.
Such a representation may offer significant advantages
compared to traditional approaches. For example, humans

8476

