Guide Me: Interacting with Deep Networks
Christian Rupprecht1,2,* , Iro Laina1,* , Nassir Navab1 , Gregory D. Hager2,1 , Federico Tombari1
*

1

equal contribution
Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
2
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA

Abstract
Interaction and collaboration between humans and intelligent machines has become increasingly important as machine learning methods move into real-world applications
that involve end users. While much prior work lies at the
intersection of natural language and vision, such as image
captioning or image generation from text descriptions, less
focus has been placed on the use of language to guide or improve the performance of a learned visual processing algorithm. In this paper, we explore methods to flexibly guide a
trained convolutional neural network through user input to
improve its performance during inference. We do so by inserting a layer that acts as a spatio-semantic guide into the
network. This guide is trained to modify the network’s activations, either directly via an energy minimization scheme
or indirectly through a recurrent model that translates human language queries to interaction weights. Learning the
verbal interaction is fully automatic and does not require
manual text annotations. We evaluate the method on two
datasets, showing that guiding a pre-trained network can
improve performance, and provide extensive insights into
the interaction between the guide and the CNN.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) continue to grow
in their breadth of application and in their performance on
challenging computer vision tasks, such as image classification, semantic segmentation, object detection, depth prediction and human pose estimation. To date, the majority of
the techniques proposed for these applications train specific
network architectures once and subsequently deploy them
as static components inside an algorithm. However, it is
unlikely that any static network will be perfect at the task
it was designed for. If the deployed CNN were adaptable
to feedback or specifications provided by a human user online, this interaction would hold the potential to improve the
model’s performance and benefit real-world applications.

For example, in photo editing, when a CNN is used to
segment the foreground of an image from the background,
the user might notice that the network has made a mistake. Instead of manually repairing the segmentation output
or developing a post-processing algorithm based on some
heuristics, a simpler and more effective way would be for
the user to interact directly with the network through a directed hint, e.g. pointing out that “the child on the bottom left of the image is in the foreground, not in the background”. The user that was previously presented with a
fixed, black-box prediction is now able to influence and alter
the outcome according to his needs. This property is particularly useful in high risk domains such as medical image
analysis and computer-assisted diagnosis, where fully automated segmentation is not always robust in clinical applications and the experience of trained practitioners matters.
Another relevant example is speeding up labor-intensive
and repetitive labeling tasks, such as those needed to create datasets for semantic segmentation, especially those for
which annotations are scarce and expensive to obtain.
We propose a novel idea to allow user-network feedbackbased interaction that aims at improving the performance of
a pre-trained CNN at test time. The core idea is the definition of a spatio-semantic guiding mechanism that translates
user feedback into changes in the internal activations of the
network, thus acting as a means of re-thinking the inference
process. The user input is modeled via a language-based approach, that enables interaction with a trained model in the
form of a dialog. The user receives a first estimate, inputs a
text query and the network replies with an updated prediction. Most previous interactive approaches place the user on
the input/data side which means user input is required for
the method to operate. In contrast, in our method, the user’s
input is optional and modifies the network, this means that
the network does not depend on human interaction but can
be adjusted by it.
We showcase this interactive module on the task of semantic image segmentation. One advantage of our method
is that it does not depend on any explicit annotation for text18551

