Now You Shake Me: Towards Automatic 4D Cinema
Yuhao Zhou1 Makarand Tapaswi1,2 Sanja Fidler1,2
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute
{henryzhou, makarand, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

http://www.cs.toronto.edu/˜henryzhou/movie4d/

Abstract
We are interested in enabling automatic 4D cinema
by parsing physical and special effects from untrimmed
movies. These include effects such as physical interactions,
water splashing, light, and shaking, and are grounded to either a character in the scene or the camera. We collect a
new dataset referred to as the Movie4D dataset which annotates over 9K effects in 63 movies. We propose a Conditional Random Field model atop a neural network that
brings together visual and audio information, as well as semantics in the form of person tracks. Our model further
exploits correlations of effects between different characters
in the clip as well as across movie threads. We propose effect detection and classification as two tasks, and present
results along with ablation studies on our dataset, paving
the way towards 4D cinema in everyone’s homes.

1. Introduction
Fast progress in deep learning together with large
amounts of labeled data has enabled significant progress in
tasks such as image tagging [16], object detection [14], action recognition [10], and image captioning [43]. Neural
networks have also proven themselves as surprisingly good
artists by repainting images in different styles [12], writing poems [18], and synthesizing music [5, 42]. With the
emerging market of virtual reality, simulated roller-coasters,
and infotainment, machines might also help us reach a new
level of the entertainment experience.
In 4D cinema, the audience is taken to a wild ride
through the movie: their seats shake when a high speed car
chase unrolls on the screen, water splashes on their faces
when a boat cuts through the Perfect Storm, and smoke
veils around them when Clint Eastwood lights up yet another cigarette. While entertaining for the audience, such
effects are not so fun to annotate for the movie creators.
They are time consuming and require careful annotation of
what physical phenomena is occurring at every time instant
in the film [23]. The strength of the effect, and possibly di-

POV: Jake, Moat, Cam
Effect: Wind
Type: Hot
Direction: Front

POV: Jake, Moat, Cam
Effect: Shake
Direction: All Around

POV: Jake, Moat, Cam
Effect: Light
Type: Yellow/White
Direc: Front

POV: Jake, Moat
Effect: PhyInt
Type: Touch

Figure 1: Movie4D: We aim to predict effects as experienced by
characters and camera, their duration, and all details such as intensity, type, and direction, automatically in movies.

rection is also important to faithfully recreate the fast-paced
dynamic world for the audience.
In this work, we take a step towards promoting creation
of 4D cinema by automatically parsing detailed physical effects in movies. In particular, given a streaming video, we
aim to detect both which effect is being applied to each of
the characters in the scene (or camera), as well as to predict
accompanying details such as the intensity of each effect,
its duration and possibly direction. While inferring effects
from videos has clear significance for the entertainment industry, we believe it also has value for building intelligent
robots in the future. When faced with the real world, robots
will need to foresee physical forces based on current visual
or audio information in order to cope with them.
Due to unavailability of an existing dataset of this form,
we first collect the Movie4D dataset containing rich annotations of physical effects in feature films (Fig. 1). Our dataset
contains 9286 effect annotations with time stamps and accompanying details. The effects are also grounded to either
the camera’s point of view, or to a particular character in
the clip. These effects take place in various scenes, ranging
from heroic battlefronts to everyday lives.
We propose a model to parse effects from untrimmed
videos and ground them to characters’ tracks. We formalize the task as performing inference in a Conditional Ran-

7425

