SurfConv: Bridging 3D and 2D Convolution for RGBD Images
Hang Chu1,2 Wei-Chiu Ma3 Kaustav Kundu1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2,3 Sanja Fidler1,2
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Uber ATG
{chuhang1122, kkundu, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

{weichiu, urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
The last few years have seen approaches trying to combine the increasing popularity of depth sensors and the success of the convolutional neural networks. Using depth as
additional channel alongside the RGB input has the scale
variance problem present in image convolution based approaches. On the other hand, 3D convolution wastes a large
amount of memory on mostly unoccupied 3D space, which
consists of only the surface visible to the sensor. Instead,
we propose SurfConv, which “slides” compact 2D filters
along the visible 3D surface. SurfConv is formulated as
a simple depth-aware multi-scale 2D convolution, through
a new Data-Driven Depth Discretization (D4 ) scheme. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on indoor and
outdoor 3D semantic segmentation datasets. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance while using less than
30% parameters used by the 3D convolution based approaches.

Image Convolution

3D Convolution

1. Introduction
While 3D sensors have been popular in the robotics
community, they have gained prominence in the computer
vision community in the recent years. This has been
the effect of extensive interest in applications such as autonomous driving [11], augmented reality [32] and urban
planning [47]. These 3D sensors come in various forms
such as active LIDAR sensors, structured light sensors,
stereo cameras, time-of-flight cameras, etc. These range
sensors produce a 2D depth image, where the value at every
pixel location corresponds to the distance traveled by a ray
from the sensor through the pixel location, before it hits a
visible surface in the 3D scene.
Recent success of convolutional neural networks for
RGB input images [24] have raised interests in using them
for depth data. One of the common approaches is to use
handcrafted representations of the depth data and treat them
as additional channels alongside the RGB input [13, 9].
Code&data: https://github.com/chuhang/SurfConv

Surface Convolution
Figure 1. A 3D sensor captures a surface at a single time frame. 2D image convolution does not utilize 3D information and suffers from scale
variance. 3D convolution solves scale variance, but suffers from nonvolumetric surface input where majority of voxels are empty. We propose
surface convolution, that convolutes 2D filters along the 3D surface.

While this line of work has shown that additional depth input can improve performance on several tasks, it is not able
to solve the scale variance problem of 2D convolutions. In
the top of Fig. 1, we can see that for two cars at different
distances, the receptive fields of a point have the same size.
This means that models are required to learn to recognize
13002

