Person Transfer GAN to Bridge Domain Gap for Person Re-Identification
Longhui Wei1 , Shiliang Zhang1 , Wen Gao1 , Qi Tian2
1

2

School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78249-1604, USA
{longhuiwei,slzhang.jdl,wgao}@pku.edu.cn, qi.tian@utsa.edu

Abstract
Although the performance of person Re-Identification
(ReID) has been significantly boosted, many challenging issues in real scenarios have not been fully investigated, e.g.,
the complex scenes and lighting variations, viewpoint and
pose changes, and the large number of identities in a camera network. To facilitate the research towards conquering those issues, this paper contributes a new dataset called
MSMT171 with many important features, e.g., 1) the raw
videos are taken by an 15-camera network deployed in both
indoor and outdoor scenes, 2) the videos cover a long period of time and present complex lighting variations, and 3)
it contains currently the largest number of annotated identities, i.e., 4,101 identities and 126,441 bounding boxes.
We also observe that, domain gap commonly exists between
datasets, which essentially causes severe performance drop
when training and testing on different datasets. This results in that available training data cannot be effectively
leveraged for new testing domains. To relieve the expensive
costs of annotating new training samples, we propose a Person Transfer Generative Adversarial Network (PTGAN) to
bridge the domain gap. Comprehensive experiments show
that the domain gap could be substantially narrowed-down
by the PTGAN.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (ReID) targets to match and return images of a probe person from a large-scale gallery
set collected by camera networks. Because of its important
applications in security and surveillance, person ReID has
been drawing lots of attention from both academia and industry. Thanks to the development of deep learning and the
availability of many datasets, person ReID performance has
been significantly boosted.
Although the performance on current person ReID
datasets is pleasing, there still remain several open issues
1 The dataset is available at http://www.pkuvmc.com.

Figure 1: Illustration of the domain gap between CUHK03
and PRID. It is obvious that, CUHK03 and PRID present
different styles, e.g., distinct lightings, resolutions, human
race, seasons, backgrounds, etc., resulting in low accuracy
when training on CUHK03 and testing on PRID.

hindering the applications of person ReID. First, existing
public datasets differ from the data collected in real scenarios. For example, current datasets either contain limited
number of identities or are taken under constrained environments. The currently largest DukeMTMC-reID [41] contains less than 2,000 identities and presents simple lighting
conditions. Those limitations simplify the person ReID task
and help to achieve high accuracy. In real scenarios, person ReID is commonly executed within a camera network
deployed in both indoor and outdoor scenes and processes
videos taken by a long period of time. Accordingly, real
applications have to cope with challenges like a large number of identities and complex lighting and scene variations,
which current algorithms might fail to address.
Another challenge we observe is that, there exists domain gap between different person ReID datasets, i.e., training and testing on different person ReID datasets results in
severe performance drop. For example, the model trained
on CUHK03 [20] only achieves the Rank-1 accuracy of
2.0% when tested on PRID [10]. As shown in Fig. 1, the
domain gap could be caused by many reasons like different
lighting conditions, resolutions, human race, seasons, backgrounds, etc. This challenge also hinders the applications

79

