Neural Baby Talk
Jiasen Lu1∗ Jianwei Yang1∗ Dhruv Batra1,2 Devi Parikh1,2
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Facebook AI Research
{jiasenlu, jw2yang, dbatra, parikh}@gatech.edu

Abstract

dog

This is a photograph
CRF

cake. The dog is …

Obj Attr Prep

cake

of one dog and one

dog
frame
cabinet

(b)

Detector

tie
chair

…

Image captioning is a challenging problem that lies at the
intersection of computer vision and natural language processing. It involves generating a natural language sentence
that accurately summarizes the contents of an image. Image captioning is also an important first step towards realworld applications with significant practical impact, ranging from aiding visually impaired users to personal assistants to human-robot interaction [5, 9].
State-of-art image captioning models today tend to be
monolithic neural models, essentially of the “encoderdecoder” paradigm. Images are encoded into a vector with
a convolutional neural network (CNN), and captions are decoded from this vector using a Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN), with the entire system trained end-to-end. While

…

1. Introduction

…

We introduce a novel framework for image captioning
that can produce natural language explicitly grounded in
entities that object detectors find in the image. Our approach reconciles classical slot filling approaches (that are
generally better grounded in images) with modern neural captioning approaches (that are generally more natural sounding and accurate). Our approach first generates
a sentence ‘template’ with slot locations explicitly tied to
specific image regions. These slots are then filled in by
visual concepts identified in the regions by object detectors. The entire architecture (sentence template generation
and slot filling with object detectors) is end-to-end differentiable. We verify the effectiveness of our proposed model
on different image captioning tasks. On standard image
captioning and novel object captioning, our model reaches
state-of-the-art on both COCO and Flickr30k datasets.
We also demonstrate that our model has unique advantages when the train and test distributions of scene compositions – and hence language priors of associated captions – are different. Code has been made available at:
https://github.com/jiasenlu/NeuralBabyTalk.

DPM

…

(a)

table

CNN

cake

(c)

RNN

Region feature

CNN

A ( ) with a ( ) is
sitting at ( ) with
a ( ).
puppy
cake

RNN

tie
table

A dog is sitting on a
couch with a toy.

Conv feature

Figure 1. Example captions generated by (a) Baby Talk [24], (c)
neural image captioning [20] and (b) our Neural Baby Talk approach. Our method generates the sentence “template” with slot
locations (illustrated with filled boxes) explicitly tied to image regions (drawn in the image in corresponding colors). These slots
are then filled by object detectors with concepts found in regions.

there are many recent extensions of this basic idea to include attention [45, 12, 49, 47, 27], it is well-understood
that models still lack visual grounding (i.e., do not associate
named concepts to pixels in the image). They often tend to
‘look’ at different regions than humans would and tend to
copy captions from training data [8].
For instance, in Fig. 1 a neural image captioning approach [20] describes the image as “A dog is sitting on a
couch with a toy.” This is not quite accurate. But if one
were to really squint at the image, it (arguably) does perhaps look like a scene where a dog could be sitting on a
couch with a toy. It certainly is common to find dogs sitting
on couches with toys. A-priori, the description is reasonable. That’s exactly what today’s neural captioning models
tend to do – produce generic plausible captions based on the
language model1 that match a first-glance gist of the scene.
While this may suffice for common scenes, images that differ from canonical scenes – given the diversity in our visual
world, there are plenty of such images – tend to be underserved by these models.
If we take a step back – do we really need the language
model to do the heavy lifting in image captioning? Given

∗ Equal contribution

1 frequently, directly reproduced from a caption in the training data.

17219

