Recognize Actions by Disentangling Components of Dynamics
Yue Zhao1 , Yuanjun Xiong1,2 , and Dahua Lin1
1

CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Amazon Rekognition
{zy317,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk {yuanjx}@amazon.com

Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress in action recognition
over the past several years, existing methods remain limited
in efficiency and effectiveness. The methods treating appearance and motion as separate streams are usually subject to the cost of optical flow computation, while those relying on 3D convolution on the original video frames often yield inferior performance in practice. In this paper,
we propose a new ConvNet architecture for video representation learning, which can derive disentangled components of dynamics purely from raw video frames, without the
need of optical flow estimation. Particularly, the learned
representation comprises three components for representing static appearance, apparent motion, and appearance
changes. We introduce 3D pooling, cost volume processing,
and warped feature differences, respectively for extracting
the three components above. These modules are incorporated as three branches in our unified network, which share
the underlying features and are learned jointly in an end-toend manner. On two large datasets, UCF101 [22] and Kinetics [16], our method obtained competitive performances
with high efficiency, using only the RGB frame sequence as
input.

Video Frames

Common low-level feature

Static Appearance

Apparent Motion Appearance change

Action: Archery

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of disentangling components of dynamics.
From the low-level visual feature maps, we derive three components, i.e., static appearance (left), apparent motion (center), and
appearance changes (right) and combine the high-level feature representation extracted thereon for action recognition.

In recent years, action recognition in videos has received
increasing attention from the vision community [25, 21, 23,
3], due to its great potential value in real-world applications.
A distinctive aspect of the video-based action recognition
task is that the dynamics, i.e. the temporal change in the
visual content, plays a crucial role. Whether the dynamics
can be effectively represented and utilized, to a large extent, determines the performance of an action recognition
method. A key goal of this work is to explore an efficient
and effective way to capture the dynamics in videos.
Since the introduction of deep networks to this area,

two different categories of methods have emerged for video
modeling. The first category of methods rely on a combination of multiple input modalities, e.g. appearance and
motion, to represent videos. The two-stream convnet [21],
a seminal work of this category, combines RGB images and
optical flows for video-based recognition. A key advantage
of this category lies in its strong performance. Many stateof-the-art frameworks [9, 29, 35, 38] can be considered as
variants of this paradigm. Yet, the methods in this category
are subject to a significant limitation, that is, the reliance on
optical flows to represent motion, which are often expen-

6566

