A Generative Adversarial Approach for Zero-Shot Learning from Noisy Texts
Yizhe Zhu1 ,

Mohamed Elhoseiny2 , Bingchen Liu1 , Xi Peng1 and Ahmed Elgammal1
yizhe.zhu@rutgers.edu, elhoseiny@fb.com,
{bingchen.liu, xipeng.cs}@rutgers.edu, elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu
1
Rutgers University, Department of Computer Science, 2 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Most existing zero-shot learning methods consider the
problem as a visual semantic embedding one. Given the
demonstrated capability of Generative Adversarial Networks(GANs) to generate images, we instead leverage
GANs to imagine unseen categories from text descriptions
and hence recognize novel classes with no examples being
seen. Specifically, we propose a simple yet effective generative model that takes as input noisy text descriptions about
an unseen class (e.g.Wikipedia articles) and generates synthesized visual features for this class. With added pseudo
data, zero-shot learning is naturally converted to a traditional classification problem. Additionally, to preserve the
inter-class discrimination of the generated features, a visual pivot regularization is proposed as an explicit supervision. Unlike previous methods using complex engineered
regularizers, our approach can suppress the noise well without additional regularization. Empirically, we show that
our method consistently outperforms the state of the art on
the largest available benchmarks on Text-based Zero-shot
Learning.

1. Introduction
In the conventional object classification tasks, samples
of all classes are available for training a model. However,
objects in the real world have a long-tailed distribution. In
spite that images of common concepts can be readily found,
there remains a tremendous number of concepts with insufficient and sparse visual data, thus making the conventional
object classification methods infeasible. Targeting on tackling such an unseen object recognition problem, zero-shot
learning has been widely researched recently.
The underlying secret ensuring the success of zero-shot
learning is to find an intermediate semantic representation
(e.g. attributes or textual features) to transfer the knowledge
learned from seen classes to unseen ones [10]. The majority of state-of-the-art approaches [2, 3, 36, 51, 41, 11, 42]
consider zero-shot learning as a visual-semantic embedding

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed approach. We leverages GANs to visually imagine the objects given noisy
Wikipedia articles. With hallucinated features, a supervised
classifier is trained to predict image’s label.
problem. The paradigm can be generalized as training mapping functions that project visual features and/or semantic
features to a common embedding space. The class label
of an unseen instance is predicted by ranking the similarity scores between semantic features of all unseen classes
and the visual feature of the instance in embedding space.
Such a strategy conducts a one-to-one projection from semantic space to visual space. However, textual descriptions for categories and objects are inherently mapped to
a variety of points in the image space. For example, “a
blue bird with white head” can be the description of all
birds with a blue body and a white head. This motivates
us to study how adversarial training learns a one-to-many
mapping with adding stochasticity. In this paper, we propose a generative adversarial approach for zero-shot learning that outperforms the state of the art by 6.5% and 5.3%
on Caltech UCSD Birds-2011(CUB) [44] and North America Birds(NAB) [43] datasets respectively.
In this paper, we adopt a novel strategy that casts zeroshot learning as an imagination problem as shown in Fig. 1.
We focus on investigating how to hallucinate competent
data instances that provide the intra-class diversity while
keeping inter-class discrimination for unseen novel classes.
Once this pseudo data is generated, a supervised classifier
is directly trained to predict the labels of unseen images.
Recent years witness the success of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [14] to generate high compelling im11004

