Motion Segmentation by Exploiting Complementary Geometric Models
Xun Xu
National University of Singapore

Loong Fah Cheong
National University of Singapore

Zhuwen Li
Intel Labs

elexuxu@nus.edu.sg

eleclf@nus.edu.sg

li.zhuwen@intel.com

Abstract
Many real-world sequences cannot be conveniently categorized as general or degenerate; in such cases, imposing a false dichotomy in using the fundamental matrix or
homography model for motion segmentation would lead
to difficulty. Even when we are confronted with a general scene-motion, the fundamental matrix approach as a
model for motion segmentation still suffers from several defects, which we discuss in this paper. The full potential of
the fundamental matrix approach could only be realized if
we judiciously harness information from the simpler homography model. From these considerations, we propose
a multi-view spectral clustering framework that synergistically combines multiple models together. We show that
the performance can be substantially improved in this way.
We perform extensive testing on existing motion segmentation datasets, achieving state-of-the-art performance on all
of them; we also put forth a more realistic and challenging dataset adapted from the KITTI benchmark, containing
real-world effects such as strong perspectives and strong
forward translations not seen in the traditional datasets.

1. Introduction
Various geometric models have been used in the motion
segmentation problem to model the different types of cameras, scenes, and motions. In this problem as commonly set
forth, the underlying models are generally regarded as applicable under different scenarios and these scenarios do not
overlap. For instance, when the underlying motion is a general motion, fundamental matrix is used to model the epipolar geometry [16, 23], and when scene-motion is degenerate
like a planar scene or a pure rotation, homography is preferred [6, 18]. However, the real world scene-motions are
in fact not so conveniently divided: they are more typified
by near-degenerate scenarios such as a scene that is almost
but not quite planar, or a motion that is rotation-dominant
but with a non-vanishing translation. In such cases, imposing a false dichotomy in deciding an appropriate model
would pose difficulty for subsequent subspace separation.

For instance, it is well-known [11, 27, 30] in the case of
a scene with dominant-plane, it is easy to find inliers belonging to the degenerate configuration (the plane), but the
precision of the resulting fundamental matrix is likely to be
very low. Most of the inliers outside the degenerate configuration will be lost, and often the erroneous fundamental
matrix will pick up outliers (e.g. from other motion groups).
Since this is not a purely planar scene, using homography
in a naive manner might fail to group all the inliers together
too, resulting in over-segmentation of the subspaces.
It is also not hard to establish—from a glance of the motion segmentation literature—that of the various models, the
fundamental matrix model is generally eschewed, due to the
lack of perspective effects in the Hopkins155 benchmark
[31]. However, it is never clearly articulated if the numerical difficulties arising from degeneracies in such approach
present insuperable obstacles. And no one has put his/her
finger on the exact manner how the resulting affinity matrix
is ill-suited for subspace clustering: is it solely due to the
degeneracies or are there other factors? Considering that
in many real-world applications say, autonomous driving,
perspective effects are not uncommon, it surely follows that
we should come to a better understanding of the suitability of fundamental matrix (or for that matter, the homography model) as a geometric model for motion segmentation. This, we contend, is far from being the case. For instance, does it follow that if we use the fundamental matrix
for wide field-of-view scenes, like those found in the KITTI
benchmark [9], we will get better performance than those
using homography? We have in fact as yet no reason to
believe that this will be the case, judging by the way how
the various algorithms based on affine model still outperform those based on fundamental matrix in individual Hopkins sequences that have larger perspectives (though admittedly still moderate). Indeed, from the results we obtained
on the KITTI sequences that we adapted for testing motion
segmentation in real-world scenarios, the superiority of the
homography-based methods is again observed. Thus, one
might naturally ask what factors other than degeneracies are
hurting the fundamental matrix approach? And why is the
homography matrix approach holding its own in wide per12859

