Densely Connected Pyramid Dehazing Network
He Zhang
Vishal M. Patel
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854
{he.zhang92,vishal.m.patel}@rutgers.edu

Abstract
We propose a new end-to-end single image dehazing
method, called Densely Connected Pyramid Dehazing Network (DCPDN), which can jointly learn the transmission
map, atmospheric light and dehazing all together. The endto-end learning is achieved by directly embedding the atmospheric scattering model into the network, thereby ensuring
that the proposed method strictly follows the physics-driven
scattering model for dehazing. Inspired by the dense network that can maximize the information flow along features
from different levels, we propose a new edge-preserving
densely connected encoder-decoder structure with multilevel pyramid pooling module for estimating the transmission map. This network is optimized using a newly introduced edge-preserving loss function. To further incorporate the mutual structural information between the estimated transmission map and the dehazed result, we propose a joint-discriminator based on generative adversarial network framework to decide whether the corresponding dehazed image and the estimated transmission map are
real or fake. An ablation study is conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of each module evaluated at both
estimated transmission map and dehazed result. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves significant improvements over the state-of-theart methods. Code and dataset is made available at:
https://github.com/hezhangsprinter/DCPDN

1. Introduction
Under severe hazy conditions, floating particles in the atmosphere such as dusk and smoke greatly absorb and scatter the light, resulting in degradations in the image quality.
These degradations in turn may affect the performance of
many computer vision systems such as classification and
detection. To overcome the degradations caused by haze,
image and video-based haze removal algorithms have been
proposed in the literature [33, 5, 42, 3, 13, 21, 27, 51, 24,
58, 8, 10, 9, 34].

Figure 1: Sample image dehazing result using the proposed
DCPDN method. Left: Input hazy image. Right: Dehazed result.

The image degradation (atmospheric scattering model)
due to the presence of haze is mathematically formulated as
I(z) = J(z)t(z) + A(z)(1 − t(z)),
(1)
where I is the observed hazy image, J is the true scene
radiance, A is the global atmospheric light, indicating the
intensity of the ambient light, t is the transmission map
and z is the pixel location. Transmission map is the
distance-dependent factor that affects the fraction of light
that reaches the camera sensor. When the atmospheric light
A is homogeneous, the transmission map can be expressed
as t(z) = e−βd(z) , where β represents attenuation coefficient of the atmosphere and d is the scene depth. In single
image dehazing, given I, the goal is to estimate J.
It can be observed from Eq. 1 that there exists two important aspects in the dehazing process: (1) accurate estimation of transmission map, and (2) accurate estimation of
atmospheric light. Apart from several works that focus on
estimating the atmospheric light [4, 40], most of the other
algorithms concentrate more on the accurate estimation of
the transmission map and they leverage empirical rule in
estimating the atmospheric light [13, 29, 33, 41]. This is
mainly due to the common belief that good estimation of
transmission map will lead to better dehazing. These methods can be broadly divided into two main groups: priorbased methods and learning-based methods. Prior-based
methods often leverage different priors in characterizing
the transmission map such as dark-channel prior [13], contrast color-lines [10] and haze-line prior [3], while learningbased methods, such as those based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), attempt to learn the transmission map di13194

