Learning Latent Super-Events to Detect Multiple Activities in Videos
AJ Piergiovanni and Michael S. Ryoo
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47408
{ajpiergi,mryoo}@indiana.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the concept of learning latent super-events from activity videos, and present how it
benefits activity detection in continuous videos. We define
a super-event as a set of multiple events occurring together
in videos with a particular temporal organization; it is the
opposite concept of sub-events. Real-world videos contain
multiple activities and are rarely segmented (e.g., surveillance videos), and learning latent super-events allows the
model to capture how the events are temporally related in
videos. We design temporal structure filters that enable the
model to focus on particular sub-intervals of the videos, and
use them together with a soft attention mechanism to learn
representations of latent super-events. Super-event representations are combined with per-frame or per-segment
CNNs to provide frame-level annotations. Our approach
is designed to be fully differentiable, enabling end-to-end
learning of latent super-event representations jointly with
the activity detector using them. Our experiments with multiple public video datasets confirm that the proposed concept of latent super-event learning significantly benefits activity detection, advancing the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Activity detection is an important computer vision
problem with many societal applications, including smart
surveillance, monitoring of patients or elderly (e.g., for
quality-of-life systems), online video retrieval, and robot
perception. Given a continuous video, the task is to find the
frames corresponding to every event occurring in the video.
This is more challenging compared to the activity classification problem of categorizing a pre-segmented video or
localizing a single activity in a trimmed video. Although
activity detection is an important area to study as almost all
real-world videos contain multiple activities and are rarely
segmented (e.g., surveillance systems), it has been investigated much less, particularly for multi-event videos.
In the past years, end-to-end learning methods using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) obtained a great amount

Dribble
...

Shot
...

Drink from cup
...

...

Block
...

Eat Sandwich

...

Hold Sandwich
...

...

Figure 1. Top: In a basketball video, the block event cannot occur
without a shot event. Similarly, the dribble event provides temporal context as to where a shot event can occur. Bottom: In a video
of a person eating, ‘eating a sandwich’ must occur near ‘holding
sandwich’. The drinking action is also related to eating.

of success in video analysis. These approaches successfully
modeled per-frame (or per-local-segment) information in
activity videos, such as a single RGB frame or optical flows
over a small number of frames [7]. Recently, models such as
I3D [3] have been developed to capture longer-term dynamics (e.g., 64 frames). However, because such end-to-end
models are optimized for capturing per-segment information, the primary focus of existing works has been mainly
on activity classification and not detection. There are recent
works on activity detection using end-to-end models (e.g.,
the detection task in [25]), but many of these works also focus on making better per-segment decisions (and their postprocessing) rather than learning details of temporal structure/context over the entire (variable length) video.
A video contains multiple activities (in a sequence or in
parallel) and they are correlated. This means that detecting
the frames of one activity in the video should benefit from
information in the frames corresponding to another activity, which are often temporally very separated. Existing approaches of representing/classifying video segments without regard to contextual information is thus limited; continuous videos contain rich temporal structure which can be
exploited to improve activity detection. For example, in a

5304

