CNN Driven Sparse Multi-Level B-spline Image Registration
Pingge Jiang
James A. Shackleford
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Drexel University
{pingge,shack}@drexel.edu

Abstract
Traditional single-grid and pyramidal B-spline parameterizations used in deformable image registration require
users to specify control point spacing configurations capable of accurately capturing both global and complex local
deformations. In many cases, such grid configurations are
non-obvious and largely selected based on user experience.
Recent regularization methods imposing sparsity upon the
B-spline coefficients throughout simultaneous multi-grid
optimization, however, have provided a promising means
of determining suitable configurations automatically. Unfortunately, imposing sparsity on over-parameterized Bspline models is computationally expensive and introduces
additional difficulties such as undesirable local minima in
the B-spline coefficient optimization process. To overcome
these difficulties in determining B-spline grid configurations, this paper investigates the use of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn and infer expressive sparse
multi-grid configurations prior to B-spline coefficient optimization. Experimental results show that multi-grid configurations produced in this fashion using our CNN based
approach provide registration quality comparable to L1 norm constrained over-parameterizations in terms of exactness, while exhibiting significantly reduced computational
requirements.

1. Introduction
Deformable image registration is a task that attempts to
precisely reproduce the spatial transform which maps two
images collected at different points in time or across different modalities into a common coordinate system. The
computation of such spatial transforms is inherently illposed; however, the value of recovering such transforms to
the medical community alone, as they relate to quantifying anatomical motion, has motivated extensive formalization of the problem over the past two decades. This pursuit
has led to the investigation of deformation models such as
thin-plate splines [2], B-splines [18], optical flow [26], and

contour driven methods [11]. The ill-posed nature of the
problem has driven the development of representative objective functions for parameter optimization [24, 6, 29, 28],
and the complexity of the problem has led to improvements
in accuracy and computational efficiency [20, 14, 21] in the
interest of improving viability for routine clinical use.
Due to their robustness and suitability for performing
multi-modal registration, B-spline based models have been
widely investigated [17, 16, 9, 28, 25, 20, 5]. In all cases,
the selection of a B-spline control grid configuration capable of expressing the desired underlying transformation
is an integral aspect of these methods, which ultimately
relies upon the degree and nature of the underlying image deformation attempting to be recovered. Consequently,
a control grid configuration capable of parameterizing the
transform is generally selected manually by the operator after inspection of the two images undergoing registration.
Fine grids with closely separated control points are ideal
for enabling the expression of complex local deformations
whereas coarse grids with further separation are more suitable for recovering larger, gradual deformations. The use
of a single fine grid providing an adequately high degree
of freedom to express the underlying transform would be
ideal, however the deviation of current similarity metrics
from the true, and unknown, underlying objective function
coupled with the over parameterization provided by such a
grid of fine spatial resolution results in a highly non-convex
B-spline coefficient optimization process that is susceptible to being caught in false local minima, resulting in poor
transform recovery.
Pyramidal B-spline registration [10, 19, 27, 30, 15] is a
commonly employed approach to addressing this issue. In
such a scheme, the process begins with performing parameter optimization using a coarse grid. Once the stopping
criteria is met the coarse grid is discarded, a finer grid is
employed, the parameters obtained from the coarser grid
optimization are fit to the new finer grid, and the optimization process continues. This process is continued over several levels of increasing grid resolution until the operator is
satisfied. The motivation driving the use of such pyramidal

9281

