Single-Shot Refinement Neural Network for Object Detection
Shifeng Zhang1,2 , Longyin Wen3 , Xiao Bian3 , Zhen Lei1,2 ,* Stan Z. Li4,1,2
1
CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
3
GE Global Research, Niskayuna, NY.
4
Faculty of Information Technology, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China.
{shifeng.zhang,zlei,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {longyin.wen,xiao.bian}@ge.com

Abstract
For object detection, the two-stage approach (e.g.,
Faster R-CNN) has been achieving the highest accuracy,
whereas the one-stage approach (e.g., SSD) has the advantage of high efficiency. To inherit the merits of both
while overcoming their disadvantages, in this paper, we propose a novel single-shot based detector, called RefineDet,
that achieves better accuracy than two-stage methods and
maintains comparable efficiency of one-stage methods. RefineDet consists of two inter-connected modules, namely,
the anchor refinement module and the object detection module. Specifically, the former aims to (1) filter out negative
anchors to reduce search space for the classifier, and (2)
coarsely adjust the locations and sizes of anchors to provide better initialization for the subsequent regressor. The
latter module takes the refined anchors as the input from
the former to further improve the regression accuracy and
predict multi-class label. Meanwhile, we design a transfer connection block to transfer the features in the anchor
refinement module to predict locations, sizes and class labels of objects in the object detection module. The multitask loss function enables us to train the whole network
in an end-to-end way. Extensive experiments on PASCAL
VOC 2007, PASCAL VOC 2012, and MS COCO demonstrate that RefineDet achieves state-of-the-art detection accuracy with high efficiency. Code is available at https:
//github.com/sfzhang15/RefineDet.

1. Introduction
Object detection has achieved significant advances in recent years, with the framework of deep neural networks
(DNN). The current DNN detectors of state-of-the-art can
be divided into two categories: (1) the two-stage approach,
including [3, 15, 36, 41], and (2) the one-stage approach,
* Corresponding author

including [29, 35]. In the two-stage approach, a sparse set
of candidate object boxes is first generated, and then they
are further classified and regressed. The two-stage methods have been achieving top performances on several challenging benchmarks, including PASCAL VOC [8] and MS
COCO [28].
The one-stage approach detects objects by regular and
dense sampling over locations, scales and aspect ratios. The
main advantage of this is its high computational efficiency.
However, its detection accuracy is usually behind that of
the two-stage approach, one of the main reasons being due
to the class imbalance problem [27].
Some recent methods in the one-stage approach aim to
address the class imbalance problem, to improve the detection accuracy. Kong et al. [23] use the objectness prior constraint on convolutional feature maps to significantly reduce
the search space of objects. Lin et al. [27] address the class
imbalance issue by reshaping the standard cross entropy
loss to focus training on a sparse set of hard examples and
down-weights the loss assigned to well-classified examples.
Zhang et al. [54] design a max-out labeling mechanism to
reduce false positives resulting from class imbalance.
In our opinion, the current state-of-the-art two-stage
methods, e.g., Faster R-CNN [36], R-FCN [5], and FPN
[26], have three advantages over the one-stage methods as
follows: (1) using two-stage structure with sampling heuristics to handle class imbalance; (2) using two-step cascade to
regress the object box parameters; (3) using two-stage features to describe the objects1 . In this work, we design a new
object detection framework, called RefineDet, to inherit the
merits of the two approaches (i.e., one-stage and two-stage
approaches) and overcome their shortcomings. It improves
the architecture of the one-stage approach, by using two
1 In case of Faster R-CNN, the features (excluding shared features) in
the first stage (i.e., RPN) are trained for binary classification (being an object or not), while the features (excluding shared features) in the second
stage(i.e., Fast R-CNN) are trained for multi-class classification (background or object classes).

4203

