Universal Denoising Networks : A Novel CNN Architecture for Image Denoising
Stamatios Lefkimmiatis
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Moscow, Russia
s.lefkimmiatis@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We design a novel network architecture for learning discriminative image models that are employed to efficiently
tackle the problem of grayscale and color image denoising. Based on the proposed architecture, we introduce two
different variants. The first network involves convolutional
layers as a core component, while the second one relies instead on non-local filtering layers and thus it is able to exploit the inherent non-local self-similarity property of natural images. As opposed to most of the existing deep network
approaches, which require the training of a specific model
for each considered noise level, the proposed models are
able to handle a wide range of noise levels using a single set
of learned parameters, while they are very robust when the
noise degrading the latent image does not match the statistics of the noise used during training. The latter argument
is supported by results that we report on publicly available
images corrupted by unknown noise and which we compare
against solutions obtained by competing methods. At the
same time the introduced networks achieve excellent results
under additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), which are
comparable to those of the current state-of-the-art network,
while they depend on a more shallow architecture with the
number of trained parameters being one order of magnitude
smaller. These properties make the proposed networks ideal
candidates to serve as sub-solvers on restoration methods
that deal with general inverse imaging problems such as
deblurring, demosaicking, superresolution, etc.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is among the basic low-level computervision problems and has received significant attention in
both academic research as well as in practical digital imaging applications [9, 32]. However, during the past decade
there was little progress in improving the state-of-the art
denoising performance and it has been suggested that denoising algorithms have reached optimality and cannot be
further improved [28]. Despite these beliefs, very recently
and thanks to the advent of deep learning techniques, several powerful image denoising algorithms that managed to

significantly improve the state-of-the-art performance have
been introduced [6, 23, 38, 40, 42, 43]. Nevertheless, their
wide applicability in real-world applications is currently
hindered mainly because the majority of them involves the
training of a specific model for each considered noise level.
Such requirement is rather impractical since it implies that
a huge number of network parameters, proportional to the
number of noise levels that the models are trained for, needs
to be stored. This directly excludes the application of such
methods on devices with limited memory storage. Another
important limitation of such deep-learning methods is that
their denoising performance deteriorates very fast when the
noise level distorting the input images deviates from the one
that the model was originally trained for.
In this work, motivated by the recent advances in deep
learning and relying on the rich body of algorithmic ideas
developed in the past for image restoration problems, we introduce a novel network architecture specifically tailored to
image denoising, which can overcome the aforementioned
limitations. Specifically, our derived networks allow the
training of image models that can handle a wide range of
noise levels and they come in two variants. The first network involves convolutional layers as a core component and
behaves similarly to local variational methods, while the
second one relies on non-local filtering layers that allow us
to exploit the inherent non-local self-similarity property of
natural images. Both networks lead to very competitive results, which are directly comparable to the state-of-the art,
while their advantage is that they involve considerably less
parameters than the current best-performing network. Furthermore, they are robust and perform very well for inputs
distorted by noise whose statistics differ from the ones of
the noise model used during training.

2. Image Restoration
To restore a latent grayscale or color image X from a
corrupted observation Y, we rely on the linear model
y = Hx + n.

(1)

In this setting, y, x ∈ RN ·C are the vectorized versions of
the observed and latent images, Y and X respectively, N is
13204

