Finding Tiny Faces in the Wild with Generative Adversarial Network
Yancheng Bai1,3
Yongqiang Zhang1,2
Mingli Ding2
Bernard Ghanem1
1
Visual Computing Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
2
School of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT)
3
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
baiyancheng20@gmail.com

{zhangyongqiang, dingml}@hit.edu.cn

bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Figure1. The detection results of tiny faces in the wild. (a) is the original low-resolution blurry face, (b) is the result of
re-sizing directly by a bi-linear kernel, (c) is the generated image by the super-resolution method, and our result (d) is learned
by the super-resolution (×4 upscaling) and refinement network simultaneously. Best viewed in color and zoomed in.

Abstract
Face detection techniques have been developed for
decades, and one of remaining open challenges is detecting small faces in unconstrained conditions. The reason is
that tiny faces are often lacking detailed information and
blurring. In this paper, we proposed an algorithm to directly generate a clear high-resolution face from a blurry small
one by adopting a generative adversarial network (GAN).
Toward this end, the basic GAN formulation achieves it by
super-resolving and refining sequentially (e.g. SR-GAN and
cycle-GAN). However, we design a novel network to address
the problem of super-resolving and refining jointly. We also
introduce new training losses to guide the generator network to recover fine details and to promote the discriminator network to distinguish real vs. fake and face vs. non-face

simultaneously. Extensive experiments on the challenging
dataset WIDER FACE demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method in restoring a clear high-resolution face
from a blurry small one, and show that the detection performance outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Face detection is a fundamental and important problem in computer vision, since it is usually a key step towards many subsequent face-related applications, including
face parsing, face verification, face tagging and retrieval,
etc. Face detection has been widely studied over the past
few decades and numerous accurate and efficient methods
have been proposed for most constrained scenarios. Recen-

21

