Learning Depth from Monocular Videos using Direct Methods
Chaoyang Wang1 José Miguel Buenaposada1,2 Rui Zhu1 Simon Lucey1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Universidad Rey Juan Carlos
chaoyanw@cs.cmu.edu

josemiguel.buenaposada@urjc.es

rz1,slucey@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The ability to predict depth from a single image - using recent advances in CNNs - is of increasing interest to
the vision community. Unsupervised strategies to learning
are particularly appealing as they can utilize much larger
and varied monocular video datasets during learning without the need for ground truth depth or stereo. In previous
works, separate pose and depth CNN predictors had to be
determined such that their joint outputs minimized the photometric error. Inspired by recent advances in direct visual odometry (DVO), we argue that the depth CNN predictor can be learned without a pose CNN predictor. Further, we demonstrate empirically that incorporation of a
differentiable implementation of DVO, along with a novel
depth normalization strategy - substantially improves performance over state of the art that use monocular videos
for training.

1. Introduction
Depth prediction from a single image using CNNs has
had a surge of interest in recent years [7, 21, 20]. Recently,
unsupervised methods that rely solely on monocular video
for training (without depth or stereo groundtruth) have captured the attention of the community. Of particular note in
this regard is the work of Zhou et al. [31] who proposed
a strategy that learned separate pose and depth CNN predictors by minimizing the photometric consistency across
monocular video datasets during training. Although achieving impressive results this strategy falls noticeably behind
those that have been trained using rectified stereo image
pairs [13, 19]. These rectified stereo methods have shown
comparable accuracy to supervised methods [26, 7, 23] over
datasets where only sparse depth annotation is available.
However, the assumption of using calibrated binocular image pairs excludes itself from utilizing monocular video
which is easier to obtain and richer in variability. This performance gap between stereo [13, 19] and monocular [31]
learning strategies is of central focus in this paper.
In this paper, we attempt to close this gap by drawing

Zhou etal.

Ours

Figure 1. Our depth prediction (3rd row) compared against Zhou
et al. [31] (2nd row) on KITTI dataset. Our method recovers more
fine details such as tree trunks and advertising board.

inspiration from recent advances in direct visual odometry. Specifically, we note that the major difference between
stereo and monocular strategies stems from: (i) unknown
camera pose between frames, and (ii) ambiguity in scale.
Existing methods [28, 31] for learning depth from monocular video address these differences only partially by adding
an extra CNN pose prediction module. In this paper we argue that these previous strategies do not adequately address
the scale ambiguity issue - causing divergence during training. Further, we advocate that the incorporation of an additional CNN pose prediction module is unnecessary. Instead
we argue that one could employ a differentiable and deterministic objective for pose prediction which is now commonly employed within the SLAM community for direct
visual odometry [10, 8, 6, 2].
Contributions: We make the following contributions.
First, we characterize theoretically and demonstrate empirically why scale ambiguity in current monocular methods is
problematic. Specifically, the problem lies in the scale sensitivity of the depth regularization terms employed during
training. Inspired by related work in direct visual odometry [10] we propose a simple normalization strategy that
circumvents many of these problems and leads to noticeably improved performance over Zhou et al. [31](see Fig. 1
for qualitative comparison).
Second, we suggest that learning an additional pose predicting CNN (which we shall refer to herein as the Pose12022

