Crowd Counting with Deep Negative Correlation Learning
Zenglin Shi1 , Le Zhang2∗, Yun Liu3 , Xiaofeng Cao4 ,
Yangdong Ye5 , Ming-Ming Cheng3 and Guoyan Zheng1
1
University of Bern, Switzerland; 2 ADSC,UIUC, Singapore; 3 Nankai University, China
4
University of Technology Sydney, Australia; 5 Zhengzhou University, China

Abstract
Deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) have achieved
unprecedented performances on many computer vision
tasks. However, their adaptations to crowd counting on
single images are still in their infancy and suffer from severe over-fitting. Here we propose a new learning strategy
to produce generalizable features by way of deep negative
correlation learning (NCL). More specifically, we deeply
learn a pool of decorrelated regressors with sound generalization capabilities through managing their intrinsic diversities. Our proposed method, named decorrelated ConvNet (D-ConvNet), is end-to-end-trainable and independent of the backbone fully-convolutional network architectures. Extensive experiments on very deep VGGNet as well
as our customized network structure indicate the superiority of D-ConvNet when compared with several state-ofthe-art methods. Our implementation will be released at
https://github.com/shizenglin/Deep-NCL

1. Introduction
Crowd counting is an active research topic in computer
vision due to its wide-ranging applications in video surveillance, metropolis security, human behavior analysis and resource management. Since the pioneering work for automated counting of object [1], several hand-crafted features [2, 3] and learning methods [4, 5] have consistently
improved the counting performance, leading the research
community to address more challenging scenarios and complex datasets [4, 5]. However, signiﬁcant hurdles due to
occlusions, scale variations and diverse crowd distributions
make it difﬁcult to solve this problem.
Detecting people individually [6] seems to be a straightforward solution but suffers from severe defects: detectors
are prone to fail when people are in close proximity and
there is no way to recover. Furthermore, high computational
∗ This work was done during Zenglin Shi’s internship at ADSC. Corresponding author: Le Zhang (zhang.le@adsc-create.edu.sg)

complexities in detection based approaches also limit their
applicability for real-time applications. Counting by regression, on the other hand, learns to predict pedestrians’ number through a regression function with some visual descriptors such as texture features, edge features [7] or learned
representations [5, 4]. Counting by regression is perceived
as state-of-the-art at present. The regression-based methods
have been widely studied and reported to be computationally feasible with modern hardware, robust with parameters
and accurate across various challenging scenarios.
Recently, the number of success stories of computer vision has seen an all-time rise across a wide range of topics such as image recognition [8], object detection [9], face
recognition [10], image segmentation [11] and visual tracking [12]. The common idea behind these solutions is to
use deep convolutional networks with many hidden layers,
aiming at learning discriminative feature embedding from
raw data, rather than relying on handcrafted feature extraction. Inspired by this, several ConvNets based crowd models have been proposed. [5, 13] make the ﬁst attempt, to
the best of our knowledge, to employ ConvNets for crowd
counting. While tremendous progress has been achieved
later by aggressively exploring deeper [14] or wider architectures [4] or heuristic engineering tricks [15, 13] with the
standard “convolution + pooling” recipe, in this paper, we
contribute from a different view. We are the ﬁrst to provide an alternative to the commonly used learning objective
with better generalization abilities by ensemble learning.
Our method is end-to-end-trainable and independent of the
backbone fully-convolutional network architectures. At the
core of our approach is the adoption of Negative Correlation Learning (NCL) that has been shown, both theoretically
and empirically, to work well for regressions based problems. NCL controls the bias-variance-covariance trade-off
systematically and usually results in a regression ensemble
where each base model is both “accurate and diversiﬁed”.
Simplicity and efﬁciency are central to our design, and trivially applying NCL to train multiple ConvNets is not the focus of this paper as it leads to signiﬁcantly higher computational complexity. Instead, we adopt a “divide and conquer”

5382

