ClusterNet: Detecting Small Objects in Large Scenes
by Exploiting Spatio-Temporal Information
Rodney LaLonde, Dong Zhang, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision (CRCV), University of Central Florida (UCF)
lalonde@knights.ucf.edu, dromstons@gmail.com, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Object detection in wide area motion imagery (WAMI)
has drawn the attention of the computer vision research
community for a number of years. WAMI proposes a number of unique challenges including extremely small object sizes, both sparse and densely-packed objects, and extremely large search spaces (large video frames). Nearly
all state-of-the-art methods in WAMI object detection report that appearance-based classifiers fail in this challenging data and instead rely almost entirely on motion information in the form of background subtraction or framedifferencing. In this work, we experimentally verify the
failure of appearance-based classifiers in WAMI, such as
Faster R-CNN and a heatmap-based fully convolutional
neural network (CNN), and propose a novel two-stage
spatio-temporal CNN which effectively and efficiently combines both appearance and motion information to significantly surpass the state-of-the-art in WAMI object detection. To reduce the large search space, the first stage (ClusterNet) takes in a set of extremely large video frames, combines the motion and appearance information within the
convolutional architecture, and proposes regions of objects
of interest (ROOBI). These ROOBI can contain from one to
clusters of several hundred objects due to the large video
frame size and varying object density in WAMI. The second
stage (FoveaNet) then estimates the centroid location of all
objects in that given ROOBI simultaneously via heatmap
estimation. The proposed method exceeds state-of-the-art
results on the WPAFB 2009 dataset by 5-16% for moving
objects and nearly 50% for stopped objects, as well as being the first proposed method in wide area motion imagery
to detect completely stationary objects.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a large and active area of research in
computer vision. In wide area motion imagery (WAMI),
performing object detection has drawn the attention of

Figure 1: Example WAMI video frame. The yellow-boxed
region is enlarged, then a blue-boxed region is further enlarged. Ground truth annotations are marked with red dots.

the computer vision community for a number of years
[14, 19, 23, 27, 30]. Numerous applications exist in both
the civilian and military domains. In urban planning, applications include automatic traffic monitoring, driver behavior analysis, and road verification for assisting both scene
understanding and land use classification. Civilian and military security is another area to benefit with applications including military reconnaissance, detection of abnormal or
dangerous behavior, border protection, and surveillance of
restricted areas. With increases in the use and affordability of drones and other unmanned aerial platforms, the desire for building a robust system to detect objects in widearea and low-resolution aerial videos has developed considerably in recent years.

1.1. Object Detection in WAMI
The goal of object detection in images or videos is
to place a bounding box (i.e. the tightest fitting rectangle
which contains all elements of an object while containing
as few extraneous elements as possible) around all objects
in the scene. Object detection in WAMI differs from the
typical object detection problem in three major ways: 1)
Ground-truth (i.e. human-generated) annotations are single
(x, y) coordinates placed at the objects’ centers, rather than
a bounding box. Therefore, scale and orientation invari14003

