Self-Supervised Feature Learning by Learning to Spot Artifacts
Simon Jenni
Paolo Favaro
University of Bern, Switzerland
{jenni,favaro}@inf.unibe.ch

Abstract
We introduce a novel self-supervised learning method
based on adversarial training. Our objective is to train a
discriminator network to distinguish real images from images with synthetic artifacts, and then to extract features
from its intermediate layers that can be transferred to other
data domains and tasks. To generate images with artifacts,
we pre-train a high-capacity autoencoder and then we use
a damage and repair strategy: First, we freeze the autoencoder and damage the output of the encoder by randomly
dropping its entries. Second, we augment the decoder with
a repair network, and train it in an adversarial manner
against the discriminator. The repair network helps generate more realistic images by inpainting the dropped feature entries. To make the discriminator focus on the artifacts, we also make it predict what entries in the feature
were dropped. We demonstrate experimentally that features
learned by creating and spotting artifacts achieve state of
the art performance in several benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Recent developments in deep learning have demonstrated impressive capabilities in learning useful features
from images [23], which could then be transferred to several other tasks [12, 13, 35, 38]. These systems rely on
large annotated datasets, which require expensive and timeconsuming human labor. To address these issues selfsupervised learning methods have been proposed [7, 28, 32,
42, 44]. These methods learn features from images without annotated data. Some introduce a pretext task through
the following strategy: one withholds some information
about the input data and then trains a network to recover
it. For example, some methods withhold image regions
[32], color [44] or both grayscale and color values [45];
others have widthheld the location of patches [7, 28], or additional external information such as egomotion [19]. In
self-supervised learning the main challenge is to define a
pretext task that relates the most to the final applications of
the learned features.

Figure 1. A mixture of real images (green border) and images with
synthetic artifacts (red border). Is a good object representation
necessary to tell them apart?

Towards this goal, we propose to learn features by classifying images as real or with artifacts (see Figure 1). We
aim at creating image artifacts, such that a model capable
of spotting them would require an accurate representation
of objects and thus build features that could transfer well to
tasks such as object classification, detection and segmentation. A first approach to create artifacts is to use inpainting
algorithms [2, 6]. Besides being computationally inefficient
on large inpainting regions, these methods are unsuitable for
training because they may introduce low-level statistics that
a neural network could easily learn to detect. This could
limit what the network learns about objects. Therefore, instead of editing images at the pixel level, we tamper with
their feature representation and create corrupt images so
that the texture artifacts are locally unnoticeable, but globally incorrect, as illustrated in Figure 1.
To generate artifacts we first train an autoencoder to reproduce images. Then, we randomly drop entries from the
encoded feature (at the bottleneck) so that some information about the input image is lost. We then add a repair
neural network to the decoder to help it render a realistic
image. The repair network inpaints the feature representations at every layer of the decoder, but its limited capacity
does not allow it to fully recover the missing information.
In this way we obtain an image with artifacts that cannot
be detected through local analysis. We then train a discrim12733

