Tangent Convolutions for Dense Prediction in 3D
Maxim Tatarchenko∗
University of Freiburg

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Jaesik Park∗
Intel Labs

Qian-Yi Zhou
Intel Labs

Abstract
We present an approach to semantic scene analysis using deep convolutional networks. Our approach is based on
tangent convolutions – a new construction for convolutional
networks on 3D data. In contrast to volumetric approaches,
our method operates directly on surface geometry. Crucially, the construction is applicable to unstructured point
clouds and other noisy real-world data. We show that tangent convolutions can be evaluated efficiently on large-scale
point clouds with millions of points. Using tangent convolutions, we design a deep fully-convolutional network for
semantic segmentation of 3D point clouds, and apply it to
challenging real-world datasets of indoor and outdoor 3D
environments. Experimental results show that the presented
approach outperforms other recent deep network constructions in detailed analysis of large 3D scenes.

1. Introduction
Methods that utilize convolutional networks on 2D images dominate modern computer vision. A key contributing
factor to their success is efficient local processing based on
the convolution operation. 2D convolution is defined on a
regular grid, a domain that supports extremely efficient implementation. This in turn enables using powerful deep architectures for processing large datasets at high resolution.
When it comes to analysis of large-scale 3D scenes, a
straightforward extension of this idea is volumetric convolution on a voxel grid [35, 59, 10]. However, voxel-based
methods have limitations, including a cubic growth rate
of memory consumption and computation time. For this
reason, voxel-based ConvNets operate on low-resolution
voxel grids that limit their prediction accuracy. The problem can be alleviated by octree-based techniques that define a ConvNet on an octree and enable processing somewhat higher-resolution volumes (e.g., up to 2563 voxels) [43, 57, 18, 42, 51]. Yet even this may be insufficient
for detailed analysis of large-scale scenes.
On a deeper level, both efficient and inefficient voxelbased methods treat 3D data as volumetric by exploiting 3D
∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Convolutional networks based on tangent convolutions
can be applied to semantic analysis of large-scale scenes, such
as urban environments. Top: point cloud from the Semantic3D
dataset. Bottom: semantic segmentation produced by the presented approach.

convolutions that integrate over volumes. In reality, data
captured by 3D sensors such as RGB-D cameras and LiDAR typically represent surfaces: 2D structures embedded
in 3D space. (This is in contrast to truly volumetric 3D data,
as encountered for example in medical imaging.) Classic
features that are used for the analysis of such data are defined in terms that acknowledge the latent surface structure,
and do not treat the data as a volume [20, 12, 45].
The drawbacks of voxel-based methods are known in the
research community. A number of recent works argue that
volumetric data structures are not the natural substrate for
3D ConvNets, and propose alternative designs based on unordered point sets [39], graphs [47], and sphere-type surfaces [32]. Unfortunately, these methods come with their
own drawbacks, such as limited sensitivity to local structure or restrictive topological assumptions.
We develop an alternative construction for convolutional
networks on surfaces, based on the notion of tangent con-

3887

