FOTS: Fast Oriented Text Spotting with a Unified Network
Xuebo Liu1 , Ding Liang1 , Shi Yan1 , Dagui Chen1 , Yu Qiao2 , and Junjie Yan1
1
SenseTime Group Ltd.
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{liuxuebo,liangding,yanshi,chendagui,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com, {yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
GIORDAN

Incidental scene text spotting is considered one of the
most difficult and valuable challenges in the document analysis community. Most existing methods treat text detection
and recognition as separate tasks. In this work, we propose a unified end-to-end trainable Fast Oriented Text Spotting (FOTS) network for simultaneous detection and recognition, sharing computation and visual information among
the two complementary tasks. Specifically, RoIRotate is introduced to share convolutional features between detection
and recognition. Benefiting from convolution sharing strategy, our FOTS has little computation overhead compared
to baseline text detection network, and the joint training
method makes our method perform better than these twostage methods. Experiments on ICDAR 2015, ICDAR 2017
MLT, and ICDAR 2013 datasets demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods significantly, which further allows us to develop the first real-time
oriented text spotting system which surpasses all previous
state-of-the-art results by more than 5% on ICDAR 2015
text spotting task while keeping 22.6 fps.

1. Introduction
Reading text in natural images has attracted increasing
attention in the computer vision community [49, 43, 53, 44,
14, 15, 34], due to its numerous practical applications in
document analysis, scene understanding, robot navigation,
and image retrieval. Although previous works have made
significant progress in both text detection and text recognition, it is still challenging due to the large variance of text
patterns and highly complicated background.
The most common way in scene text reading is to divide
it into text detection and text recognition, which are handled as two separate tasks [20, 34]. Deep learning based
approaches become dominate in both parts. In text detection, usually a convolutional neural network is used to extract feature maps from a scene image, and then different

GAP
50

FOTS
44.2 ms

OFF

Detection 41.7 ms
GIORDAN

GAP
50

Recognition

OFF

42.5 ms

Figure 1: Different to previous two-stage methods, FOTS solves
oriented text spotting problem straightforward and efficiently.
FOTS can detect and recognize text simultaneously with little
computation cost compared to a single text detection network
(44.2ms vs. 41.7ms) and almost twice as fast as the two-stage
method (44.2ms vs. 84.2ms). This is detailed in Sec. 4.4.

decoders are used to decode the regions [49, 43, 53]. While
in text recognition, a network for sequential prediction is
conducted on top of text regions, one by one [44, 14]. It
leads to heavy time cost especially for images with a number of text regions. Another problem is that it ignores the
correlation in visual cues shared in detection and recognition. A single detection network cannot be supervised by
labels from text recognition, and vice versa.
In this paper, we propose to simultaneously consider text
detection and recognition. It leads to the fast oriented text
spotting system (FOTS) which can be trained end-to-end.
In contrast to previous two-stage text spotting, our method
learns better features through convolutional neural network,
which are shared between text detection and text recognition. Since feature extraction usually takes most of the time,
it shrinks the computation to a single detection network,
shown in Fig. 1. The key to connect detection and recognition is the ROIRotate, which gets proper features from

5676

