Efficient Video Object Segmentation via Network Modulation
Linjie Yang1

Yanran Wang2∗
1
Snap Inc.

Xuehan Xiong3
Jianchao Yang1
Aggelos K. Katsaggelos2
2
3
Northwestern University
Google Inc.

{linjie.yang,jianchao.yang}@snap.com {joycewang1026@u,aggk@eecs}.northwestern.edu xiong828@gmail.com

Abstract
Video object segmentation targets segmenting a specific
object throughout a video sequence when given only an annotated first frame. Recent deep learning based approaches
find it effective to fine-tune a general-purpose segmentation model on the annotated frame using hundreds of iterations of gradient descent. Despite the high accuracy
that these methods achieve, the fine-tuning process is inefficient and fails to meet the requirements of real world
applications. We propose a novel approach that uses a
single forward pass to adapt the segmentation model to
the appearance of a specific object. Specifically, a second
meta neural network named modulator is trained to manipulate the intermediate layers of the segmentation network
given limited visual and spatial information of the target
object. The experiments show that our approach is 70×
faster than fine-tuning approaches and achieves similar accuracy. Our model and code have been released at https:
//github.com/linjieyangsc/video_seg.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation plays an important role in understanding the visual content of an image as it assigns predefined objects or scene labels to each pixel and thus translates the image into a segmentation map. When dealing with
video content, a human can easily segment an object in the
whole video without knowing its semantic meaning, which
inspired a research topic named semi-supervised video segmentation. In a typical scenario of semi-supervised video
segmentation, one is given the first frame of a video along
with an annotated object mask, and the task is to accurately
locate the object in all following frames [24, 20]. The ability
of performing accurate pixel-level video segmentation with
minimum supervision (e.g., one annotated frame) can lead
to a large amount of applications, such as accurate object
tracking for video understanding, interactive video editing,
augmented reality, and video-based advertisements. When
∗ This work is done when Yanran was an intern at Snap Inc.

Figure 1. An overview of our approach. Our model is consisted of
a modulator and a segmentation network. The modulator can adapt
the segmentation model instantly to segment an arbitrary object
through a video sequence.

the supervision is limited to only one annotated frame, researchers refer to this scenario as one-shot learning. In recent years, we have witnessed a rising amount of interest in
developing one-shot learning techniques for video segmentation [2, 23, 35, 22, 32, 4]. Most of these works share a
similar two-stage paradigm: first, train a general-purpose
Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [31] to segment the
foreground object; second, fine-tune this network based on
the first frame of the video for several hundred forwardbackward iterations to adapt the model to the specific video
sequence. Despite the high accuracies achieved by these
approaches, the fine-tuning process is arguably time consuming, which hinders real-time applications. Some of
these approaches [4] [23] also utilize optical flow information, which is computationally heavy for state-of-the-art
algorithms[29] [15].
In order to reduce the computational cost of semisupervised segmentation, we propose a novel approach to
adapt the generic segmentation network to the appearance
of a specific object instance in one single feed-forward pass.
16499

