Generate To Adapt: Aligning Domains using Generative Adversarial Networks
Swami Sankaranarayanan ∗ Yogesh Balaji ∗

Carlos D. Castillo

Rama Chellappa

UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
Domain Adaptation is an actively researched problem in
Computer Vision. In this work, we propose an approach
that leverages unsupervised data to bring the source and
target distributions closer in a learned joint feature space.
We accomplish this by inducing a symbiotic relationship between the learned embedding and a generative adversarial
network. This is in contrast to methods which use the adversarial framework for realistic data generation and retraining deep models with such data. We demonstrate the
strength and generality of our approach by performing experiments on three different tasks with varying levels of difficulty: (1) Digit classification (MNIST, SVHN and USPS
datasets) (2) Object recognition using OFFICE dataset and
(3) Domain adaptation from synthetic to real data. Our
method achieves state-of-the art performance in most experimental settings and by far the only GAN-based method
that has been shown to work well across different datasets
such as OFFICE and DIGITS.

1. Introduction
The development of powerful learning algorithms such
as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has provided
an effective pipeline for solving many classification problems [30]. The abundance of labeled data has resulted in
remarkable improvements for tasks such as the Imagenet
challenge: beginning with the CNN framework of AlexNet
[12] and more recently ResNets [9] and its variants. Another example is the steady improvements in performance
on the LFW dataset [29]. The common theme across all
these approaches is the dependence on large amounts of labeled data. While labeled data is available and getting labeled data has been easier over the years, the lack of uniformity of label distributions across different domains results in suboptimal performance of even the most powerful
CNN-based algorithms on realistic unseen test data. For
example, labeled synthetic data is available in plenty but al∗ First two authors contributed equally

gorithms trained only on synthetic data perform poorly on
real data. This is of vital importance in cases where labeled
real data is unavailable. The use of such unlabeled target
data to mitigate the shift between source and target distributions is the most useful direction among domain adaptation
approaches. Hence this paper focuses on the topic of unsupervised domain adaptation. In this work, we learn an
embedding that is robust to the shift between source and
target distributions. We achieve this by using unsupervised
data sampled from the target distribution to guide the supervised learning procedure that uses data sampled from the
source distribution. We propose an adversarial image generation approach to directly learn the shared feature embedding using labeled data from source and unlabeled data from
the target. It should be noted that while there have been a
few approaches that use an adversarial framework for solving the domain adaptation problem, the novelty of the proposed approach is in using a joint generative discriminative
method: the embeddings are learned using a combination of
classification loss and an image generation procedure that
is modeled using a variant of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [7].
Figure 1 illustrates the pipeline of the proposed approach. During training, the source images are passed
through the feature extraction network (encoder) to obtain
an embedding which is then used by the label prediction
network (classifier) for predicting the source label and also
used by the generator to generate a realistic source image.
The realistic nature of the images from the generator (G) is
controlled by the discriminator (D). The encoder is updated
based on the discriminative gradients from the classifier and
generative gradients from the adversarial framework. Given
unlabeled target images, the encoder is updated using only
gradients from the adversarial part, since the labels are unavailable. Thus, the encoder learns to discriminate better
even in the target domain using the knowledge imparted by
the generator-discriminator pair. By using the discriminator
as a multi-class classifier, we ensure that the gradient signals backpropagated by the discriminator for the unlabeled
target images belong to the feature space of the respective
classes. By sampling from the distribution of the generator
18503

