Lightweight Probabilistic Deep Networks
Jochen Gast
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Even though probabilistic treatments of neural networks
have a long history, they have not found widespread use in
practice. Sampling approaches are often too slow already
for simple networks. The size of the inputs and the depth
of typical CNN architectures in computer vision only compound this problem. Uncertainty in neural networks has
thus been largely ignored in practice, despite the fact that it
may provide important information about the reliability of
predictions and the inner workings of the network. In this
paper, we introduce two lightweight approaches to making
supervised learning with probabilistic deep networks practical: First, we suggest probabilistic output layers for classification and regression that require only minimal changes
to existing networks. Second, we employ assumed density
filtering and show that activation uncertainties can be propagated in a practical fashion through the entire network,
again with minor changes. Both probabilistic networks retain the predictive power of the deterministic counterpart,
but yield uncertainties that correlate well with the empirical error induced by their predictions. Moreover, the robustness to adversarial examples is significantly increased.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep convolutional networks have become the workhorse for many applications, such as image
classification [20], object detection [15], semantic labeling
[37], or optical flow estimation [10]. While details of the
employed architectures differ, there is typically the common
notion that activations and predictions are represented as
point estimates. In practice, this means that most architectures do not exhibit an explicit representation of uncertainty
– network predictions are agnostic of whether they are reliable or not. Even worse, predictive distributions of common
classification models relying on the softmax are not well
calibrated and tend to be overconfident [4, 13, 19]. Additionally, they can be easily fooled even with imperceptible
changes made to the input image [40]. While the focus on
application performance may be desired from the perspec-

y

!y

!y

...

...

...

z(1)

z(1)

!z1

x

x

x,"n

(a) Determ.

(b) ProbOut

(c) ADF

Figure 1. Uncertainties in CNNs: (a) Traditional deep networks
represent both activations and outputs as deterministic point estimates. (b) In this work, we explore the replacement of outputs
by probabilistic output layers. (c) To go one step further, we also
consider replacing all intermediate activations by distributions.

tive of benchmark comparisons, there are many other realworld settings where the robustness and reliability of predictive distributions is much more important, e.g. in medical applications [52] or autonomous driving [2]. Here, uncertainties are crucial, since they enable us to treat highly
uncertain predictions with particular care. It is interesting
to note that prominent cases where modern AI systems fail
increasingly make headlines in mainstream media, e.g. [9].
More recently, interest in becoming more Bayesian
in deep learning has picked up momentum, c.f . [5, 6].
Bayesian methods, despite being principled, often complicate inference [18], or require expensive test-time sampling
[13]. In this work, we extend deep neural networks to probabilistic predictions, while at the same time making minimal changes to existing network architectures and keeping
inference fast and efficient. Hence, we propose to not “go
down the full Bayesian road”, but obtain uncertainties in a
lightweight manner, which can be applied to well-proven
networks. In a first step, we rely on probabilistic output
layers, termed ProbOut for brevity, which replace standard
point predictions from deterministic networks by distributions over the output (Fig. 1, a–b). Subsequently, we go one
step further by replacing intermediate activations by distributions as well (Fig. 1, b–c). Building on classical Gaussian belief networks [12], we use assumed density filtering

3369

