Generative Adversarial Image Synthesis with Decision Tree Latent Controller
Takuhiro Kaneko
Kaoru Hiramatsu
Kunio Kashino
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{kaneko.takuhiro, hiramatsu.kaoru, kashino.kunio}@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
This paper proposes the decision tree latent controller
generative adversarial network (DTLC-GAN), an extension
of a GAN that can learn hierarchically interpretable representations without relying on detailed supervision. To impose a hierarchical inclusion structure on latent variables,
we incorporate a new architecture called the DTLC into the
generator input. The DTLC has a multiple-layer tree structure in which the ON or OFF of the child node codes is
controlled by the parent node codes. By using this architecture hierarchically, we can obtain the latent space in which
the lower layer codes are selectively used depending on the
higher layer ones. To make the latent codes capture salient
semantic features of images in a hierarchically disentangled
manner in the DTLC, we also propose a hierarchical conditional mutual information regularization and optimize it
with a newly defined curriculum learning method that we
propose as well. This makes it possible to discover hierarchically interpretable representations in a layer-by-layer
manner on the basis of information gain by only using a
single DTLC-GAN model. We evaluated the DTLC-GAN
on various datasets, i.e., MNIST, CIFAR-10, Tiny ImageNet,
3D Faces, and CelebA, and confirmed that the DTLC-GAN
can learn hierarchically interpretable representations with
either unsupervised or weakly supervised settings. Furthermore, we applied the DTLC-GAN to image-retrieval tasks
and showed its effectiveness in representation learning.

1. Introduction
There have been recent advances in computer vision
and graphics, enabling photo-realistic images to be created. However, it still requires considerable skill or effort
to create a pixel-level detailed image from scratch. Deep
generative models, such as generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [10] and variational autoencoders (VAEs) [17, 37],
have recently emerged as powerful models to alleviate this
difficulty. Although these models make it possible to generate various images with high fidelity quality by changing
(e.g., randomly sampling) latent variables in the generator
or decoder input, there still remains a painstaking process to
create the desired image because the naive formulation does

Select & narrow

Want to find
the most suitable
glasses...

Figure 1. Examples of image generation under control using
DTLC-GAN: DTLC-GAN enables image generation to be controlled in coarse-to-fine manner, i.e., “selected & narrowed.” Our
goal is to discover such hierarchically interpretable representations
without relying on detailed supervision.

not impose any structure on latent variables; as a result,
they may be used by the generator or decoder in a highly
entangled manner. This causes difficulty in interpreting the
“meaning” of the individual variables and in controlling image generation by operating each one.
When we create an image from scratch, we typically select and narrow a target to paint in a coarse-to-fine manner. For example, when we create an image of a face with
glasses, we first roughly consider the type of glasses, e.g.,
transparent glasses/sunglasses, then define the details, e.g.,
thin/thick rimmed glasses or small/big sunglasses. To use a
deep generative model as a supporter for creating an image,
we believe that such hierarchically interpretable representation is the key to obtaining the image one has in mind.
These facts motivated us to address the problem of how
to derive hierarchically interpretable representations in a
deep generative model. To solve this problem, we propose
the decision tree latent controller GAN (DTLC-GAN), an
extension of the GAN that can learn hierarchically interpretable representations without relying on detailed supervision. Figure 1 shows examples of image generation under control using the DTLC-GAN. If semantic features are
represented in a hierarchically disentangled manner, we can
approach a target image gradually and interactively.
To impose a hierarchical inclusion structure on latent
variables, we incorporate a new architecture called the
DTLC into the generator input. The DTLC has a multiplelayer tree structure in which the ON or OFF of the child
node codes is controlled by the parent node codes. By using this architecture hierarchically, we can obtain the latent

6606

