Avatar-Net: Multi-scale Zero-shot Style Transfer by Feature Decoration
Lu Sheng1 , Ziyi Lin2 , Jing Shao2 , Xiaogang Wang1
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research
{lsheng, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk,

{linziyi, shaojing}@sensetime.com

Figure 1. Exemplar stylized results by the proposed Avatar-Net, which faithfully transfers the Lena image by arbitrary style.

Abstract
Zero-shot artistic style transfer is an important image
synthesis problem aiming at transferring arbitrary style into
content images. However, the trade-off between the generalization and efficiency in existing methods impedes a high
quality zero-shot style transfer in real-time. In this paper, we resolve this dilemma and propose an efficient yet
effective Avatar-Net that enables visually plausible multiscale transfer for arbitrary style. The key ingredient of our
method is a style decorator that makes up the content features by semantically aligned style features from an arbitrary style image, which does not only holistically match
their feature distributions but also preserve detailed style
patterns in the decorated features. By embedding this module into an image reconstruction network that fuses multiscale style abstractions, the Avatar-Net renders multi-scale
stylization for any style image in one feed-forward pass.
We demonstrate the state-of-the-art effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method in generating high-quality
stylized images, with a series of successive applications include multiple style integration, video stylization and etc.

1. Introduction
Unlike taking days or months to create a particular artistic style by a diligent artist, modern computational methods have enabled fast and reliable style creation for natural
images. Especially inspired by the remarkable representa-

tive power of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the
seminal work by Gatys et al. [8, 9] discovered that multilevel feature statistics extracted from a trained CNN notably represent the characteristics of visual styles, which
boosts the development of style transfer approaches, either
by iterative optimizations [9, 16, 30, 20] or feed-forward
networks [5, 13, 18, 20, 31, 28, 29, 25, 3]. However, a
dilemma in terms of generalization and quality versus efficiency hampers the availability of style transfer for arbitrary style. Since the optimization-based approaches render
visually plausible results for various styles at the sacrifice
of executing efficiency[9, 16, 30], while the feed-forward
networks are either restricted by a finite set of predefined
styles [5, 13, 18, 20, 31, 28], or simplify the zero-shot transfer with compromised visual quality [12, 25, 29].
Valuable efforts have been devoted to solving this
dilemma. A common practice is employing external style
signals to supervise the content modification [12, 25, 31, 29,
3] on a feed-forward network. But these methods require
the networks trained by the perceptual loss [13], which has
been known instable and produces compromised stylized
patterns [10, 30]. In contrast, another category [19, 4] manipulates the content features under the guidance of the style
features in a shared high-level feature space. By decoding
the manipulated features back into the image space with
a style-agnostic image decoder, the reconstructed images
will be stylized with seamless integration of the style patterns. However, current techniques may either over-distort
the content and add unconstrained patterns [19], or fail to
retrieve complete style patterns when large domain gap ex18242

