Low-Shot Learning with Imprinted Weights
Hang Qi∗
UCLA

Matthew Brown
Google

Abstract
Human vision is able to immediately recognize novel visual categories after seeing just one or a few training examples. We describe how to add a similar capability to
ConvNet classifiers by directly setting the final layer weights
from novel training examples during low-shot learning. We
call this process weight imprinting as it directly sets weights
for a new category based on an appropriately scaled copy of
the embedding layer activations for that training example.
The imprinting process provides a valuable complement to
training with stochastic gradient descent, as it provides immediate good classification performance and an initialization for any further fine-tuning in the future. We show how
this imprinting process is related to proxy-based embeddings. However, it differs in that only a single imprinted
weight vector is learned for each novel category, rather
than relying on a nearest-neighbor distance to training instances as typically used with embedding methods. Our experiments show that using averaging of imprinted weights
provides better generalization than using nearest-neighbor
instance embeddings.

1. Introduction
Human vision can immediately recognize new categories
after a person is shown just one or a few examples [10, 8].
For instance, humans can recognize a new face from a photo
of an unknown person and new objects or fine-grained categories from a few examples by implicitly drawing connections from previously acquired knowledge. Although
deep neural networks trained on millions of images have
in some cases exceeded human performance in large-scale
image recognition [15], under an open-world setting with
emerging new categories it remains a challenging problem
how to continuously expand the capability of an intelligent
agent from limited new samples, also known as low-shot
learning.
Embedding methods [25] have a natural representation
for low-shot learning, as new categories can be added simply by pushing data examples through the network and per∗ The majority of the work was done while interning at Google.

David G. Lowe
Google

forming a nearest neighbor algorithm on the result [16].
It has long been realized in the semantic embedding literature that the activations of the penultimate layer of a
ConvNet classifier can also be thought of as an embedding
vector, which is a connection we further develop in this paper. ConvNets are the preferred solution for achieving the
highest classification performance, and the softmax crossentropy loss is faster to train than the objectives typically
used in embedding methods, such as triplet loss.
In this paper, we attempt to combine the best properties of ConvNet classifiers1 with embedding approaches for
solving the low-shot learning problem. Inspired by the use
of embeddings as proxies [11] or agents [24] for individual object classes, we argue that embedding vectors can be
effectively compared to weights in the last linear layer of
ConvNet classifiers. Our approach, called imprinting, is to
compute these activations from a training image for a new
object category and use an appropriately scaled version of
these activation values as the final layer weights for the new
category while leaving the weights of existing categories
unchanged. This is extended to multiple training examples
by incrementally averaging the activation vectors computed
from the new training images, which our experiments find
to outperform nearest-neighbor classification as used with
embedding approaches.
We consider a low-shot learning scenario where a learner
initially trained on base classes with abundant samples is
then exposed to previously unseen novel classes with a limited amount of training data for each category [5]. The goal
is to have a learner that performs well on the combined set
of classes. This setup aligns with human recognition which
continuously learns new concepts during a lifetime.
Existing approaches exhibit characteristics that render
them infeasible for resource-limited environments such as
mobile devices and robots. For example, training a deep
ConvNet classifier with stochastic gradient descent requires
an extensive fine-tuning process that cycles through all prior
training data together with examples from additional categories [5]. Alternatively, semantic embedding methods
1 In this paper we use the term “ConvNet classifiers” to refer to convolutional neural networks trained with the softmax cross-entropy loss for
classification tasks.

15822

