A Two-Step Disentanglement Method
Naama Hadad
Tel Aviv University

Lior Wolf
Facebook AI Research and Tel Aviv University

Abstract
We address the problem of disentanglement of factors
that generate a given data into those that are correlated
with the labeling and those that are not. Our solution
is simpler than previous solutions and employs adversarial training. First, the part of the data that is correlated
with the labels is extracted by training a classifier. Then,
the other part is extracted such that it enables the reconstruction of the original data but does not contain label
information. The utility of the new method is demonstrated
on visual datasets as well as on financial data. Our code
is available at https://github.com/naamahadad/
A-Two-Step-Disentanglement-Method.

1. Introduction
The problem of identifying complementary factors and
separating them from each other is ubiquitous. In face recognition and in object recognition, one would like to separate
illumination and pose from identity or label. In handwriting recognition, we would like to separate the factors that
define the content of the text written from those that define
its style. The separation between what is spoken and who
is the speaker in automatic speech recognition and multispeaker speech synthesis is similar in nature. In each of
these domains, specialized solutions have emerged, oftentimes emphasizing recognition and eliminating the other
factors and sometimes employing compound labels from
orthogonal domains. However, the task of separating the
factors that generated the observations, which is called disentanglement, is also being studied as an abstract pattern
recognition problem.
In this work, we present a new algorithm for disentanglement of factors, where the separation is based on whether the
factors are relevant to a given classification problem. Following the terminology used in [14], we call the factors that are
relevant for the classification task specified factors, and those
which are not unspecified factors. In order to perform disentanglement, we present a new adversarial technique. First,
a classifier S is trained to predict the specified factors. The
activations of S are then used to capture the specified compo-

Moni Shahar
Tel Aviv University

nent of the samples. A second network Z is then trained to
recover the complimentary component. A first loss on Z ensures that the original sample can be reconstructed from the
output of both networks together (S and Z). A second loss
on Z, which is based on an adversarial network, ensures that
Z does not encode the specified factors. The algorithm has
the advantage that is makes very weak assumptions about
the distribution of the specified and the unspecified factors.
We focus our experiments on the image-based benchmarks used in previous work. In addition to image data,
we also evaluate our model on financial data. A simplified
model for stock price changes is that the price change can
be decomposed into two factors, market movement and idiosyncratic movement. A common assumption is that the
market return is a Geometric Brownian motion and cannot
be predicted. However, since different stocks have different
correlations with the market, one can neutralize the market
factor from her portfolio. In real-life trading, the correlations
are non-stationary and there are other effects such as trading
costs that should be taken into account. Despite all that,
the disentanglement of driving factors is relevant both for
prediction purposes as well as for data generation.

1.1. Related work
Disentanglement was studied in many contexts and has a
vast literature. Early attempts to separate text from graphics
using basic computer vision tools were made in [5]. In [18]
voice data was analyzed. It was assumed that the data was
generated by two sources and separation was done using
a bilinear model. Manifold learning methods was used by
ElGammal and Lee in order to separate the body configuration from the appearance [4]. In recent years, few papers
tackled this problem using neural networks. What-where
encoders [8] combine the reconstruction criteria with the discrimination in order to separate the factors that are relevant
for the labels. In [10] variational auto encoders were used
to separate the digit from the style. However their approach
can not generalized to unseen identities. This restriction
was relaxed in [14], where they trained a conditional generative model by using an adversarial network to remove label
information from the unspecified part of the encoding.
Concurrently with our work, the Fader Networks [11]
1772

