Deep Spatio-Temporal Random Fields for Efficient Video Segmentation
Siddhartha Chandra1

Camille Couprie2

siddhartha.chandra@inria.fr

coupriec@fb.com

1

INRIA GALEN, Ecole CentraleSupélec Paris

Abstract
In this work we introduce a time- and memory-efficient
method for structured prediction that couples neuron decisions across both space at time. We show that we are
able to perform exact and efficient inference on a denselyconnected spatio-temporal graph by capitalizing on recent
advances on deep Gaussian Conditional Random Fields
(GCRFs). Our method, called VideoGCRF is (a) efficient, (b) has a unique global minimum, and (c) can
be trained end-to-end alongside contemporary deep networks for video understanding. We experiment with multiple connectivity patterns in the temporal domain, and
present empirical improvements over strong baselines on
the tasks of both semantic and instance segmentation of
videos. Our implementation is based on the Caffe2 framework and will be available at https://github.com/
siddharthachandra/gcrf-v3.0.

1. Introduction
Video understanding remains largely unsolved despite
significant improvements in image understanding over the
past few years. The accuracy of current image classification
and semantic segmentation models is not yet matched in
action recognition and video segmentation, to some extent
due to the lack of large-scale benchmarks, but also due to
the complexity introduced by the time variable. Combined
with the increase in memory and computation demands,
video understanding poses additional challenges that call
for novel methods.
Our objective in this work is to couple the decisions
taken by a neural network in time, in a manner that allows
information to flow across frames and thereby result in decisions that are consistent both spatially and temporally. Towards this goal we pursue a structured prediction approach,
where the structure of the output space is exploited in order
to train classifiers of higher accuracy. For this we introduce
VideoGCRF, an extension into video segmentation of the
Deep Gaussian Random Field (DGRF) technique recently

Inputs

Iasonas Kokkinos2
iasonask@fb.com
2

Facebook AI Research, Paris

S
U
T
FCN T
U
S

CRF inference
Outputs

Figure 1: Overview of our VideoGCRF approach: we
jointly segment multiple images by passing them firstly
through a fully convolutional network to obtain per-pixel
class scores (‘unary’ terms U), alongside with spatial (S)
and temporal (T) embeddings. We couple predictions at
different spatial and temporal positions in terms of the inner product of their respective embeddings, shown here as
arrows pointing to a graph edge. The final prediction is obtained by solving a linear system; this can eliminate spurious responses, e.g. on the left pavement, by diffusing the
per-pixel node scores over the whole spatio-temporal graph.
The CRF and CNN architecture is jointly trained end-toend, while CRF inference is exact and particularly efficient.

proposed for single-frame structured prediction in [5, 6].
We show that our algorithm can be used for a variety of
video segmentation tasks: semantic segmentation (CamVid
dataset), instance tracking (DAVIS dataset), and a combination of instance segmentation with Mask-RCNN-style object detection, customized in particular for the person class
(DAVIS Person dataset).
Our work inherits all favorable properties of the DGRF
method: in particular, our method has the advantage of
delivering (a) exact inference results through the solution of a linear system, rather than relying on approximate mean-field inference, as [24, 25], (b) allowing for exact computation of the gradient during back-propagation,
thereby alleviating the need for the memory-demanding
back-propagation-through-time used in [41] (c) making it
possible to use non-parametric terms for the pairwise term,
rather than confining ourselves to pairwise terms of a predetermined form, as [24, 25], and (d) facilitating inference
18915

