SeedNet: Automatic Seed Generation with Deep Reinforcement Learning
for Robust Interactive Segmentation
Gwangmo Song∗

Heesoo Myeong∗

Kyoung Mu Lee

Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, 08826, Seoul, Korea
kfsgm@snu.ac.kr, heesoo.myeong@gmail.com, kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an automatic seed generation
technique with deep reinforcement learning to solve the interactive segmentation problem. One of the main issues
of the interactive segmentation problem is robust and consistent object extraction with less human effort. Most of
the existing algorithms highly depend on the distribution of
inputs, which differs from one user to another and hence
need sequential user interactions to achieve adequate performance. In our system, when a user first specifies a point
on the desired object and a point in the background, a sequence of artificial user input is automatically generated
for precisely segmenting the desired object. The proposed
system allows the user to reduce the number of input significantly. This problem is difficult to cast as a supervised
learning problem because it is not possible to define globally optimal user input at some stage of the interactive segmentation task. Hence, we formulate automatic seed generation problem as Markov Decision Process (MDP) and
then optimize it by reinforcement learning with Deep QNetwork (DQN). We train our network on the MSRA10K
dataset and show that the network achieves notable performance improvement from inaccurate initial segmentation on
both seen and unseen datasets.

Figure 1. An automatic seed generation example. The green and
red dots represent the foreground and the background seeds, respectively. (a) RW result is the output of random walker segmentation [13] algorithm with the initial seeds and our result is the
segmentation output with the generated seeds from the SeedNet.
(b) Seed generation process through the SeedNet. At each step,
the SeedNet creates a new foreground or background seed input.

1. Introduction
Segmenting the object of interest in an image is one of
the fundamental problems in computer vision. However,
without knowing the user’s intention, automatic object selection has inherent limitations because where and what objects should be extracted differs by users. For this reason, an
interactive segmentation approach that receives information
on the desired object roughly from a human in the form of
a scribble or a bounding box and performs segmentation is
widely used to extract the object from an image and video.
∗ First two authors contributed equally

One of the critical components of the interactive segmentation algorithm is robust object extraction while matching the human intention. For many objects with a complex background, the user often has to spend much effort
to refine the results obtained from the algorithm. In this
regard, how to reduce human effort while maintaining the
performance in interactive segmentation is very important.
In [14], the number of additional efforts by users is used as
a measure of system performance. In this study, we propose a novel technique to simulate the human process of
guiding the interactive segmentation system to obtain the
11760

