End-to-End Deep Kronecker-Product Matching for Person Re-identification
Yantao Shen1∗ Tong Xiao1∗ Hongsheng Li1† Shuai Yi2 Xiaogang Wang1†
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research
1

{ytshen, xiaotong, hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2

yishuai@sensetime.com

Feature maps

Abstract

Feature maps

Feature
Learning

Person re-identification aims to robustly measure similarities between person images. The significant variation
of person poses and viewing angles challenges for accurate person re-identification. The spatial layout and correspondences between query person images are vital information for tackling this problem but are ignored by most
state-of-the-art methods. In this paper, we propose a novel
Kronecker Product Matching module to match feature maps
of different persons in an end-to-end trainable deep neural network. A novel feature soft warping scheme is designed for aligning the feature maps based on matching
results, which is shown to be crucial for achieving superior accuracy. The multi-scale features based on hourglasslike networks and self residual attention are also exploited
to further boost the re-identification performance. The
proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on the Market-1501, CUHK03, and DukeMTMC datasets,
which demonstrates the effectiveness and generalization
ability of our proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims at finding a person
of interest in an image gallery by comparing the query image of this person with all the other images in the gallery.
It is an active research field in computer vision and has extensive applications in intelligent video surveillance, smart
phone apps, and home robotics. Person Re-ID is closely related to yet harder than face verification, where human faces
are usually well aligned, while person images show various
poses and are captured from different viewing angles.
Recent years witnessed the success of deep learning
methods for various computer vision problems. A large
number of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based
methods have been proposed for solving the problem of
person Re-ID. Most state-of-the-art CNN based approaches
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† H. Li and X. Wang are the co-corresponding authors.

KPM
Feature
Matching

W

Feature
Learning

W

Matching
correspondence
map

W

Same-person
Confidence
W

Soft
Feature
Warping

W

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed framework with Kronecker Matching module and Soft Warping scheme for person reidentification. The KPM and soft warping are conducted between
feature maps, which is end-to-end trainable in a deep network.

aim at learning a highly non-linear mapping function that
transforms person images into a common embedding space
and ranking the gallery images according to their distances
to the query image.
However, most existing CNN-based methods treat each
person image as an individual sample without differentiating the semantic meanings of different pixels. State-ofthe-art CNN networks either utilize global average pooling
(e.g., ResNet [10]) or direct vectorization (e.g., VGG network [29]) to convert the topmost feature maps into feature vectors. Directly comparing such feature vectors is ineffective because the same feature might encode different
semantic concepts. The global average pooling simply averages features from all image spatial locations and abandons valuable spatial information. Features from different
person regions might be compared. On the other hand, direct vectorization assumes that the person pose and camera
viewpoints remain the same for all compared images so that
features from the same image location could be compared,
which is generally not true for person images from various surveillance cameras. In addition, existing CNN-based
methods assume the same importance for all pixels in a person image. However, visual appearances of background regions are not informative and comparing them across different images leads to inaccurate similarity estimation.
To fully utilize spatial information of person images,
we propose a deep neural network with Kronecker Product Matching (KPM) module to recover probabilistic correspondences between spatial regions across two images for
more accurate person similarity estimation. Given the fea16886

