Reward Learning from Narrated Demonstrations
Hsiao-Yu Tung

Adam W. Harley
Liang-Kang Huang
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Katerina Fragkiadaki

{htung, aharley, katef}@cs.cmu.edu, henrykang7177@gmail.com

Abstract
Humans effortlessly “program” one another by communicating goals and desires in natural language. In contrast,
humans program robotic behaviours by indicating desired
object locations and poses to be achieved [5], by providing RGB images of goal configurations [19], or supplying
a demonstration to be imitated [17]. None of these methods generalize across environment variations, and they convey the goal in awkward technical terms. This work proposes joint learning of natural language grounding and instructable behavioural policies reinforced by perceptual detectors of natural language expressions, grounded to the
sensory inputs of the robotic agent.
Our supervision is narrated visual demonstrations
(NVD), which are visual demonstrations paired with verbal narration (as opposed to being silent). We introduce a dataset of NVD where teachers perform activities
while describing them in detail. We map the teachers’ descriptions to perceptual reward detectors, and use them
to train corresponding behavioural policies in simulation.
We empirically show that our instructable agents (i) learn
visual reward detectors using a small number of examples by exploiting hard negative mined configurations from
demonstration dynamics, (ii) develop pick-and-place policies using learned visual reward detectors, (iii) benefit from
object-factorized state representations that mimic the syntactic structure of natural language goal expressions, and
(iv) can execute behaviours that involve novel objects in
novel locations at test time, instructed by natural language.

1. Introduction
Currently, rewards or goals for behavioural policy learning are either manually coded by experts [42, 32, 31], or
are learned from human supplied demonstrations (LfD, or
inverse RL) [39, 40, 20, 54]. Manually coded rewards
are hard to generalize across variations of the environment.
Moreover, we often need a large number of demonstrations
for the right reward function to be effectively communi-

1

Narrated Visual Demonstration

Move the coke to
the right of the mug.
Human Teacher
2

Reward Learning through Language Grounding
Coke is to
the right of
the mug

1. What are the subject and object?
Coke and mug
2.What is “right of”?

Reward
Detector
Before
the action
3

After
the action

Policy Learning with perceptual reward
Learned
Reward

Agent
action

state

Environment

Visual Sensor

Figure 1. Reward Learning from Narrated Demonstrations.
We begin with a narrated visual demonstration, prepared by a human (1). Our system then learns a spatial relationship detector
from the visuals and audio (2). Finally, we use the learned detectors to train pick-and-place policies (3).

cated to the agent, invariant to distractors, accidental coincidences, view-dependent feature representations, speed
of execution, etc. In contrast, humans effortlessly program
each other’s behaviour by conveying goals and desires in
natural language, e.g. “for a CVPR submission, the margin should be one inch on each side of the page”, or “while
driving, make sure to keep a safe distance from the car in
front of you.” Interestingly, in absence of natural language
competence, understanding the goal of a behaviour is often harder than learning the behaviour itself. For example,
although macaques are excellent tree climbers, incremen17004

