Fast Spectral Ranking for Similarity Search
Ahmet Iscen1

Yannis Avrithis2

Giorgos Tolias1

1 VRG, FEE, CTU in Prague

Teddy Furon2

Ondřej Chum1

2 Inria Rennes

{ahmet.iscen,giorgos.tolias,chum}@cmp.felk.cvut.cz
{ioannis.avrithis,teddy.furon}@inria.fr

Abstract
Despite the success of deep learning on representing
images for particular object retrieval, recent studies show
that the learned representations still lie on manifolds in a
high dimensional space. This makes the Euclidean nearest
neighbor search biased for this task. Exploring the manifolds online remains expensive even if a nearest neighbor
graph has been computed offline.
This work introduces an explicit embedding reducing
manifold search to Euclidean search followed by dot product similarity search. This is equivalent to linear graph filtering of a sparse signal in the frequency domain. To speed
up online search, we compute an approximate Fourier basis
of the graph offline. We improve the state of art on particular object retrieval datasets including the challenging Instre
dataset containing small objects. At a scale of 105 images,
the offline cost is only a few hours, while query time is comparable to standard similarity search.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval based on deep learned features has recently achieved near perfect performance on all standard
datasets [45, 14, 15]. It requires fine-tuning on a properly designed image matching task involving little or no human supervision. Yet, retrieving particular small objects is
a common failure case. Representing an image with several
regions rather than a global descriptor is indispensable in
this respect [46, 60]. A recent study [24] uses a particularly
challenging dataset [67] to investigate graph-based query
expansion and re-ranking on regional search.
Query expansion [7] explores the image manifold by recursive Euclidean or similarity search on the nearest neighbors (NN) at increased online cost. Graph-based methods [44, 53] help reducing this cost by computing a kNN graph offline. Given this graph, random walk1 processes [39, 70] provide a principled means of ranking. Iscen

yi

xi

(a) Input signal y

(b) Output signal x

xi

yi

(c) Input signal y

(d) Output signal x

Figure 1: The low-pass filtering of an impulse over the real
line (top) and a graph (bottom). In a weighted undirected
graph the information “flows” in all directions, controlled
by edge weights. In retrieval, the impulse in red is the query,
and the output x is its similarity to all samples.
et al. [24] transform the problem into finding a solution x of
a linear system Ax = y for a large sparse dataset-dependent
matrix A and a sparse query-dependent vector y. Such a
solution can be found efficiently on-the-fly with conjugate
gradients (CG). Even for an efficient solver, the query times
are still in the order of one second at large scale.
In this work, we shift more computation offline: we exploit a low-rank spectral decomposition A ≈ U ΛU⊤ and
express the solution in closed form as x = U Λ−1 U⊤ y. We
thus treat the query as a signal y to be smoothed over the
graph, connecting query expansion to graph signal processing [50]. Figure 1 depicts 1d and graph miniatures of this
interpretation. We then generalize, improve and interpret
this spectral ranking idea on large-scale image retrieval. In
particular, we make the following contributions:
1. We cast image retrieval as linear filtering over a graph,
efficiently performed in the frequency domain.
2. We provide a truly scalable solution to computing an
approximate Fourier basis of the graph offline, accompanied by performance bounds.

1 We avoid the term diffusion [11, 24] in this work.

17632

