High-Resolution Image Synthesis and Semantic Manipulation with Conditional GANs
Ting-Chun Wang1

Ming-Yu Liu1 Jun-Yan Zhu2 Andrew Tao1 Jan Kautz1
1
2
NVIDIA Corporation
UC Berkeley

Bryan Catanzaro1

Cascaded refinement network [5]

(a) Synthesized result

Our result

(b) Application: Change label types

(c) Application: Edit object appearance

Figure 1: We propose a generative adversarial framework for synthesizing 2048 × 1024 images from semantic label maps
(lower left corner in (a)). Compared to previous work [5], our results express more natural textures and details. (b) We can
change labels in the original label map to create new scenes, like replacing trees with buildings. (c) Our framework also
allows the user to edit the appearance of individual objects in the scene, e.g. changing the color of a car or the texture of a
road. Please visit our website for more side-by-side comparisons as well as interactive editing demos.

Abstract
We present a new method for synthesizing highresolution photo-realistic images from semantic label maps
using conditional generative adversarial networks (conditional GANs). Conditional GANs have enabled a variety
of applications, but the results are often limited to lowresolution and still far from realistic. In this work, we generate 2048 × 1024 visually appealing results with a novel
adversarial loss, as well as new multi-scale generator and
discriminator architectures. Furthermore, we extend our

framework to interactive visual manipulation with two additional features. First, we incorporate object instance segmentation information, which enables object manipulations
such as removing/adding objects and changing the object
category. Second, we propose a method to generate diverse results given the same input, allowing users to edit
the object appearance interactively. Human opinion studies demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms
existing methods, advancing both the quality and the resolution of deep image synthesis and editing.

18798

