Multi-Image Semantic Matching by Mining Consistent Features
Qianqian Wang†
†

Xiaowei Zhou†∗

Kostas Daniilidis‡

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania

‡

Figure 1: Given initial feature candidates in multiple images and their noisy correspondences between each pair of images, the proposed
method identifies a sparse set of reliable feature points and establishes cyclically and geometrically consistent correspondences across all
images. The figure gives an example of identified features points (colored crosses) from 1000 cat head images (only 30 images are shown
here). The color indicates the correspondence. The last column shows initial feature candidates (top) and manually-annotated landmarks
provided by the dataset (bottom), both in the first image. Interestingly, the unsupervisedly-identified feature points by the proposed method
roughly coincide with the manually-annotated landmarks.

Abstract
This work proposes a multi-image matching method to
estimate semantic correspondences across multiple images.
In contrast to the previous methods that optimize all pairwise correspondences, the proposed method identifies and
matches only a sparse set of reliable features in the image
collection. In this way, the proposed method is able to prune
nonrepeatable features and also highly scalable to handle
thousands of images. We additionally propose a low-rank
constraint to ensure the geometric consistency of feature
correspondences over the whole image collection. Besides
the competitive performance on multi-graph matching and
semantic flow benchmarks, we also demonstrate the applicability of the proposed method for reconstructing objectclass models and discovering object-class landmarks from
images without using any annotation.

∗ Corresponding author. E-mail: xzhou@cad.zju.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Computing feature correspondences across images is a
fundamental problem in computer vision. Low-level geometric features (e.g., SIFT [30]) are successful for matching
images of the same scene. Recently, there has been an increasing interest in semantic matching (e.g., [28, 22]), i.e.,
establishing semantic correspondences across different object instances or scenes. Most research on semantic matching focuses on the pairwise case that considers only image
pairs. Finding consistent correspondences across multiple
images is important in many situations, e.g., object-class
model reconstruction [21] and automatic landmark annotation [38]. The multi-image semantic matching problem is
the focus of this work.
Despite remarkable advances in solving semantic matching and multi-image matching problems (see related work
section), the following challenges remain. First, repeatable feature point detection for semantic matching is an
open problem [25, 38]. Previous work bypassed this issue by either using all pixels (dense flow) [28] or randomly sampled points [41], resulting in numerous nonre1685

