Neural 3D Mesh Renderer
Hiroharu Kato1 , Yoshitaka Ushiku1 , and Tatsuya Harada1,2
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN
{kato,ushiku,harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
For modeling the 3D world behind 2D images, which
3D representation is most appropriate? A polygon mesh
is a promising candidate for its compactness and geometric
properties. However, it is not straightforward to model a
polygon mesh from 2D images using neural networks because the conversion from a mesh to an image, or rendering, involves a discrete operation called rasterization,
which prevents back-propagation. Therefore, in this work,
we propose an approximate gradient for rasterization that
enables the integration of rendering into neural networks.
Using this renderer, we perform single-image 3D mesh reconstruction with silhouette image supervision and our system outperforms the existing voxel-based approach. Additionally, we perform gradient-based 3D mesh editing operations, such as 2D-to-3D style transfer and 3D DeepDream,
with 2D supervision for the first time. These applications
demonstrate the potential of the integration of a mesh renderer into neural networks and the effectiveness of our proposed renderer.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D world from 2D images is one of
the fundamental problems in computer vision. Humans
model the 3D world in their brains using images on their
retinas, and live their daily existence using the constructed
model. The machines, too, can act more intelligently by
explicitly modeling the 3D world behind 2D images.
The process of generating an image from the 3D world
is called rendering. Because this lies on the border between
the 3D world and 2D images, it is crucially important in
computer vision.
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have achieved considerable success in 2D image understanding [7, 13]. Therefore, incorporating rendering into
neural networks has a high potential for 3D understanding.
What type of 3D representation is most appropriate for
modeling the 3D world? Commonly used 3D formats are
voxels, point clouds and polygon meshes. Voxels, which

Mesh
Generator

Image

Neural
Renderer

3D Mesh

Silhouette

Ground-truth
Loss

Backprop
Neural
Renderer

3D Mesh

Image

Backprop

Style Image

New Mesh

Loss

Figure 1. Pipelines for single-image 3D mesh reconstruction (upper) and 2D-to-3D style transfer (lower).

are 3D extensions of pixels, are the most widely used format in machine learning because they can be processed by
CNNs [2, 17, 20, 24, 30, 31, 34, 35, 36]. However, it is
difficult to process high resolution voxels because they are
regularly sampled from 3D space and their memory efficiency is poor. The scalability of point clouds, which are
sets of 3D points, is relatively high because point clouds are
based on irregular sampling. However, textures and lighting are difficult to apply because point clouds do not have
surfaces. Polygon meshes, which consist of sets of vertices
and surfaces, are promising because they are scalable and
have surfaces. Therefore, in this work, we use the polygon
mesh as our 3D format.
One advantage of polygon meshes over other representations in 3D understanding is its compactness. For example,
to represent a large triangle, a polygon mesh only requires
three vertices and one face, whereas voxels and point clouds
require many sampling points over the face. Because polygon meshes represent 3D shapes with a small number of
parameters, the model size and dataset size for 3D understanding can be made smaller.
Another advantage is its suitability for geometric trans-

3907

