A Robust Method for Strong Rolling Shutter Effects Correction
Using Lines with Automatic Feature Selection
Yizhen Lao
Omar Ait-Aider
Institut Pascal, Université Clermont Auvergne / CNRS
4 Avenue Blaise Pascal, 63178 Aubière Cedex, FRANCE
lyz91822@gmail.com

omar.ait-aider@uca.fr

Abstract
We present a robust method which compensates RS distortions in a single image using a set of image curves, basing on the knowledge that they correspond to 3D straight
lines. Unlike in existing work, no a priori knowledge about
the line directions (e.g. Manhattan World assumption) is
required. We first formulate a parametric equation for the
projection of a 3D straight line viewed by a moving rolling
shutter camera under a uniform motion model. Then we
propose a method which efficiently estimates ego angular
velocity separately from pose parameters, using at least
4 image curves. Moreover, we propose for the first time
a RANSAC-like strategy to select image curves which really correspond to 3D straight lines and reject those corresponding to actual curves in 3D world. A comparative
experimental study with both synthetic and real data from
famous benchmarks shows that the proposed method outperforms all the existing techniques from the state-of-theart.

(a) RS distorted image

(b) Detection by [13]

(c) Correction by [13]

(d) Initial detection by (e) Result of automatic (f) Correction by our
our method
feature selection
method

Figure 1: (a) An example of a distorted RS image. (b)Arc
segments detected by [13] using LSD detector [18] where
outliers are also considered in correction. In contrast, the
automatic feature selection in our method successfully filters outliers among detected candidate curves (d) and obtains correctly fitted curves (e). Final corrections by [13]
and our method are shown on (c) and (f).

1. Introduction
Rolling shutter cameras are widely-used for their lowcost and low consumption compared to global shutter (GS)
ones. However, in RS acquisition mode, pixels are exposed
sequentially row by row from the top to the bottom. Therefore, images captured by moving RS cameras will occur distortions (e.g. Wobble, Skew) called RS effects (shown in
Fig. 1(a)). The aim from RS correction is to obtain images
which not only are visually acceptable but also can serve as
input data for computer vision applications such as image
alignment or SfM.

1.1. Related Works and Motivation
The state-of-the-art works for RS image correction can
be divided into three main classes:
Video-based methods: Methods of [11, 3, 10, 4, 20] try to

recover the geometry between RS frames first, then to compensate RS effects by scanline realignment or RS-aware
warping. These methods all require pairwise or more point
correspondences obtained thanks to feature tracking and
matching, which may be data and/or time consuming.
Gyroscopes-based methods: Methods of [7, 9, 12] utilize
gyroscopes to measure camera ego-motion during acquisition and compensate RS effects directly. It is obvious that
the strong dependency on external sensors is a strong limitation on the practical use of these methods.
Single-image-based methods: Most of the methods in this
category are based on line features because straight lines
are generally abundant in man made environments such as
buildings interiors or urban cityspaces. Moreover, they are
both easy to detect and robust to partial occlusion. Fi-

4795

