Independently Recurrent Neural Network (IndRNN): Building A Longer and
Deeper RNN
Shuai Li * , Wanqing Li * , Chris Cook * , Ce Zhu † , Yanbo Gao †
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong
†
School of Electronic Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
*

{sl669,wanqing,ccook}@uow.edu.au,eczhu@uestc.edu.cn,yanbogao@std.uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been widely
used for processing sequential data. However, RNNs are
commonly difficult to train due to the well-known gradient
vanishing and exploding problems and hard to learn longterm patterns. Long short-term memory (LSTM) and gated
recurrent unit (GRU) were developed to address these problems, but the use of hyperbolic tangent and the sigmoid action functions results in gradient decay over layers. Consequently, construction of an efficiently trainable deep network is challenging. In addition, all the neurons in an RNN
layer are entangled together and their behaviour is hard to
interpret. To address these problems, a new type of RNN,
referred to as independently recurrent neural network (IndRNN), is proposed in this paper, where neurons in the same
layer are independent of each other and they are connected
across layers. We have shown that an IndRNN can be easily regulated to prevent the gradient exploding and vanishing problems while allowing the network to learn long-term
dependencies. Moreover, an IndRNN can work with nonsaturated activation functions such as relu (rectified linear
unit) and be still trained robustly. Multiple IndRNNs can be
stacked to construct a network that is deeper than the existing RNNs. Experimental results have shown that the proposed IndRNN is able to process very long sequences (over
5000 time steps), can be used to construct very deep networks (21 layers used in the experiment) and still be trained
robustly. Better performances have been achieved on various tasks by using IndRNNs compared with the traditional
RNN and LSTM.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [16] have been
widely used in sequence learning problems such as action
recognition [8], scene labelling [4] and language processing [5], and have achieved impressive results. Compared

with the feed-forward networks such as the convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), a RNN has a recurrent connection
where the last hidden state is an input to the next state. The
update of states can be described as follows:
ht = σ(Wxt + Uht−1 + b)

(1)

where xt ∈ RM and ht ∈ RN are the input and hidden state
at time step t, respectively. W ∈ RN ×M , U ∈ RN ×N and
b ∈ RN are the weights for the current input and the recurrent input, and the bias of the neurons. σ is an element-wise
activation function of the neurons, and N is the number of
neurons in this RNN layer.
Training of the RNNs suffers from the gradient vanishing
and exploding problem due to the repeated multiplication of
the recurrent weight matrix. Several RNN variants such as
the long short-term memory (LSTM) [10, 17] and the gated
recurrent unit (GRU) [5] have been proposed to address the
gradient problems. However, the use of the hyperbolic tangent and the sigmoid functions as the activation function in
these variants results in gradient decay over layers. Consequently, construction and training of a deep LSTM or GRU
based RNN network is practically difficult. By contrast, existing CNNs using non-saturated activation function such as
relu can be stacked into a very deep network (e.g. over 20
layers using the basic convolutional layers and over 100 layers with residual connections [12]) and be still trained efficiently. Although residual connections have been attempted
for LSTM models in several works [44, 36], there have been
no significant improvement (mostly due to the reason that
gradient decays in LSTM with the use of the hyperbolic tangent and the sigmoid functions as mentioned above).
Moreover, the existing RNN models share the same component σ(Wxt + Uht−1 + b) in (1), where the recurrent
connection entangles all the neurons. This makes it hard
to interpret and understand the roles of the trained neurons
(e.g., what patterns each neuron responds to) since the simple visualization of the outputs of individual neurons [18] is
hard to ascertain the function of one neuron without considering the others.
15457

