Real-Time Seamless Single Shot 6D Object Pose Prediction
Bugra Tekin
EPFL

Sudipta N. Sinha
Microsoft Research

Pascal Fua
EPFL

bugra.tekin@epfl.ch

sudipta.sinha@microsoft.com

pascal.fua@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose a single-shot approach for simultaneously
detecting an object in an RGB image and predicting its 6D
pose without requiring multiple stages or having to examine
multiple hypotheses. Unlike a recently proposed single-shot
technique for this task [10] that only predicts an approximate 6D pose that must then be refined, ours is accurate
enough not to require additional post-processing. As a result, it is much faster – 50 fps on a Titan X (Pascal) GPU
– and more suitable for real-time processing. The key component of our method is a new CNN architecture inspired
by [27, 28] that directly predicts the 2D image locations of
the projected vertices of the object’s 3D bounding box. The
object’s 6D pose is then estimated using a PnP algorithm.
For single object and multiple object pose estimation
on the L INE M OD and O CCLUSION datasets, our approach substantially outperforms other recent CNN-based
approaches [10, 25] when they are all used without postprocessing. During post-processing, a pose refinement step
can be used to boost the accuracy of these two methods, but
at 10 fps or less, they are much slower than our method.

1. Introduction
Real-time object detection and 6D pose estimation is
crucial for augmented reality, virtual reality, and robotics.
Currently, methods relying on depth data acquired by RGBD cameras are quite robust [1, 3, 4, 11, 13]. However, active depth sensors are power hungry, which makes 6D object detection methods for passive RGB images more attractive for mobile and wearable cameras. There are many
fast keypoint and edge-based methods [21, 31, 36] that are
effective for textured objects. However, they have difficulty
handling weakly textured or untextured objects and processing low-resolution video streams, which are quite common
when dealing with cameras on wearable devices.
Deep learning techniques have recently been used to address these limitations [10, 25]. BB8 [25] is a 6D object
detection pipeline made of one CNN to coarsely segment
the object and another to predict the 2D locations of the

projections of the object’s 3D bounding box given the segmentation, which are then used to compute the 6D pose using a PnP algorithm [16]. The method is effective but slow
due to its multi-stage nature. SSD-6D [10] is a different
pipeline that relies on the SSD architecture [19] to predict
2D bounding boxes and a very rough estimate of the object’s
orientation in a single step. This is followed by an approximation to predict the object’s depth from the size of its 2D
bounding box in the image, to lift the 2D detections to 6D.
Both BB8 and SSD-6D require a further pose refinement
step for improved accuracy, which increases their running
times linearly with the number of objects being detected.
In this paper, we propose a single-shot deep CNN architecture that takes the image as input and directly detects
the 2D projections of the 3D bounding box vertices. It is
end-to-end trainable and accurate even without any a posteriori refinement. And since, we do not need this refinement
step, we also do not need a precise and detailed textured
3D object model that is needed by other methods [10, 25].
We only need the 3D bounding box of the object shape for
training. This can be derived from other easier to acquire
and approximate 3D shape representations.
We demonstrate state-of-the-art accuracy on the
L INE M OD dataset [8], which has become a de facto
standard benchmark for 6D pose estimation. However,
we are much faster than the competing techniques by a
factor of more than five, when dealing with a single object.
Furthermore, we pay virtually no time-penalty when
handling several objects and our running time remains
constant whereas that of other methods grow proportional
to the number of objects, which we demonstrate on the
O CCLUSION dataset [1].
Therefore, our contribution is an architecture that yields
a fast and accurate one-shot 6D pose prediction without requiring any post-processing. It extends single shot CNN architectures for 2D detection in a seamless and natural way
to the 6D detection task. Our implementation is based on
YOLO [28] but the approach is amenable to other singleshot detectors such as SSD [19] and its variants.

292

