First-Person Hand Action Benchmark with RGB-D Videos
and 3D Hand Pose Annotations
Guillermo Garcia-Hernando

Shanxin Yuan
Seungryul Baek
Imperial College London

Tae-Kyun Kim

{g.garcia-hernando,s.yuan14,s.baek15,tk.kim}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In this work we study the use of 3D hand poses to recognize first-person dynamic hand actions interacting with
3D objects. Towards this goal, we collected RGB-D video
sequences comprised of more than 100K frames of 45 daily
hand action categories, involving 26 different objects in several hand configurations. To obtain hand pose annotations,
we used our own mo-cap system that automatically infers
the 3D location of each of the 21 joints of a hand model via
6 magnetic sensors and inverse kinematics. Additionally, we
recorded the 6D object poses and provide 3D object models for a subset of hand-object interaction sequences. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first benchmark that
enables the study of first-person hand actions with the use
of 3D hand poses. We present an extensive experimental
evaluation of RGB-D and pose-based action recognition by
18 baselines/state-of-the-art approaches. The impact of using appearance features, poses, and their combinations are
measured, and the different training/testing protocols are
evaluated. Finally, we assess how ready the 3D hand pose
estimation field is when hands are severely occluded by objects in egocentric views and its influence on action recognition. From the results, we see clear benefits of using hand
pose as a cue for action recognition compared to other data
modalities. Our dataset and experiments can be of interest
to communities of 3D hand pose estimation, 6D object pose,
and robotics as well as action recognition.

1. Introduction
We interact with the world using our hands to manipulate
objects, machines, tools, and socialize with other humans.
In this work we are interested in understanding how we use
our hands while performing daily life dynamic actions with
the help of fine-grained hand pose features, a problem of
interest for multiple applications requiring high precision,
such as hand rehabilitation [1], virtual/augmented reality
[24], teleoperation [89], and robot imitation learning [2].

Figure 1: We show two frames from a sequence belonging
to the action class ‘pour juice’. We propose a novel firstperson action recognition dataset with RGB-D videos and
3D hand pose annotations. We use magnetic sensors and
inverse kinematics to capture the hand pose. On the right
we see the captured depth image and hand pose. We also
captured 6D object pose for a subset of hand-object actions.

Previous work in first-person action recognition [8, 23,
31, 56] found that daily actions are well explained by looking at hands, a similar observation found in third-person
view [77]. In these approaches, hand information is extracted from hand silhouettes [31, 56] or discrete grasp classification [8, 23, 50] using low-level image features. In fullbody human action recognition it is known that using higher
level and viewpoint invariant features such as body pose can
benefit action recognition [54, 74, 79, 81, 86], although this
has not yet been studied in detail for hands. Compared to
full-body actions, hand actions present unique differences
that make the use of pose as a cue not obvious: style and

409

