Reinforcement Cutting-Agent Learning for Video Object Segmentation
Junwei Han1 , Le Yang1 , Dingwen Zhang1,2∗, Xiaojun Chang3 , Xiaodan Liang3
1
Northwestern Polytechincal University, 2 Xidian University, 3 Carnegie Mellon University
junweihan2010@gmail.com, nwpuyangle@gmail.com, zdw2006yyy@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
cxj273@gmail.com, xdliang328@gmail.com

Abstract
Video object segmentation is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision community. In this paper,
we formulate this problem as a Markov Decision Process,
where agents are learned to segment object regions under a
deep reinforcement learning framework. Essentially, learning agents for segmentation is nontrivial as segmentation
is a nearly continuous decision-making process, where the
number of the involved agents (pixels or superpixels) and
action steps from the seed (super)pixels to the whole object mask might be incredibly huge. To overcome this difficulty, this paper simplifies the learning of segmentation
agents to the learning of a cutting-agent, which only has
a limited number of action units and can converge in just
a few action steps. The basic assumption is that object
segmentation mainly relies on the interaction between object regions and their context. Thus, with an optimal object (box) region and context (box) region, we can obtain
the desirable segmentation mask through further inference.
Based on this assumption, we establish a novel reinforcement cutting-agent learning framework, where the cuttingagent consists of a cutting-policy network and a cuttingexecution network. The former learns policies for deciding
optimal object-context box pair, while the latter executes
the cutting function based on the inferred object-context box
pair. With the collaborative interaction between the two networks, our method can achieve the outperforming VOS performance on two public benchmarks, which demonstrates
the rationality of our assumption as well as the effectiveness of the proposed learning framework.

1. Introduction
The video object segmentation (VOS) task [36, 37, 18]
focuses on labeling each pixel as foreground or background
in the given frame. It is the foundation of many vision
tasks, such as scene understanding [8] and video surveil∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Segmentation masks. For an identical segmentation
model, different object boxes (shown in red) and context boxes
(shown in blue) can generate different segmentation masks. The
gt indicates the ground truth segmentation mask for this frame.

lance [7, 4]. There are three kinds of VOS methods in general, including unsupervised VOS methods [29, 43], weakly
supervised VOS methods [5, 11, 48], and semi-supervised
VOS methods [1, 12, 16], respectively. This paper mainly
focuses on the semi-supervised VOS.
One common choice for addressing the semi-supervised
VOS problem is based on tracking or matching [1, 16, 43],
where the core idea is to find the image (super)pixels that
correspond to those in the previous (annotated) mask from
the preceding video frame. However, this strategy is hard to
obtain satisfactory performance in practice because in the
unconstrained real-world scenarios, the blurry motion and
heavy occlusion would destroy the matching results. Besides, the cluttered background and textureless object foreground would mislead the matching results. In this paper,
we model this problem as a conditional decision-making
process rather than the simple matching or tracking process,
where one or more agents are employed to decide which
(super)pixels are the corresponding foreground object con-

9080

