The Lovász-Softmax loss: A tractable surrogate for the optimization of the
intersection-over-union measure in neural networks
Maxim Berman Amal Rannen Triki Matthew B. Blaschko
Dept. ESAT, Center for Processing Speech and Images
KU Leuven, Belgium
{maxim.berman,amal.rannen,matthew.blaschko}@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract

have been mapped to probabilities through a softmax unit

The Jaccard index, also referred to as the intersectionover-union score, is commonly employed in the evaluation
of image segmentation results given its perceptual qualities,
scale invariance – which lends appropriate relevance to
small objects, and appropriate counting of false negatives,
in comparison to per-pixel losses. We present a method
for direct optimization of the mean intersection-over-union
loss in neural networks, in the context of semantic image
segmentation, based on the convex Lovász extension of submodular losses. The loss is shown to perform better with
respect to the Jaccard index measure than the traditionally
used cross-entropy loss. We show quantitative and qualitative differences between optimizing the Jaccard index per
image versus optimizing the Jaccard index taken over an
entire dataset. We evaluate the impact of our method in a
semantic segmentation pipeline and show substantially improved intersection-over-union segmentation scores on the
Pascal VOC and Cityscapes datasets using state-of-the-art
deep learning segmentation architectures.

fi (c) = P

∀i ∈ [1, p], ∀c ∈ C.

Jc (y ∗ , ỹ) =

|{y ∗ = c} ∩ {ỹ = c}|
,
|{y ∗ = c} ∪ {ỹ = c}|

p

1X
log fi (yi∗ ),
p i=1

(1)

with p the number of pixels in the image or minibatch considered, yi∗ ∈ C the ground truth class of pixel i, fi (yi∗ ) the
network probability estimate of the ground truth probability
of pixel i, and f a vector of all network outputs fi (c). This
supposes that the unnormalized scores Fi (c) of the network

(3)

which gives the ratio in [0, 1] of the intersection between the
ground truth mask and the evaluated mask over their union,
with the convention that 0/0 = 1. A corresponding loss
function to be employed in empirical risk minimization is
∆Jc (y ∗ , ỹ) = 1 − Jc (y ∗ , ỹ).

We consider the task of semantic image segmentation,
where each pixel i of a given image has to be classified
into an object class c ∈ C. Most of the deep network based
segmentation methods rely on logistic regression, optimizing
the cross-entropy loss [10]

(2)

Loss (1) generalizes the logistic loss and leads to smooth optimization. During testing, the decision function commonly
used consists in picking the class of maximum score: the
predicted class for a given pixel i is ỹi = arg maxc∈C Fi (c).
The measure of the cross-entropy loss on a validation set
is often a poor indicator of the quality of the segmentation.
A better performance measure commonly used for evaluating segmentation masks is the Jaccard index, also called
the intersection-over-union (IoU) score. Given a vector of
ground truth labels y ∗ and a vector of predicted labels ỹ, the
Jaccard index of class c is defined as [14]

1. Introduction

loss(f ) = −

eFi (c)
Fi (c′ )
c′ ∈C e

(4)

For multilabel datasets, the Jaccard index is commonly averaged across classes, yielding the mean IoU (mIoU).
We develop here a method for optimizing the performance
of a discriminatively trained segmentation system with respect to the Jaccard index. We show that a piecewise linear
convex surrogate to the Jaccard loss based on the Lovász
extension of submodular set functions yields a consistent
improvement of predicted segmentation masks as measured
by the Jaccard index.
Although the Jaccard index is often computed globally,
over every pixel of the evaluated segmentation dataset [8], it
can also be computed independently for each image. Using
the per-image Jaccard index is known to have better perceptual accuracy by reducing the bias towards large instances of

4413

