MaskLab: Instance Segmentation by Refining Object Detection with Semantic
and Direction Features
Liang-Chieh Chen1 , Alexander Hermans2∗ , George Papandreou1 , Florian Schroff1 , Peng Wang3∗ , Hartwig Adam1
Google Inc.1 , RWTH Aachen University2 , UCLA3

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the problem of instance segmentation, the task of simultaneously solving object detection
and semantic segmentation. Towards this goal, we present
a model, called MaskLab, which produces three outputs:
box detection, semantic segmentation, and direction prediction. Building on top of the Faster-RCNN object detector,
the predicted boxes provide accurate localization of object
instances. Within each region of interest, MaskLab performs
foreground/background segmentation by combining semantic and direction prediction. Semantic segmentation assists
the model in distinguishing between objects of different semantic classes including background, while the direction
prediction, estimating each pixel’s direction towards its corresponding center, allows separating instances of the same
semantic class. Moreover, we explore the effect of incorporating recent successful methods from both segmentation
and detection (e.g., atrous convolution and hypercolumn).
Our proposed model is evaluated on the COCO instance segmentation benchmark and shows comparable performance
with other state-of-art models.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) [41,
40] have significantly improved the performance of computer vision systems. In particular, models based on Fully
Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [64, 53] achieve remarkable results in object detection (localize instances) [22, 69,
25, 62, 51, 60, 19, 47] and semantic segmentation (identify
semantic class of each pixel) [10, 46, 56, 52, 80, 73, 79, 54].
Recently, the community has been tackling the more challenging instance segmentation task [26, 28], whose goal is
to localize object instances with pixel-level accuracy, jointly
solving object detection and semantic segmentation.
Due to the intricate nature of instance segmentation, one
could develop a system focusing on instance box-level detection first and then refining the prediction to obtain more
∗ Work done in part during an internship at Google Inc.

(a) Image
(b) Predicted masks
Figure 1. Instance segmentation aims to solve detection and segmentation jointly. We tackle this problem by refining the segmentation
masks within predicted boxes (gray bounding boxes).

detailed mask segmentation, or conversely, one could target
at sharp segmentation results before tackling the association
problem of assigning pixel predictions to instances. The
state-of-art instance segmentation model FCIS [44] employs
the position-sensitive [16] inside/outside score maps to encode the foreground/background segmentation information.
The usage of inside/outside score maps successfully segments foreground/background regions within each predicted
bounding box, but it also doubles the number of output channels because of the redundancy of background encoding. On
the other hand, the prior work of [70] produces three outputs:
semantic segmentation, instance center direction (predicting pixel’s direction towards its corresponding instance center), and depth estimation. However, complicate template
matching is employed subsequently to decode the predicted
direction for instance detection. In this work, we present
MaskLab (short for Mask Labeling), seeking to combine
the best from both detection-based and segmentation-based
methods for solving instance segmentation.
Specifically, MaskLab builds on top of Faster R-CNN
[62] and additionally produces two outputs: semantic segmentation and instance center direction [70]. The predicted
boxes returned by Faster R-CNN bring object instances of
different scales to a canonical scale, and MaskLab performs
foreground/background segmentation within each predicted
box by exploiting both semantic segmentation and direction prediction. The semantic segmentation prediction, encoding the pixel-wise classification information including
14013

