Accurate and Diverse Sampling of Sequences based on a
“Best of Many” Sample Objective
Apratim Bhattacharyya, Bernt Schiele, Mario Fritz
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
{abhattac, schiele, mfritz}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Abstract
For autonomous agents to successfully operate in the real
world, anticipation of future events and states of their environment is a key competence. This problem has been formalized as a sequence extrapolation problem, where a number of
observations are used to predict the sequence into the future.
Real-world scenarios demand a model of uncertainty of such
predictions, as predictions become increasingly uncertain –
in particular on long time horizons. While impressive results
have been shown on point estimates, scenarios that induce
multi-modal distributions over future sequences remain challenging. Our work addresses these challenges in a Gaussian
Latent Variable model for sequence prediction. Our core
contribution is a “Best of Many” sample objective that leads
to more accurate and more diverse predictions that better
capture the true variations in real-world sequence data. Beyond our analysis of improved model fit, our models also
empirically outperform prior work on three diverse tasks
ranging from traffic scenes to weather data.

1. Introduction
Predicting the future is important in many scenarios ranging from autonomous driving to precipitation forecasting.
Many of these tasks can be formulated as sequence prediction problems. Given a past sequence of events, probable
future outcomes are to be predicted.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) especially LSTM formulations are state-of-the-art models for sequence prediction
tasks [2, 23, 6, 22]. These approaches predict only point estimates. However, many sequence prediction problems are
only partially observed or stochastic in nature and hence the
distribution of future sequences can be highly multi-modal.
Consider the task of predicting future pedestrian trajectories.
In many cases, we do not have any information about the
intentions of the pedestrains in the scene. A pedestrian after
walking over a Zerba crossing might decide to turn either left
or right. A point estimate in such a situation would be highly

Figure 1: Comparison between our “Best of Many” sample
objective and the standard CVAE objective.
unrealistic. Therefore, in order to incorporate uncertainty of
future outcomes, we are interested in structured predictions.
Structured prediction in this context implies learning a one to
many mapping of a given fixed sequence to plausible future
sequences [19]. This leads to more realistic predictions and
enables probabilistic inference.
Recent work [14] has proposed deep conditional generative models with Gaussian latent variables for structured
sequence prediction. The Conditional Variational AutoEncoder (CVAE) framework [19] is used in [14] for learning of the Gaussian Latent Variables. We identify two key
limitations of this CVAE framework. First, the currently
used objectives hinder learning of diverse samples due to a
marginalization over multi-modal futures. Second, a mismatch in latent variable distribution between training and
testing leads to errors in model fitting. We overcome both
challenges which results in more accurate and diverse samples – better capturing the true variations in data. Our main
contributions are: 1. We propose a novel “best of many” sample objective; 2. We analyze the benefits of our ‘best of many”
sample objective analytically as well as show an improved
fit of latent variables on models trained with this novel objec18485

