Beyond the Pixel-Wise Loss for Topology-Aware Delineation
Agata Mosinska1∗ Pablo Márquez-Neila12 Mateusz Koziński1† Pascal Fua1
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
2
ARTORG Center for Biomedical Engineering Research, University of Bern
{agata.mosinska, pablo.marquezneila, mateusz.kozinski, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Delineation of curvilinear structures is an important
problem in Computer Vision with multiple practical applications. With the advent of Deep Learning, many current
approaches on automatic delineation have focused on finding more powerful deep architectures, but have continued
using the habitual pixel-wise losses such as binary crossentropy. In this paper we claim that pixel-wise losses alone
are unsuitable for this problem because of their inability to
reflect the topological impact of mistakes in the final prediction. We propose a new loss term that is aware of the higherorder topological features of linear structures. We also exploit a refinement pipeline that iteratively applies the same
model over the previous delineation to refine the predictions
at each step, while keeping the number of parameters and
the complexity of the model constant.
When combined with the standard pixel-wise loss, both
our new loss term and an iterative refinement boost the
quality of the predicted delineations, in some cases almost
doubling the accuracy as compared to the same classifier
trained with the binary cross-entropy alone. We show that
our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods on a
wide range of data, from microscopy to aerial images.

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)
Figure 1: Linear structures. (a) Detected roads in an
aerial image. (b) Detected cell membranes in an electron
microscopy (EM) image. (c) Segmentation obtained after
detecting neuronal membranes using [21] (d) Segmentation
obtained after detecting membranes using our method. Our
approach closes small gaps, which prevents much bigger
topology mistakes.

1. Introduction
Automated delineation of curvilinear structures, such as
those in Fig. 1(a, b), has been investigated since the inception of the field of Computer Vision in the 1960s and 1970s.
Nevertheless, despite decades of sustained effort, full automation remains elusive when the image data is noisy and
the structures are complex. As in many other fields, the advent of Machine Learning techniques in general, and Deep
Learning in particular, has produced substantial advances,
in large part because learning features from the data makes
them more robust to appearance variations [5, 17, 27, 32].
∗ This work was supported by Swiss National Science Foundation.
† This work was funded by the ERC FastProof grant.

However, all new methods focus on finding either better
features to feed a classifier or more powerful deep architectures, while still using a pixel-wise loss such as binary
cross-entropy for training purposes. Such loss is entirely
local and does not account for the very specific and sometimes complex topology of curvilinear structures penalizing
all mistakes equally regardless of their influence on geometry. As a shown in Fig. 1(c,d) this is a major problem because small localized pixel-wise mistakes can result in large
topological changes.
In this paper, we show that supplementing the usual
pixel-wise loss by a topology loss that promotes results with
13136

