Probabilistic Plant Modeling via Multi-View Image-to-Image Translation
Takahiro Isokane1,∗

Fumio Okura1,2,∗ Ayaka Ide1 Yasuyuki Matsushita1
1
2
Osaka University
JST PRESTO

{isokane,okura,ide,yagi}@am.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Yasushi Yagi1

yasumat@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

Figure 1: Result of branch structure estimation from simulated and real leafy plant images. From multi-view plant images,
our method infers the branch structure in a probabilistic framework. An explicit graph structure (red lines) can be derived
from the probabilistic plant model.

Abstract
This paper describes a method for inferring threedimensional (3D) plant branch structures that are hidden
under leaves from multi-view observations. Unlike previous geometric approaches that heavily rely on the visibility
of the branches or use parametric branching models, our
method makes statistical inferences of branch structures in
a probabilistic framework. By inferring the probability of
branch existence using a Bayesian extension of image-toimage translation applied to each of multi-view images, our
method generates a probabilistic plant 3D model, which
represents the 3D branching pattern that cannot be directly
observed. Experiments demonstrate the usefulness of the
proposed approach in generating convincing branch structures in comparison to prior approaches.

1. Introduction
We propose an approach to estimate branch (skeleton) structures of plants from multi-view images that are
severely occluded by leaves. Unveiling hidden skeleton
structures is one of the most challenging tasks in computer
vision, because it naturally involves inference of the unobserved structures. Skeleton estimation is actively studied for
human pose estimation [6]. A recent trend in image-based
human skeleton estimation relies on the prior knowledge of
∗ Authors contributed equally.

the relationship among joints for extracting and interpreting joints from images. Unlike human bodies, the branch
structures of plants are less organized, namely, the number
of joints and their connections are generally unknown. In
addition, heavy occlusions due to leaves makes the problem
harder. These aspects pose a unique challenge in plant’s
structure estimation. Although difficult, branch structure
estimation has a number of applications, such as synthetic
plant generation in computer graphics and computational
agriculture.
Toward this goal, this paper presents a multi-view imageto-image translation approach to 3D branch structure estimation. To estimate the branching paths hidden under
leaves, we cast the estimation problem to an image-to-image
translation problem [12], which converts an image from one
domain to another domain. In our context, we convert an
input image of a leafy plant to a map that represents the
branch structure, i.e., each pixel containing the prediction
of “branch” or “not-branch”. To deal with the uncertainty of
the prediction, we develop a Bayesian extension of imageto-image translation applied to each of the multi-view images. It yields the prediction together with its reliability,
resulting in probabilistic estimates in a similar manner to a
Bayesian semantic segmentation approach [13].
The probabilistic representation is advantageous in a few
important aspects; not only that we have access to the credibility of the estimates, but also that it allows us to consolidate the view-dependent inferences in a 3D space in a
well-defined probabilistic framework. Thus, in our method,

2906

