MoNet: Deep Motion Exploitation for Video Object Segmentation
Huaxin Xiao1,2
1

Jiashi Feng2

National University of Defense Technology

2

Guosheng Lin3

Yu Liu1

National University of Singapore

{xiaohuaxin, jasonyuliu, mjzhang}@nudt.edu.cn

3

Maojun Zhang1

Nanyang Technological University

elefjia@nus.edu.sg

gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel MoNet model to deeply
exploit motion cues for boosting video object segmentation performance from two aspects, i.e., frame representation learning and segmentation refinement. Concretely,
MoNet exploits computed motion cue (i.e., optical flow) to
reinforce the representation of the target frame by aligning and integrating representations from its neighbors. The
new representation provides valuable temporal contexts for
segmentation and improves robustness to various common
contaminating factors, e.g., motion blur, appearance variation and deformation of video objects. Moreover, MoNet exploits motion inconsistency and transforms such motion cue
into foreground/background prior to eliminate distraction
from confusing instances and noisy regions. By introducing
a distance transform layer, MoNet can effectively separate
motion-inconstant instances/regions and thoroughly refine
segmentation results. Integrating the proposed two motion
exploitation components with a standard segmentation network, MoNet provides new state-of-the-art performance on
three competitive benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Given the segmentation mask of a target object in the first
frame, semi-supervised Video Object Segmentation (VOS)
aims to automatically segment the specified object in subsequent video frames. Recently remarkable progress has been
made by CNN-based approaches [3, 5, 13, 15, 26] which
generally solve the task in two stages: offline training a segmentation model and online fine-tuning it on the test video.
Conventionally, CNN-based methods [3, 26] ignore the
temporal information among adjacent frames and cast VOS
as a static image segmentation problem. Such frame-byframe methods suffer a lot from unconstrained video conditions like deformation, scale variation and motion blur,
which lead to large appearance changes of the target object from the initial frame to subsequent ones (see results in
Fig. 1 by OSVOS [3] which processes each frame independently). Moreover, new instances with confusing appear-

Figure 1. Segmentation results (red masks) of the proposed
MoNet, OSVOS [3] and MSK [15] on two video sequences from
DAVIS [21], which include several typical challenges for VOS,
e.g., appearance change, scale variation (the top example) and
confusing instances (the bottom example). MoNet deeply exploits
motion cues from adjacent frames and well copes with these challenges, producing better segmentation results than state-of-the-art
OSVOS and MSK. Best viewed in color with 4× zoom.

ance appearing in subsequent frames may fail VOS models
in distinguishing the target object from distracting ones (see
the bottom example in Fig. 1).
To tackle these challenges, leveraging motion cues (i.e.,
optical flow in this work) as additional information along
the temporal domain becomes necessary for VOS models
to enhance segmentation consistency and quality. One simple way is to apply segmentation models to optical flow
field [15, 29]. However, in this case, the model performance
would be limited by the quality of flow estimation (see results in Fig. 1 by MSK [15] employing RGB image and
optical flow as the inputs). To exploit motion cues more
effectively, [5, 11] introduce learnable networks to extract
motion features from optical flow to complement appearance features, but they learn these two types of features
separately, which limits their robustness to various video
challenges. Different from simply treating motion as extra
inputs or external features, this work attempts to give a new
insight into exploiting and utilizing such informative cues
better for CNN-based VOS.
First of all, we exploit motion cues to reinforce the
learned representation of a target frame. Intense changes
in object appearance and scale can bring great difficulties in

1140

