Generating Synthetic X-ray Images of a Person from the Surface Geometry
Brian Teixeira1 , Vivek Singh1 , Terrence Chen1 , Kai Ma1 , Birgi Tamersoy1 , Yifan Wu2 , Elena
Balashova3 , and Dorin Comaniciu1
1

Medical Imaging Technologies, Siemens Medical Solutions Inc., Princeton, NJ, USA
2
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
3
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA

Abstract
We present a novel framework that learns to predict human anatomy from body surface. Specifically, our approach
generates a synthetic X-ray image of a person only from the
person’s surface geometry. Furthermore, the synthetic Xray image is parametrized and can be manipulated by adjusting a set of body markers which are also generated during the X-ray image prediction. With the proposed framework, multiple synthetic X-ray images can easily be generated by varying surface geometry. By perturbing the parameters, several additional synthetic X-ray images can be
generated from the same surface geometry. As a result, our
approach offers a potential to overcome the training data
barrier in the medical domain. This capability is achieved
by learning a pair of networks - one learns to generate the
full image from the partial image and a set of parameters,
and the other learns to estimate the parameters given the
full image. During training, the two networks are trained iteratively such that they would converge to a solution where
the predicted parameters and the full image are consistent
with each other. In addition to medical data enrichment,
our framework can also be used for image completion as
well as anomaly detection. 1

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, there has been significant advances
in realistic human body shape modeling and simulation in
the graphics domain [2, 14, 25, 16], where different statistical models have been applied to learn compact parametric representations of the human body shape. However, their impact on the healthcare domain is relatively
limited [21, 29]. One major reason is that existing shape
1 This feature is based on research, and is not commercially available.
Due to regulatory reasons its future availability cannot be guaranteed.

Figure 1. Synthetic X-ray generated from 3D surface meshes.
Each row contains data corresponding to one patient, (a) 3D surface meshes (b) corresponding ground truth images obtained using
medical scanning, (c) predicted X-ray images using the proposed
approach, and (d) the X-ray images with predicted markers.

modeling approaches focus primarily on the skin surface
while the healthcare domain pays more attention to the internal organs. This work attempts to tackle this limitation
by addressing the challenging task of estimating the internal anatomy of human body from the surface data. More
specifically, our approach generates a synthetic X-ray image of a person only from the surface geometry. However
the synthetic X-ray would only serve as an approximation
of the true internal anatomy, we thus simultaneously predict markers which can be adjusted to update the X-ray image. Since the markers serve as spatial parameters that can
be used to perturb the image, we refer to the predicted image as a parametrized image. Figure 1 shows examples of
parametrized X-ray images generated from surface data.
Learning to predict parametrized images is a very challenging task due to strict constraints in the output space. As
the training framework learns to predict images and the corresponding spatial parameters (i.e. markers), it also needs
to ensure that the perturbations of these parameters lies on
a manifold of ’realistic deformations’ (e.g. realistic facial

9059

