Learning to Detect Features in Texture Images
Linguang Zhang

Szymon Rusinkiewicz

Princeton University

Ground Texture Image

Abstract
Local feature detection is a fundamental task in computer vision, and hand-crafted feature detectors such as
SIFT have shown success in applications including imagebased localization and registration. Recent work has used
features detected in texture images for precise global localization, but is limited by the performance of existing feature detectors on textures, as opposed to natural images.
We propose an effective and scalable method for learning
feature detectors for textures, which combines an existing
“ranking” loss with an efficient fully-convolutional architecture as well as a new training-loss term that maximizes the
“peakedness” of the response map. We demonstrate that our
detector is more repeatable than existing methods, leading
to improvements in a real-world texture-based localization
application.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision tasks require computing local features as the first step. These tasks include but are not limited
to image alignment [33, 3], image retrieval [17, 9], imagebased localization and reconstruction [24, 25]. A pipeline
used for computing local features given a single input image
typically consists of a feature detector and a feature descriptor, which are often performed sequentially. For both
of these two important components, there is a substantial
amount of work on designing hand-crafted solutions, and
some of the best-performing hand-crafted pipelines such as
SIFT [11] have become gold standards in real applications.
Nevertheless, nearly all existing hand-crafted solutions are
optimized for and evaluated on natural images. There are,
however, many more types of images that are outside the
scope of natural images, but also require a well-performing
feature pipeline. A recent project named Micro-GPS [31]
has demonstrated that precise global localization can exploit
textures (such as those present on ground surfaces ranging
from carpet to asphalt), because textures globally exhibit
many distinctive and persistent features that can be used for
unique identification. While a hand-crafted feature pipeline
such as SIFT indeed works properly in most of the textures

Trajectory

Detected Features

Localization
in the Map
(Asphalt)

Figure 1. From each test image, our proposed detector extracts
highly repeatable features, which can be utilized by Micro-GPS to
achieve precise global localization in a pre-built map, such as the
asphalt map being shown. Note that Micro-GPS locates each test
image independently in the map (ignoring temporal coherence).

demonstrated in that work, its robustness varies on different
textures. We observe that different textures consist of different “basic elements” that are not always ideal for a particular feature detector. For example, a typical blob or corner
detector will find few features on the stripes present in a
wood texture. In this paper, we propose a learning-based
feature detector optimized for texture images, and demonstrate its effectiveness in the Micro-GPS system(Figure 1).
In recent years, machine learning techniques have shown
success in improving feature pipelines. Most of this previous work, however, focuses on learning feature descriptors [23, 5, 22, 30], which we argue is a more straightforward problem than learning a feature detector. While it is
difficult to obtain ground-truth labels for both feature detection and feature description, learning a feature descriptor often relies on self-supervision, which is usually achieved by
training with corresponding and non-corresponding image
patches. Exploiting such self-supervision is more natural
for learning a feature descriptor, because it exactly matches
how a descriptor is evaluated — minimizing the distance between corresponding descriptors and maximizing the distance between non-corresponding descriptors. In contrast,
it is less obvious how to perform similar self-supervision

6325

