TOM-Net: Learning Transparent Object Matting from a Single Image
Guanying Chen∗, Kai Han∗, Kwan-Yee K. Wong
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{gychen, khan, kykwong}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract

Matte

This paper addresses the problem of transparent object
matting. Existing image matting approaches for transparent objects often require tedious capturing procedures and
long processing time, which limit their practical use. In
this paper, we first formulate transparent object matting as
a refractive flow estimation problem. We then propose a
deep learning framework, called TOM-Net, for learning
the refractive flow. Our framework comprises two parts,
namely a multi-scale encoder-decoder network for producing a coarse prediction, and a residual network for refinement. At test time, TOM-Net takes a single image as input, and outputs a matte (consisting of an object mask,
an attenuation mask and a refractive flow field) in a fast
feed-forward pass. As no off-the-shelf dataset is available
for transparent object matting, we create a large-scale synthetic dataset consisting of 178K images of transparent objects rendered in front of images sampled from the Microsoft
COCO dataset. We also collect a real dataset consisting
of 876 samples using 14 transparent objects and 60 background images. Promising experimental results have been
achieved on both synthetic and real data, which clearly
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
Image matting refers to the process of extracting the
foreground matte of an image by locating the region of the
foreground object and estimating the opacity of each pixel
inside the foreground region. The foreground object can
then be composited onto a new background image using the
matting equation [20]
C = F + (1 − α)B,

α ∈ [0, 1],

(1)

where C denotes the composited color, F the foreground
color, B the background color, and α the opacity.
Image matting has been widely used in image editing and
film production. However, most of the existing methods are
∗ indicates equal contribution

TOM-Net

Object Mask

Attenuation

Refractive Flow

Composite

Figure 1. Given an image of a transparent object as input, our
model can estimate the environment matte (consisting of an object
mask, an attenuation mask and a refractive flow field) in a feedforward pass. The transparent object can then be composited onto
new background images with the extracted matte.

tailored for opaque objects, and cannot handle transparent
objects whose appearances depend on how light is refracted
from the background.
To model the effect of refraction, Zongker et al. [26] introduced environment matting as
C = F + (1 − α)B + Φ,

α ∈ [0, 1],

(2)

where Φ is the contribution of environment light caused by
refraction or reflection at the foreground object. Besides
estimating the foreground shape, environment matting also
describes how objects interact with the background.
Many efforts [3, 22, 15, 25, 7, 5] have been devoted to
improving the seminal work of [26]. The resulting methods often require either a huge number of input images to
achieve a higher accuracy, or specially designed patterns to
reduce the number of required images. They are in general
all very computational expensive.
In this paper, we focus on environment matting for transparent objects. It is highly ill-posed, if not impossible,
to estimate an accurate environment matte for transparent
objects from a single image with an arbitrary background.
Given the huge solution space, there may exist multiple objects and backgrounds that can produce the same refractive
effect. In order to make the problem more tractable, we simplify our problem to estimating an environment matte that
19233

