Learning a Discriminative Feature Network for Semantic Segmentation
Changqian Yu1 Jingbo Wang2 Chao Peng3 Changxin Gao1∗ Gang Yu3 Nong Sang1
1
Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Peking University
3
Megvii Inc. (Face++)
{changqian yu,cgao,nsang}@hust.edu.cn,wangjingbo1219@pku.edu.cn,{pengchao,yugang}@megvii.com

Abstract
Most existing methods of semantic segmentation still suffer from two aspects of challenges: intra-class inconsistency and inter-class indistinction. To tackle these two problems, we propose a Discriminative Feature Network (DFN),
which contains two sub-networks: Smooth Network and
Border Network. Specifically, to handle the intra-class inconsistency problem, we specially design a Smooth Network
with Channel Attention Block and global average pooling
to select the more discriminative features. Furthermore, we
propose a Border Network to make the bilateral features of
boundary distinguishable with deep semantic boundary supervision. Based on our proposed DFN, we achieve stateof-the-art performance 86.2% mean IOU on PASCAL VOC
2012 and 80.3% mean IOU on Cityscapes dataset.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental technique for
numerous computer vision applications like scene understanding, human parsing and autonomous driving. With
the recent development of the convolutional neural network,
especially the Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [27], a
lot of great work such as [40, 6, 19, 30] have obtained
promising results on the benchmarks. However, the features
learned by these methods are usually not discriminative to
differentiate 1) the patches which share the same semantic label but different appearances, named intra-class inconsistency as shown in the first row of Figure 1; 2) the two
adjacent patches which have different semantic labels but
with similar appearances, named inter-class indistinction as
shown in the second row of Figure 1.
To address these two challenges, we rethink the semantic segmentation task from a more macroscopic point of
view. In this way, we regard the semantic segmentation as
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Hard examples in semantic segmentation. The second
column is the output of FCN based model. The third column is the
output of our proposed approach. In the first row, the left bottom
corner of the cow is recognized as a horse. This is the Intra-class
Inconsistency problem. In the second row, the computer case has
the similar blue light and black shell with the computer screen,
which is hard to distinguish. This is the Inter-class Indistinction
problem.

a task to assign a consistent semantic label to a category of
things, rather than to each single pixel. From a macroscopic
perspective, regarding each category of pixels as a whole,
inherently considers both intra-class consistency and interclass variation. It means that the task demands discriminative features. To this end, we present a novel Discriminative
Feature Network (DFN) to learn the feature representation
which considers both the “intra-class consistency” and the
“inter-class distinction”.
Our DFN involves two components: Smooth Network
and Border Network, as Figure 2 illustrates. The Smooth
Network is designed to address the intra-class inconsistency
issue. To learn a robust feature representation for intra-class
consistency, we usually consider two crucial factors. On
the one hand, we need multi-scale and global context features to encode the local and global information. For example, the small white patch only in Figure 1(a) usually
11857

