PieAPP: Perceptual Image-Error Assessment through Pairwise Preference
Ekta Prashnani∗
Hong Cai∗
Yasamin Mostofi
University of California, Santa Barbara

Pradeep Sen

{ekta,hcai,ymostofi,psen}@ece.ucsb.edu

Abstract
The ability to estimate the perceptual error between images is an important problem in computer vision with many
applications. Although it has been studied extensively, however, no method currently exists that can robustly predict
visual differences like humans. Some previous approaches
used hand-coded models, but they fail to model the complexity of the human visual system. Others used machine learning to train models on human-labeled datasets, but creating
large, high-quality datasets is difficult because people are
unable to assign consistent error labels to distorted images.
In this paper, we present a new learning-based method that
is the first to predict perceptual image error like human observers. Since it is much easier for people to compare two
given images and identify the one more similar to a reference than to assign quality scores to each, we propose a
new, large-scale dataset labeled with the probability that
humans will prefer one image over another. We then train
a deep-learning model using a novel, pairwise-learning
framework to predict the preference of one distorted image over the other. Our key observation is that our trained
network can then be used separately with only one distorted
image and a reference to predict its perceptual error, without ever being trained on explicit human perceptual-error
labels. The perceptual error estimated by our new metric,
PieAPP, is well-correlated with human opinion. Furthermore, it significantly outperforms existing algorithms, beating the state-of-the-art by almost 3× on our test set in terms
of binary error rate, while also generalizing to new kinds of
distortions, unlike previous learning-based methods.

1 Introduction
One of the major goals of computer vision is to enable computers to “see” like humans. To this end, a key problem is
the automatic computation of the perceptual error (or “distance”) of a distorted image with respect to a corresponding
reference in a way that is consistent with human observers.
A successful solution to this problem would have many
applications, including image compression/coding, restoration, and adaptive reconstruction.
∗ Joint first authors.

This project was supported in part by NSF grants IIS-1321168 and
IIS-1619376, as well as a Fall 2017 AI Grant (awarded to Ekta Prashnani).

Because of its importance, this problem, also known
as full-reference image-quality assessment (FR-IQA) [58],
has received significant research attention in the past few
decades [5, 11, 23, 29, 30, 32]. The naı̈ve approaches do this
by simply computing mathematical distances between the
images based on norms such as L2 or L1 , but these are
well-known to be perceptually inaccurate [52]. Others have
proposed metrics that try to exploit known aspects of the human visual system (HVS) such as contrast sensitivity [22],
high-level structural acuity [52], and masking [48, 51], or
use other statistics/features [3,4,14,15,38,44–46,53,54,57].
However, such hand-coded models are fundamentally limited by the difficulty of accurately modeling the complexity
of the HVS and therefore do not work well in practice.
To address these limitations, some have proposed IQA
methods based on machine learning to learn more sophisticated models [19]. Although many learning-based methods
use hand-crafted image features [8, 10, 18, 20, 21, 31, 33, 35,
40], recent methods (including ours) apply deep-learning
to FR-IQA to learn features automatically [7, 17, 25]. However, the accuracy of all existing learning-based methods
depends on the size and quality of the datasets they are
trained on, and existing IQA datasets are small and noisy.
For instance, many datasets [16, 26, 27, 34, 47, 49, 55] are
labeled using a mean opinion score (MOS) where each user
gives the distorted image a subjective quality rating (e.g.,
0 = “bad”, 10 = “excellent”). These individual scores are
then averaged in an attempt to reduce noise. Unfortunately,
creating a good IQA dataset in this fashion is difficult because humans cannot assign quality or error labels to a distorted image consistently, even when comparing to a reference (e.g., try rating the images in Fig.1 from 0 to 10!).
Other datasets (e.g., TID2008 [43] and TID2013 [42])
leverage the fact that it is much easier for people to select
which image from a distorted pair is closer to the reference
than to assign them quality scores. To translate user preferences into quality scores, they then take a set of distorted
images and use a Swiss tournament [1] to assign scores to
each. However, this approach has the fundamental problem
that the same distorted image could have varying scores in
different sets (see supplementary for examples in TID2008
and TID2013). Moreover, the number of images and distortion types in all of these datasets is very limited. The

1808

