Surface Networks
Ilya Kostrikov1 , Zhongshi Jiang1 , Daniele Panozzo ∗1 , Denis Zorin †1 , and Joan Bruna‡1,2
1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
2
Center for Data Science, New York University

Abstract
We study data-driven representations for threedimensional triangle meshes, which are one of the
prevalent objects used to represent 3D geometry. Recent
works have developed models that exploit the intrinsic geometry of manifolds and graphs, namely the Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) and its spectral variants, which learn
from the local metric tensor via the Laplacian operator.
Despite offering excellent sample complexity and builtin invariances, intrinsic geometry alone is invariant to isometric deformations, making it unsuitable for many applications. To overcome this limitation, we propose several
upgrades to GNNs to leverage extrinsic differential geometry properties of three-dimensional surfaces, increasing its
modeling power. In particular, we propose to exploit the
Dirac operator, whose spectrum detects principal curvature directions — this is in stark contrast with the classical
Laplace operator, which directly measures mean curvature.
We coin the resulting models Surface Networks (SN).
We prove that these models define shape representations that are stable to deformation and to discretization,
and we demonstrate the efficiency and versatility of SNs on
two challenging tasks: temporal prediction of mesh deformations under non-linear dynamics and generative models using a variational autoencoder framework with encoders/decoders given by SNs.

1. Introduction
3D geometry analysis, manipulation and synthesis plays
an important role in a variety of applications from engineering to computer animation to medical imaging. Despite the
∗ DP was supported in part by the NSF CAREER award IIS-1652515, a
gift from Adobe, and a gift from nTopology.
† DZ was supported in part by the NSF awards DMS-1436591 and IIS1320635.
‡ JB was partially supported by Samsung Electronics (Improving Deep
Learning using Latent Structure) and DOA W911NF-17-1-0438. Corresponding author: bruna@cims.nyu.edu

vast amount of high-quality 3D geometric data available,
data-driven approaches to problems involving complex geometry have yet to become mainstream, in part due to the
lack of data representation regularity which is required for
traditional convolutional neural network approaches. While
in computer vision problems inputs are typically sampled
on regular two or three-dimensional grids, surface geometry is represented in a more complex form and, in general,
cannot be converted to an image-like format by parametrizing the shape using a single planar chart. Most commonly
an irregular triangle mesh is used to represent shapes, capturing its main topological and geometrical properties.
Similarly to the regular grid case (used for images or
videos), we are interested in data-driven representations that
strike the right balance between expressive power and sample complexity. In the case of CNNs, this is achieved by exploiting the inductive bias that most computer vision tasks
are locally stable to deformations, leading to localized, multiscale, stationary features. In the case of surfaces, we face
a fundamental modeling choice between extrinsic versus intrinsic representations. Extrinsic representations rely on the
specific embedding of surfaces within a three-dimensional
ambient space, whereas intrinsic representations only capture geometric properties specific to the surface, irrespective of its parametrization. Whereas the former offer arbitrary representation power, they are unable to easily exploit
inductive priors such as stability to local deformations and
invariance to global transformations.
A particularly simple and popular extrinsic method [30,
31] represents shapes as point clouds in R3 of variable size,
and leverages recent deep learning models that operate on
input sets [38, 37]. Despite its advantages in terms of ease
of data acquisition (they no longer require a mesh triangulation) and good empirical performance on shape classification and segmentation tasks, one may wonder whether this
simplification comes at a loss of precision as one considers
more challenging prediction tasks.
In this paper, we develop an alternative pipeline that applies neural networks directly on triangle meshes, building
12540

