Learning Deep Models for Face Anti-Spoofing: Binary or Auxiliary Supervision
Yaojie Liu∗ Amin Jourabloo∗ Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{liuyaoj1,jourablo,liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
Face anti-spoofing is crucial to prevent face recognition
systems from a security breach. Previous deep learning approaches formulate face anti-spoofing as a binary classification problem. Many of them struggle to grasp adequate
spoofing cues and generalize poorly. In this paper, we argue the importance of auxiliary supervision to guide the
learning toward discriminative and generalizable cues. A
CNN-RNN model is learned to estimate the face depth with
pixel-wise supervision, and to estimate rPPG signals with
sequence-wise supervision. The estimated depth and rPPG
are fused to distinguish live vs. spoof faces. Further, we
introduce a new face anti-spoofing database that covers a
large range of illumination, subject, and pose variations.
Experiments show that our model achieves the state-of-theart results on both intra- and cross-database testing.

1. Introduction
With applications in phone unlock, access control, and
security, biometric systems are widely used in our daily
lives, and face is one of the most popular biometric modalities. While face recognition systems gain popularity, attackers present face spoofs (i.e., presentation attacks, PA) to the
system and attempt to be authenticated as the genuine user.
The face PA include printing a face on paper (print attack),
replaying a face video on a digital device (replay attack),
wearing a mask (mask attack), etc. To counteract PA, face
anti-spoofing techniques [16, 22, 23, 29] are developed to
detect PA prior to a face image being recognized. Therefore, face anti-spoofing is vital to ensure that face recognition systems are robust to PA and safe to use.
RGB image and video are the standard input to face antispoofing systems, similar to face recognition systems. Researchers start the texture-based anti-spoofing approaches
by feeding handcrafted features to binary classifiers [13, 18,
19, 27, 33, 34, 38, 49]. Later in the deep learning era, several
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) approaches utilize
⇤ denotes equal contribution by the authors.

0
Live Face

Depth map

rPPG signal

1
✗

Binary
Supervision

Presentation
Attack

✓

Auxiliary
Supervision

Figure 1. Conventional CNN-based face anti-spoof approaches utilize the binary supervision, which may lead to overfitting given the
enormous solution space of CNN. This work designs a novel network architecture to leverage two auxiliary information as supervision: the depth map and rPPG signal, with the goals of improved
generalization and explainable decisions during inference.

softmax loss as the supervision [21, 30, 37, 48]. It appears
almost all prior work regard the face anti-spoofing problem
as merely a binary (live vs. spoof) classification problem.
There are two main issues in learning deep anti-spoofing
models with binary supervision. First, there are different
levels of image degradation, namely spoof patterns, comparing a spoof face to a live one, which consist of skin detail loss, color distortion, moiré pattern, shape deformation
and spoof artifacts (e.g., reflection) [29, 38]. A CNN with
softmax loss might discover arbitrary cues that are able to
separate the two classes, such as screen bezel, but not the
faithful spoof patterns. When those cues disappear during
testing, these models would fail to distinguish spoof vs. live
faces and result in poor generalization. Second, during the
testing, models learnt with binary supervision will only generate a binary decision without explanation or rationale for
the decision. In the pursuit of Explainable Artificial Intelligence [1], it is desirable for the learnt model to generate the
spoof patterns that support the final binary decision.
To address these issues, as shown in Fig. 1, we propose
a deep model that uses the supervision from both the spatial and temporal auxiliary information rather than binary
supervision, for the purpose of robustly detecting face PA
1389

