Deep Cocktail Network:
Multi-source Unsupervised Domain Adaptation with Category Shift
Ruijia Xu1,† ,
Ziliang Chen1,† ,
Wangmeng Zuo2 ,
Junjie Yan3 ,
Liang Lin1,3∗
1
2
3
Sun Yat-sen University Harbin Institute of Technology SenseTime Research
xurj3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, c.ziliang@yahoo.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn,
yanjunjie@sensetime.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) conventionally
assumes labeled source samples coming from a single underlying source distribution. Whereas in practical scenario,
labeled data are typically collected from diverse sources.
The multiple sources are different not only from the target
but also from each other, thus, domain adaptater should not
be modeled in the same way. Moreover, those sources may
not completely share their categories, which further brings
a new transfer challenge called category shift. In this paper, we propose a deep cocktail network (DCTN) to battle the domain and category shifts among multiple sources.
Motivated by the theoretical results in [33], the target distribution can be represented as the weighted combination of
source distributions, and, the multi-source UDA via DCTN
is then performed as two alternating steps: i) It deploys
multi-way adversarial learning to minimize the discrepancy
between the target and each of the multiple source domains,
which also obtains the source-specific perplexity scores to
denote the possibilities that a target sample belongs to different source domains. ii) The multi-source category classifiers are integrated with the perplexity scores to classify target sample, and the pseudo-labeled target samples together
with source samples are utilized to update the multi-source
category classifier and the feature extractor. We evaluate DCTN in three domain adaptation benchmarks, which
clearly demonstrate the superiority of our framework.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have significantly improved the state-of-the-arts across a variety of visual learn∗ Corresponding author: Liang Lin. † indicates equal contribution. This

work was supported by National Science Foundation of China under Grant
U1611461 and Special Funds for Guangdong College Students’ Science
and Technology Innovation (under Grant pdjhb0009).

(a) Single source domain adaptation
Bike

Clipper

Bus

Dog

(b) Multi-source domain adaptation with
category shift

Figure 1. (a). Single source domain adaptation (UDA) assumes
that source samples are drawn from some underlying distribution
under the i.i.d. condition. (b). Multiple source domain adaptation
(MDA) assume source data are collected from different source distributions. Category shift is a new protocol in MDA, where domain
shift and categorical disalignment co-exist among the sources.

ing tasks [25] [40] [28] [6] [47]. These achievements, to a
great extent, should be attributed to the availability of large
scale labeled data for supervised learning. When turning
to (Unsupervised) domain adaptation (UDA, see Fig. 1(a))
[38] [37] [15], we do not have the labels of the data in target domain, but have massive labeled data in source domain.
One natural solution is to learn a deep model on the labeled
source data and deploy it to target domain. However, due
to the presence of domain shift [18], the performance of
the learned model tends to degrade heavily in the target domain. To mitigate the model damage caused by the domain
shift, UDA learns to map the data from both domains into
a common feature space by minimizing domain distribution
discrepancy, the source classifier can then be directly ap13964

