Unsupervised Discovery of Object Landmarks as Structural Representations
Yuting Zhang1 , Yijie Guo1 , Yixin Jin1 , Yijun Luo1 , Zhiyuan He1 , Honglak Lee2,1
1
2
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Google Brain
{yutingzh, guoyijie, jinyixin, lyjtour, zhiyuan, honglak}@umich.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks can model images with rich latent representations, but they cannot naturally conceptualize structures of object categories in a human-perceptible
way. This paper addresses the problem of learning object
structures in an image modeling process without supervision. We propose an autoencoding formulation to discover
landmarks as explicit structural representations. The encoding module outputs landmark coordinates, whose validity is ensured by constraints that reflect the necessary
properties for landmarks. The decoding module takes the
landmarks as a part of the learnable input representations
in an end-to-end differentiable framework. Our discovered
landmarks are semantically meaningful and more predictive of manually annotated landmarks than those discovered
by previous methods. The coordinates of our landmarks
are also complementary features to pretrained deep-neuralnetwork representations in recognizing visual attributes. In
addition, the proposed method naturally creates an unsupervised, perceptible interface to manipulate object shapes
and decode images with controllable structures.

1. Introduction
Computer vision seeks to understand object structures
that reflect the physical states of objects and show invariance to individual appearance changes. Such intrinsic structures can serve as intermediate representations for highlevel visual understanding. However, manual annotations
or designs of object structures (e.g., skeleton, semantic
parts) are costly and barely available for most object categories, making the automatic representation learning of object structure an attractive solution to this challenge.
Modern neural networks can learn latent representations
to effectively solve various vision problems, including image classification [26, 53, 56, 20], segmentation [32, 40,
21], object detection [17, 80, 49], human pose estimation [39], 3D reconstruction [13, 67, 14], and image generation [25, 18, 43]. Several existing studies [17, 76, 1]
observe that these representations naturally encode massive
templates of particular visual patterns. However, little evidence suggests that deep neural networks can naturally conceptualize the intrinsic structures of an object category compactly and perceptibly.
We aim at learning the physical parameters of concep-

honglak@google.com

tualized object structures without supervision. As a typical
representation of intrinsic structures, landmarks represent
the spatial configuration of stable local semantics across different object instances of the same category. Thewlis et al.
[59] proposed an unsupervised method to locate landmarks
at the places where a convolutional neural network can detect stable visual patterns with high spatial equivariance to
image transformations. However, this method did not explicitly encourage the landmarks to appear at critical locations for image modeling.
This paper addresses the problem of discovering landmarks in a generic image modeling process. In particular,
we take landmark discovery as an intermediate step for image autoencoding. To leverage the training signals from
the landmark-based image decoder, gradients need to go
through the landmark coordinates, which makes Thewlis
et al. [59]’s non-differentiable formulation infeasible. With
a different way to calculate landmark coordinates, the image decoding module can make the landmark configuration
informative regarding image reconstruction. We also introduce additional regularization terms to enforce the desirable properties of the detected landmarks and to prevent
the landmark coordinates from encoding irrelevant or redundant latent information.
Our contributions in this paper are as follows.
1. We develop a differentiable autoencoder framework
for object landmark discovery, which allows the image
decoder to propagate training signals back to the landmark detection module. We introduce several soft constraints to reflect the properties of landmarks, forcing
the discovered representations to be valid landmarks.
2. The proposed method discovers visually meaningful
landmarks without supervision for a variety of objects. It outperforms the state-of-the-art method regarding the accuracy of predicting manually-annotated
landmarks using discovered landmarks, and it performs comparably to fully supervised landmark detectors trained with a significant amount of labeled data.
3. The discovered landmarks show strong discriminative
performance in recognizing visual attributes.
4. Our landmark-based image decoder is useful for controllable image decoding, such as object shape manipulation and structure-conditioned image generation.

2694

