Learning Compressible 360◦ Video Isomers
Yu-Chuan Su
Kristen Grauman
The University of Texas at Austin
z

Abstract

1. Introduction
Both the technology and popularity of 360◦ video has
grown rapidly in recent years, for emerging Virtual Reality
(VR) applications and others. Sales of 360◦ cameras are
expected to grow by 1500% from 2016 to 2022 [45]. Foreseeing the tremendous opportunities in 360◦ video, many
companies are investing in it. For example, Facebook and
YouTube have offered 360◦ content support since 2015.
Facebook users have since uploaded more than one million
360◦ videos [8], and YouTube plans to bring 360◦ videos to
even broader platforms (TV, gaming consoles). 360◦ editing tools are now available in popular video editors such
as PowerDirector and Premiere Pro. Meanwhile, on the research side, there is strong interest in improving 360◦ video
display [22, 26, 21, 41, 40, 19, 29], and performing visual
processing efficiently on the new format [23, 14, 39]. All
together, these efforts make 360◦ video production and distribution easier and more prevalent than ever.
At the core of all video technologies is the data format.

y

x
Ω1
z

Video Size

Standard video encoders developed for conventional
narrow field-of-view video are widely applied to 360◦ video
as well, with reasonable results. However, while this approach commits arbitrarily to a projection of the spherical frames, we observe that some orientations of a 360◦
video, once projected, are more compressible than others.
We introduce an approach to predict the sphere rotation
that will yield the maximal compression rate. Given video
clips in their original encoding, a convolutional neural network learns the association between a clip’s visual content
and its compressibility at different rotations of a cubemap
projection. Given a novel video, our learning-based approach efficiently infers the most compressible direction in
one shot, without repeated rendering and compression of
the source video. We validate our idea on thousands of
video clips and multiple popular video codecs. The results
show that this untapped dimension of 360◦ compression
has substantial potential—“good” rotations are typically
8−10% more compressible than bad ones, and our learning approach can predict them reliably 82% of the time.

z

Ω2 Ω3

z

T
Ω4

z

Ω

Figure 1: Our approach learns to automatically rotate the
360◦ video axis before storing the video in cubemap format. While the 360◦ videos are equivalent under rotation
(“isomers”), the bit-streams are not because of the video
compression procedures. Our approach analyzes the video’s
visual content to predict its most compressible isomer.
In particular, a compressed video bit-stream format is the
basis for all video related applications, ranging from video
capture, storage, processing to distribution. Without adequate compression, all of the above suffer. 360◦ video
is no exception. Thus far, the focus for 360◦ video compression is to find a proper projection that transforms a
360◦ frame into a rectangular planar image that will have
a high compression rate. A current favorite is to project the
sphere to a cubemap and unwrap the cube into a planar image [27, 10, 32] (see Fig. 2). Cubemaps can improve the
compression rate by up to 25% compared to the previously
popular equirectangular projection [28].
One unique property of 360◦ video is that each spherical video has an infinite number of equivalents related by
a rotation. Therefore, each 360◦ video could be transformed into multiple possible cubemaps by changing the
orientation of the cube, yet all of them represent the very
same video content. We refer to these content-equivalent
rotations as 360◦ isomers.1 The isomers, however, are not
1 Strictly speaking isomers are equivalent only theoretically, because
pixels are discretely sampled and rotating a cubemap requires interpolating
the pixels. Nevertheless, as long as the pixel density, i.e. video resolution,
is high enough, the information delta is negligible.

17824

