Camera Pose Estimation with Unknown Principal Point
Viktor Larsson
Lund University
Lund, Sweden

Zuzana Kukelova
FEE, Czech Technical University
Prague, Czech Republic

Yinqiang Zheng
National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan

viktorl@maths.lth.se

kukelzuz@fel.cvut.cz

yqzheng@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
To estimate the 6-DoF extrinsic pose of a pinhole camera with partially unknown intrinsic parameters is a critical
sub-problem in structure-from-motion and camera localization. In most of existing camera pose estimation solvers, the
principal point is assumed to be in the image center. Unfortunately, this assumption is not always true, especially
for asymmetrically cropped images. In this paper, we develop the first exactly minimal solver for the case of unknown principal point and focal length by using four and a
half point correspondences (P4.5Pfuv). We also present an
extremely fast solver for the case of unknown aspect ratio
(P5Pfuva). The new solvers outperform the previous stateof-the-art in terms of stability and speed. Finally, we explore the extremely challenging case of both unknown principal point and radial distortion, and develop the first practical non-minimal solver by using seven point correspondences (P7Pfruv). Experimental results on both simulated
data and real Internet images demonstrate the usefulness of
our new solvers.

1. Introduction
To determine the 6-DoF rotation and translation parameters of a pinhole camera is proven indispensable for many
applications ranging from structure-from-motion, to augmented reality and image based geo-localization. Given
fully known intrinsic parameters, the perspective-threepoint (P3P) problem arises, for which many solvers have
been developed [6, 10, 8, 14]. In terms of partially calibrated intrinsic parameters, the majority of existing work
assume that the principal point lies in the image center. Unfortunately, as noticed by Triggs [21], this assumption is not
always true, especially in the case of cropped images. When
the offset is trivial, it can be partially compensated by the
translation, without severely affecting the rotation. However, in the presence of significant offset such solvers with
centered principal point will give poor rotation and translation estimates.

In this paper we present the first exactly minimal solver
for the case of unknown principal point and focal length,
using four and a half point correspondences (P4.5Pfuv). In
addition to the classical constraints on the camera matrix
[5, 12], we derive novel polynomial constraints which allow
us to avoid solutions with rank deficient camera matrices.
We also consider unknown aspect ratio and construct
a minimal solver which uses five point correspondences
(P5Pfuva). In this case the equations reduce to a simple
quartic polynomial which allows for a closed form solver
that is both extremely fast and stable. In experiments we
show that the new solvers are superior in terms of stability
and efficiency compared to the previous state-of-the-art five
point solver from Triggs [21].
Later, we consider case of both unknown principal point
and radial distortion. This problem is very difficult and
highly non-linear due the radial distortion being centered on
the unknown principal point. We develop the first practical
non-minimal solver by using seven point correspondences
(P7Pfruv) instead of the minimum five.
Our major contributions are:
i. To derive new polynomial constraints on the camera
matrix for the case of unit aspect ratio and zero skew.
ii. To develop the first minimal P4.5Pfuv solver (unit aspect ratio and zero skew) as well as an extremely fast
P5Pfuva solver (zero skew).
iii. To explore the extremely challenging case of unknown
principal point and radial distortion, and develop the
first practical non-minimal solver using seven point
correspondences.

2. Background and Related Work
Given 2D-to-3D point correspondences, the camera pose
estimation problem aims to estimate the rotation matrix R
and the translation vector t, and possibly all or a subset of
the intrinsic parameters


αf s u
(1)
K =  0 f v ,
0 0 1
12984

