Jointly Optimize Data Augmentation and Network Training:
Adversarial Data Augmentation in Human Pose Estimation
Xi Peng*
Rutgers University

Zhiqiang Tang*
Rutgers University

Fei Yang
Facebook

px13@cs.rutgers.edu

zt53@cs.rutgers.edu

yangfei@fb.com

Rogerio S. Feris
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

Dimitris Metaxas
Rutgers University

rsferis@us.ibm.com

dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Isolated

Random data augmentation is a critical technique to
avoid overfitting in training deep neural network models.
However, data augmentation and network training are usually treated as two isolated processes, limiting the effectiveness of network training. Why not jointly optimize the two?
We propose adversarial data augmentation to address this
limitation. The main idea is to design an augmentation network (generator) that competes against a target network
(discriminator) by generating “hard” augmentation operations online. The augmentation network explores the weaknesses of the target network, while the latter learns from
“hard” augmentations to achieve better performance. We also
design a reward/penalty strategy for effective joint training. We demonstrate our approach on the problem of human
pose estimation and carry out a comprehensive experimental
analysis, showing that our method can significantly improve
state-of-the-art models without additional data efforts.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved significant
improvements in many computer vision tasks [20, 10, 18, 9].
A key ingredient for the success of state-of-the-art deep learning models is the availability of large amounts of training
data. However, data collection and annotation are costly, and
for many tasks, only a few training examples may be available. In addition, natural images usually follow a long-tail
distribution [46, 33]. Effective training examples that lead
to more robust classifiers may still be rare even if a large
amount of data have been collected.
A common solution for this problem is to perform random data augmentation [21, 37]. Prior to being fed into the
* Contributed equally. The project page is publicly available: https:
//sites.google.com/site/xipengcshomepage/cvpr2018

Data Collection

Network Training

G
Scaling

Rotating

Occluding

Adversarial Augmentation

Figure 1: Data preparation and network training are usually
isolated. We propose to bridge the two by generating adversarial augmentations online. The generations are conditioned
to both training images and the status of the target network.

network, training images are heuristically jittered by predefined transformations (e.g., scaling, rotating, occluding) to
increase variations. This strategy is simple, but data augmentation and network training are still treated as isolated
processes, leading to the following issues.
First, the entire training set is usually applied the same
random data augmentation strategy without considering the
individual difference. This may produce many ineffective
variations that are either too “hard” or too “easy” to help
the network training [32, 39]. Second, random data augmentations can hardly match the dynamic training status since
they are usually sampled from static distributions. Third,
Gaussian distribution are widely used, which cannot address
the long-tail issue since there would be a small chance to
sample rare but useful augmentations.
A natural question then arises: can data augmentation and
12226

