Solving the Perspective-2-Point Problem for Flying-Camera Photo Composition
Ziquan Lan1,2 David Hsu1,2 Gim Hee Lee2
1
NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering,
2
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{ziquan, dyhsu, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Figure 1: Flying-camera photo composition with two objects of interest: an envisioned use case. LEFT: The initial viewpoint. Colored
circles indicate objects of interest. MIDDLE-LEFT: Compose a photo with simple gestures on the viewfinder image. MIDDLE-RIGHT:
The camera determines the desired viewpoint and flies to it autonomously. RIGHT: The final viewpoint with the desired composition.

Abstract
Drone-mounted flying cameras will revolutionize
photo-taking. The user, instead of holding a camera
in hand and manually searching for a viewpoint, will
interact directly with image contents in the viewfinder
through simple gestures, and the flying camera will
achieve the desired viewpoint through the autonomous
flying capability of the drone. This work studies a common
situation in photo-taking, i.e., the underlying viewpoint
search problem for composing a photo with two objects
of interest. We model it as a Perspective-2-Point (P2P)
problem, which is under-constrained to determine the six
degrees-of-freedom camera pose uniquely. By incorporating the user’s composition requirements and minimizing
the camera’s flying distance, we form a constrained nonlinear optimization problem and solve it in closed form.
Experiments on synthetic data sets and on a flying camera
system indicate promising results.

1. Introduction
Drone-mounted flying cameras will be ubiquitous in
the near future and revolutionize photo-taking. They
produce fascinating photos from viewpoints unreachable
previously [4]. People may bring along compact, portable
flying cameras [2, 3, 6] and use their touchscreen mobile phones as viewfinders to take photos [3, 7]. The
autonomous flying capability of drone-mounted cameras opens a new way of photo-taking. With traditional

cameras, the user holds a camera in hand and manually
searches for a favorable viewpoint. With flying cameras,
the user will interact directly with the image through simple gestures on the touchscreen viewfinder, and the camera will determine the desired viewpoint and fly to it autonomously (Fig. 1). To achieve this, we study the underlying viewpoint search problem for composing a photo
with two objects of interest, which is common in, e.g.,
foreground-background or side-by-side composition.
Assume that the positions of two objects of interest are
known [15, 22, 25] and their corresponding projections
on the image plane are specified by the user. Determining the six degrees-of-freedom (DoFs) camera pose that
satisfies the composition constraints is the well-known
Perspective-n-Point (PnP) problem, with n = 2. P2P is related to the family of minimal problems in computer vision, and our solution approach shares a similar line of
thought. While many minimal problems in computer vision attempt to solve for the unique solution of the unknown camera parameters with a minimum number of
correspondences, the P2P problem is under-determined
and has infinite solutions: the minimum number of point
correspondences required to solve the PnP problem is 3.
We propose to solve the problem by adding the constraint
that the flying camera should reach one of the solutions
as fast as possible along the shortest path. This leads to a
constrained nonlinear optimization problem.
We show that our constrained nonlinear optimization
problem can be solved in closed form. By analyzing the geometry of the solution space and applying the first-order
optimality conditions of the objective function, we derive

4588

