Feature Space Transfer for Data Augmentation
Bo Liu
University of California, San Diego

Xudong Wang
University of California, San Diego

boliu@ucsd.edu

xuw080@ucsd.edu

Mandar Dixit
Microsoft

Roland Kwitt
University of Salzburg, Austria

Nuno Vasconcelos
University of California, San Diego

madixit@microsoft.com

rkwitt@gmx.at

nuno@ece.ucsd.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on large
datasets, such as ImageNet [2], have enabled tremendous
gains in problems like object recognition over the last
few years. These models not only achieve human level
performance in recognition challenges, but are also easily transferable to other tasks, by fine tuning. Many recent works have shown that ImageNet trained CNNs, like

ce
sp a

x

Po
se

The problem of data augmentation in feature space is
considered. A new architecture, denoted the FeATure TransfEr Network (FATTEN), is proposed for the modeling of feature trajectories induced by variations of object pose. This
architecture exploits a parametrization of the pose manifold in terms of pose and appearance. This leads to a deep
encoder/decoder network architecture, where the encoder
factors into an appearance and a pose predictor. Unlike
previous attempts at trajectory transfer, FATTEN can be
efficiently trained end-to-end, with no need to train separate feature transfer functions. This is realized by supplying
the decoder with information about a target pose and the
use of a multi-task loss that penalizes category- and posemismatches. In result, FATTEN discourages discontinuous
or non-smooth trajectories that fail to capture the structure
of the pose manifold, and generalizes well on object recognition tasks involving large pose variation. Experimental
results on the artificial ModelNet database show that it can
successfully learn to map source features to target features
of a desired pose, while preserving class identity. Most notably, by using feature space transfer for data augmentation
(w.r.t. pose and depth) on SUN-RGBD objects, we demonstrate considerable performance improvements on one/fewshot object recognition in a transfer learning setup, compared to current state-of-the-art methods.

Feature space
trajectory

P(x)

x̂

F(x)

Feature space
manifold M

P(x̂)

A(x) = A(x̂)
Appearance space

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of feature space transfer for variations in pose. The input feature x and transferred feature x̂ are
projected to the same point in appearance space, but have different
mapping points in pose space.

AlexNet [14], VGG [27], GoogLeNet [32], or ResNet [9]
can be used as feature extractors for the solution of problems as diverse as object detection [6, 23] or generating
image captions [12, 35]. Nevertheless, there are still challenges to CNN-based recognition. One limitation is that
existing CNNs still have limited ability to handle pose
variability. This is, in part, due to limitations of existing
datasets, which are usually collected on the web and are biased towards a certain type of images. For example, objects
that have a well defined “frontal view,” such as “couch” or
“clock,” are rarely available from viewing angles that differ
significantly from frontal.
This is problematic for applications like robotics, where
a robot might have to navigate around or manipulate such
objects. When implemented in real time, current CNNs
tend to produce object labels that are unstable with respect
to viewing angle. The resulting object recognition can vary
19090

