Unifying Identification and Context Learning for Person Recognition
Qingqiu Huang, Yu Xiong, Dahua Lin
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{hq016, xy017, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Visual Context

Abstract

Social Context

Event-Person
Head

Despite the great success of face recognition techniques,
recognizing persons under unconstrained settings remains
challenging. Issues like profile views, unfavorable lighting,
and occlusions can cause substantial difficulties. Previous
works have attempted to tackle this problem by exploiting
the context, e.g. clothes and social relations. While showing
promising improvement, they are usually limited in two important aspects, relying on simple heuristics to combine different cues and separating the construction of context from
people identities. In this work, we aim to move beyond such
limitations and propose a new framework to leverage context for person recognition. In particular, we propose a Region Attention Network, which is learned to adaptively combine visual cues with instance-dependent weights. We also
develop a unified formulation, where the social contexts are
learned along with the reasoning of people identities. These
models substantially improve the robustness when working
with the complex contextual relations in unconstrained environments. On two large datasets, PIPA [27] and Cast In
Movies (CIM), a new dataset proposed in this work, our
method consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance
under multiple evaluation policies.

1. Introduction
Person recognition is a key task in computer vision
and has been extensively studied over the past decades.
Thanks to the advances in deep learning, recent years have
witnessed remarkable progress in face recognition techniques [22, 19, 21, 17]. On LFW [10], a challenging
public benchmark, the accuracy has been pushed to over
99.8% [17]. Nonetheless, the success on benchmarks does
not mean that the problem has been well solved. Recent
studies [27, 11, 13, 15] have shown that recognizing persons under an unconstrained setting remains very challenging. Substantial difficulties arise in unfavorable conditions,
e.g. when the faces are in a non-frontal position, subject to
extreme lighting, or too far away from the camera. Such
conditions are very common in practice.

Face
Face

G

Body

Person-Person

UpperBody
Inference
Inference

?

?

?

Inference

Kate

Leonardo

Learning

Kate

Figure 1: Person recognition under unconstrained settings remains a very challenging problem. Inference purely by face recognition techniques would fail in many cases. We propose a framework to tackle this problem, which combines visual context with
adaptive weights and unifies person recognition with social context learning.

The difficulties above are essentially due to the fact that
facial appearance is highly sensitive to environmental conditions. To tackle this problem, a natural idea is to leverage
another important source of information, namely the context. It is our common experience that we can easily recognize a familiar person by looking at the wearing, the surrounding environment, or the people who are nearby. On the
other hand, cognitive neuroscience studies [6, 1, 12] have
shown that context plays a crucial role when we, as human
beings, recognize a person or an object. A familiar context
often allows much greater accuracy in recognition.
Exploiting context to help recognition is not a new story
in computer vision. Previous efforts mainly follow two
lines. The first line of research [2, 8, 27, 11] attempts to incorporate additional visual cues, e.g. clothes and hairstyles,
as additional channels of features. The other line, instead,
focuses on social relationships, e.g. group priors [7, 20] or
people co-occurrence [4, 23]. There are also studies that try
to integrate both visual cues and social relations [15, 13].
Whereas previous works have shown the utility of context in person recognition, especially in unconstrained en-

2217

