Efficient, sparse representation of manifold distance matrices for classical scaling
Javier S. Turek
Intel Labs, Hillsboro, Oregon
javier.turek@intel.com

Alexander G. Huth
Departments of Computer Science & Neuroscience, The University of Texas at Austin
huth@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Geodesic distance matrices can reveal shape properties
that are largely invariant to non-rigid deformations, and
thus are often used to analyze and represent 3-D shapes.
However, these matrices grow quadratically with the number of points. Thus for large point sets it is common to
use a low-rank approximation to the distance matrix, which
fits in memory and can be efficiently analyzed using methods such as multidimensional scaling (MDS). In this paper
we present a novel sparse method for efficiently representing geodesic distance matrices using biharmonic interpolation. This method exploits knowledge of the data manifold
to learn a sparse interpolation operator that approximates
distances using a subset of points. We show that our method
is 2x faster and uses 20x less memory than current leading
methods for solving MDS on large point sets, with similar
quality. This enables analyses of large point sets that were
previously infeasible.

1. Introduction
Distance matrices have many important roles in machine
learning, graphics, and computer vision. Yet with growing data, it is becoming impossible to store
 or process full
distance matrices. For n points, O n2 space is required
to store the distance matrix, and, depending on the
 type of
data and distance metric, as much as O n2 log n time can
be required to compute it. Many algorithms
that operate on

distance matrices execute in O n3 time. With growing n
these requirements quickly become intractable.
One solution is to work with a low-rank approximation
of the distance matrix. While the best rank k approximation
is given
 by the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), its
O n3 computation is impractical for large matrices. An
alternative is the Nyström method [17], which computes a
low-rank approximation by subsampling l columns from the

canonical coordinates
mapped to RGB

large mesh
(1.8M vertices)

sBMDS

canonical form
(3D MDS of geodesic
distance matrix)

D1

D3

D2

Figure 1. Sparse Biharmonic Multidimensional Scaling (sBMDS)
was used to obtain the canonical form for a mesh with 1.8M vertices. MDS is impossible on the full distance matrix (1.8M x 1.8M,
26 TB), but easy using a sparse approximation (50,000 landmarks,
20.9 GB). Here the 3-D canonical coordinates found by MDS are
are mapped into RGB colors on the original mesh.

distance matrix. Nyström has been studied theoretically [7,
12] and empirically [4, 13, 22], but it is a generic method
that does not take advantage of any knowledge about the
geometry of the point set.
For the specific problem of approximating geodesic distance matrices computed from 3-D meshes, methods such
as spectral MDS (SMDS) [1] and fast MDS (FMDS) [21]
have been proposed. These methods were designed to compress large geodesic distance matrices so that they can be
analyzed using multidimensional scaling (MDS). The key
insight offered by SMDS and FMDS that is not exploited
by methods such as Nyström is that the geometry of the
12850

