Nonlocal Low-Rank Tensor Factor Analysis for Image Restoration
Xinyuan Zhang†
Duke University
Durham, NC, USA

Xin Yuan∗
Nokia Bell Labs
Murray Hill, NJ, USA

Lawrence Carin
Duke University
Durham, NC, USA

xy.zhang@duke.edu

xyuan@bell-labs.com

lcarin@duke.edu

Abstract

† This work was performed when Xinyuan Zhang was a summer intern

at Nokia Bell Labs in 2017.
∗ Corresponding author.

ADMM
…

Inspired by the nonlocal self-similarity of image
patches [3], various image processing algorithms have been
proposed to investigate the low-rank property of image
patch groups [9, 11, 17, 31, 44]. In general, these methods first select a reference patch and then search for similar
patches across the image to form a group. Following this,
the patches in this group are vectorized and stacked to a
matrix. Since these patches are similar, the constructed matrix has a low-rank property. Via performing this low-rank
model on every (overlapping) patch in the image, state-ofthe-art image restoration results have been achieved.
One common issue in the above algorithms is that the
original two-dimensional (2D) patches are vectorized to
construct the group matrix, which loses the spatial structure within the image patch. We propose a tensor based
algorithm to retain this structure while still leveraging the
advantages of low-rank patch models. Tensor factorization

LR-TFA
…

1. Introduction

…

…

Low-rank signal modeling has been widely leveraged to
capture non-local correlation in image processing applications. We propose a new method that employs low-rank tensor factor analysis for tensors generated by grouped image
patches. The low-rank tensors are fed into the alternative
direction multiplier method (ADMM) to further improve image reconstruction. The motivating application is compressive sensing (CS), and a deep convolutional architecture
is adopted to approximate the expensive matrix inversion
in CS applications. An iterative algorithm based on this
low-rank tensor factorization strategy, called NLR-TFA, is
presented in detail. Experimental results on noiseless and
noisy CS measurements demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed approach, especially at low CS sampling rates.

Figure 1: An illustration of the NLR-TFA model. The
left image is the initial estimate using some fast algorithm.
Each tensor is concatenated by a reference image patch and
its similar patches. Blue cubes represent full-rank tensors;
green cubes represent low-rank tensors. The right image
(PSNR=26.15dB) is reconstructed using NLR-TFA from
compressive sensing (CS) measurements at a CS rate of
only 0.02. Notice how the proposed method can restore rich
semantic content and fine structure of the image, even when
the sensing rate is extremely low.
methods [19] offer a useful way to learn latent structure
from complex multiway data, and have been used in image
processing tasks [43]. These methods decompose the tensor data into a set of factor matrices (one for each mode or
“way” of the tensor), that can be used as a latent feature representation for the objects in each of the tensor modes [33].
Recently tensor approaches have been applied in computer
vision, such as image denoising [32], and video denoising [42]. We consider the general image restoration problem with specific applications to compressive sensing [12]
using the tensor factor analysis (TFA) approach. In particular, instead of vectorizing the image patches, we impose
low-rank TFA to the 3D image patch groups.
To be concrete, the image restoration problem aims to estimate the latent clean image x given the observation y (the
corrupted/compressive measurement) and the measurement
matrix Φ, which can be formulated as
y = Φx + e,

(1)

where e denotes the measurement noise and is usually modeled by e ∼ N (0, σ 2 I). The problem has different variants
18232

