Fusing Crowd Density Maps and Visual Object Trackers for People Tracking in
Crowd Scenes
Weihong Ren1,2,3 , Di Kang1 , Yandong Tang2 , Antoni B. Chan1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong;
2
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
1

{weihonren2-c, dkang5-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, ytang@sia.cn, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
While visual tracking has been greatly improved over the
recent years, crowd scenes remain particularly challenging
for people tracking due to heavy occlusions, high crowd
density, and significant appearance variation. To address
these challenges, we first design a Sparse Kernelized Correlation Filter (S-KCF) to suppress target response variations caused by occlusions and illumination changes, and
spurious responses due to similar distractor objects. We
then propose a people tracking framework that fuses the SKCF response map with an estimated crowd density map
using a convolutional neural network (CNN), yielding a refined response map. To train the fusion CNN, we propose
a two-stage strategy to gradually optimize the parameters. The first stage is to train a preliminary model in batch
mode with image patches selected around the targets, and
the second stage is to fine-tune the preliminary model using the real frame-by-frame tracking process. Our density
fusion framework can significantly improves people tracking in crowd scenes, and can also be combined with other
trackers to improve the tracking performance. We validate
our framework on two crowd video datasets.

1. Introduction
In recent years, visual object tracking methods [1, 7, 12,
14, 17, 20] have focused on developing an effective appearance model in sparsely crowd scenes. Few works can
effectively track people in crowded scenes due to heavy
occlusions, high crowd density, and appearance variations. Though people tracking in crowded scenes is challenging, it is necessary for a wide range of applications including surveillance, event detection and group behaviour modelling. Rather than focus on individual people, crowd counting methods aim to predict the number of people in an image without explicitly detecting or tracking the people. One
effective method is to estimate a crowd density map [18],
where the sum over a region in the image corresponds to

the number of people in that region. The crowd density
map has been used for people counting [28, 30, 32], as well
as for small object detection [21, 25, 28]. In this paper, we
propose a framework that can effectively combine crowd
density maps with generic visual object trackers to address
the problem of people tracking in crowd scenes.

Image patch Density map Our Fused map

KCF

LCT

Ours

Density-aware

S-KCF

Ground truth

KCF response LCT response S-KCF response

Figure 1. An example of people tracking in crowd scene using different trackers: KCF [14], S-KCF (ours), long-term correlation
tracker (LCT) [20], density-aware [25], and our proposed fusion
tracker. The response maps of the raw trackers (bottom-right) are
greatly affected by the objects surrounding the target due to their
similar appearances. Compared to KCF and LCT, our S-KCF partially suppresses the spurious responses using a sparsity constraint.
Our density fusion framework combines the S-KCF response map
with the crowd density map, and effectively suppresses the irrelevant responses and detects the target accurately (top-right).

Fig. 1 presents an example for people tracking using different trackers: KCF [14], S-KCF (ours), long-term correlation tracker (LCT) [20], density-aware [25], and our proposed fusion tracker. KCF and LCT are designed to address
the problem of target appearance variation, but they do not
perform well in crowd scenes due to the presence of many
objects with similar appearance as the target, which results
in drift. In addition, the target in crowd scenes is usually
heavily occluded by other objects, and it is difficult to differentiate appearances between the target and other objects.
Although originally developed for counting, crowd den-

5353

