Geometric Multi-Model Fitting with a Convex Relaxation Algorithm
Paul Amayo, Pedro Piniés, Lina M. Paz and Paul Newman
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford, UK
{pamayo,ppinies,linapaz,pnewman}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a novel method for fitting multiple geometric
models to multi-structural data via convex relaxation. Unlike greedy methods - which maximise the number of inliers
- our approach efficiently searches for a soft assignment of
points to geometric models by minimising the energy of the
overall assignment. The inherently parallel nature of our
approach, as compared to the sequential approach found
in state-of-the-art energy minimisation techniques, allows
for the elegant treatment of a scaling factor that occurs as
the number of features in the data increases. This results
in an energy minimisation that, per iteration, is as much as
two orders of magnitude faster on comparable architectures
thus bringing real-time, robust performance to a wider set
of geometric multi-model fitting problems.
We demonstrate the versatility of our approach on two
canonical problems in estimating structure from images:
plane extraction from RGB-D images and homography estimation from pairs of images. Our approach seamlessly
adapts to the different metrics brought forth in these distinct problems. In both cases, we report results on publicly
available data-sets that in most instances outperform the
state-of-the-art while simultaneously presenting run-times
that are as much as an order of magnitude faster.

1. Introduction
Many interesting applications in computer vision such
as homography estimation, plane detection, and motion estimation demand the ability to fit geometric models onto
noisy data. This is a non-trivial task in that the scene typically consists of multiple geometric structures. Moreover,
the observed data is likely to be contaminated with noise
from different sources including measurement sensor noise
and outliers. These are the main factors leading to biased
solutions. Therefore, many multi-model fitting algorithms
are driven fundamentally by their capacity to robustly deal
with the complexity of the data and unknown distributions
of data errors and outliers [15]. Extracted geometric models are often also drivers of other algorithms such as camera

calibration, robotic navigation, and 3D reconstructions creating an increased desire for algorithms that are not only robust to contamination but exhibit quick and repeatable runtimes.
The most well-known solution to the geometric multimodel fitting problem found in the literature is RANSAC
[5], a greedy approach consisting of two steps: in the first
step, a set of model proposals is sampled from the model parameter space in a hypothesis-verification fashion. A refinement step is applied over the best-selected model, supported
by the maximum number of inliers. To deal with multiple models, an extended solution like [19] suggests applying RANSAC sequentially over the remaining data points.
Running alongside this are clustering methods that greedily maximise the inliers of geometric models [10]. Presenting approaches such as J-linkage [18] and its expansion to
the continuous space T-linkage [8] that analyse and merge
clusters in the preference space. However, as these greedy
approaches do not implicitly consider the overall classification of the data to geometric models, their performance
deteriorates in situations with high noise or outlier clutter.
Global energy-based approaches [7, 22, 4] have gained
popularity by presenting a more general optimisation
framework that jointly fit all models present in multistructural data. In practice, global energy methods aim to
find an optimal fitting solution by accounting for the model
error in a data fidelity term for a given metric. In addition,
the set of solutions can be constrained by encouraging spatial smoothness in a regularisation term. A more complete
formulation also considers the number of models as a parameter to optimise for [7]. These approaches have been
shown to outperform greedy methods such as RANSAC at
the expense of intractable computational complexity with
respect to the number of models fitted.
Minimisation of this energy can be performed via combinatorial algorithms, such as α-expansion [2], which operate
in a discrete domain. These approaches have been largely
applied to the multi-label image segmentation problem formalised as a graph cut Markov Random Field (MRF) based
approach but when applied to geometric multi-model fitting
have exhibited better performance than greedy methods [7].
However, attempts to parallelise this approach have so far
18138

