GeoNet: Geometric Neural Network
for Joint Depth and Surface Normal Estimation
Xiaojuan Qi† Renjie Liao§,‡ Zhengzhe Liu† Raquel Urtasun§,‡ Jiaya Jia†,♭
†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong ‡ University of Toronto
§
Uber Advanced Technologies Group ♭ YouTu Lab, Tencent

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Geometric Neural Network
(GeoNet) to jointly predict depth and surface normal maps
from a single image. Building on top of two-stream CNNs,
our GeoNet incorporates geometric relation between depth
and surface normal via the new depth-to-normal and normalto-depth networks. Depth-to-normal network exploits the
least square solution of surface normal from depth and improves its quality with a residual module. Normal-to-depth
network, contrarily, refines the depth map based on the constraints from the surface normal through a kernel regression
module, which has no parameter to learn. These two networks enforce the underlying model to efficiently predict
depth and surface normal for high consistency and corresponding accuracy. Our experiments on NYU v2 dataset
verify that our GeoNet is able to predict geometrically consistent depth and normal maps. It achieves top performance
on surface normal estimation and is on par with state-of-theart depth estimation methods.

1. Introduction
We tackle the important problem of joint estimation of
depth and surface normal from a single RGB image. The
2.5D geometric information is beneficial to various computer
vision tasks, including structure from motion (SfM), 3D reconstruction, pose estimation, object recognition, and scene
classification.
There exist a large amount of methods on depth estimation [25, 19, 8, 7, 21, 31, 24, 16, 20, 34, 18] and surface
normal estimation [7, 33, 3, 2, 18] from a single image.
Among them, deep-neural-network-based methods achieve
very promising results.
Challenges Albeit the great advancement in this field, we
notice that most previous methods deal with depth and normal estimation independently, which possibly make their
prediction inconsistent without considering the close underlying geometry relationship. For example, as demonstrated

Figure 1: Geometric relationship of depth and surface normal. Surface normal can be estimated from 3D point cloud;
depth is inferred from surface normal by solving linear equations.

in [32], the predicted depth map could be distorted in planar
regions. It is thus intriguing to ask what if one considers
the fact that surface normal does not change much in planar
regions. This thought motivates us to design new models,
which are exactly based on above simple fact and yet potentially show a vital direction in this field, to exploit the
inevitable geometric relationship between depth and surface
normal for more accurate estimation.
We use the example in Fig. 1 to illustrate the commonknowledge relation. On the one hand, surface normal is determined by local surface tangent plane of 3D points, which
can be estimated from depth; on the other hand, depth is
constrained by the local surface tangent plane determined
by surface normal. Although it looks straightforward, it is
not trivial to design neural networks to properly make use of
these geometric conditions.
We note incorporating geometric relationship into traditional models via hand-crafted feature is already feasible, as
explained in [25, 4]. However, there is no much research to
make it happen in neural networks. One possible design is
to build a convolutional neural network (CNN) to directly
learn such geometric relationship from data. However, our
1283

