Learning Steerable Filters for Rotation Equivariant CNNs
Maurice Weiler1,2
Fred A. Hamprecht2
Martin Storath2
1
2
AMLab / QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam
HCI/IWR, University of Heidelberg
m.weiler@uva.nl

{fred.hamprecht, martin.storath}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
In many machine learning tasks it is desirable that a
model’s prediction transforms in an equivariant way under
transformations of its input. Convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) implement translational equivariance by construction; for other transformations, however, they are compelled to learn the proper mapping. In this work, we develop Steerable Filter CNNs (SFCNNs) which achieve joint
equivariance under translations and rotations by design.
The proposed architecture employs steerable filters to efficiently compute orientation dependent responses for many
orientations without suffering interpolation artifacts from
filter rotation. We utilize group convolutions which guarantee an equivariant mapping. In addition, we generalize
He’s weight initialization scheme to filters which are defined as a linear combination of a system of atomic filters.
Numerical experiments show a substantial enhancement of
the sample complexity with a growing number of sampled
filter orientations and confirm that the network generalizes
learned patterns over orientations. The proposed approach
achieves state-of-the-art on the rotated MNIST benchmark
and on the ISBI 2012 2D EM segmentation challenge.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks are extremely successful
predictive models when the input data has spatial structure.
One principal reason is that the convolution operation exhibits translational equivariance so that feature extraction is
independent of the spatial position. For many types of images it is desirable to make feature extraction orientation
independent as well. Typical examples are biomedical microscopy images or astronomical data which do not show
a prevailing global orientation. Consequently, the output
of a network processing such data should be equivariant
w.r.t. the orientation of its input – if the input is rotated,
the output should transform accordingly. Even when there
is a predominant direction in an image as a whole, the low
level features in the first layers such as edges usually appear
in all orientations; see e.g. the filterbanks visualized in [1].

In both cases, conventional CNNs are compelled to learn
rotated versions of the same filter, introducing redundant
degrees of freedom and increasing the risk of overfitting.

1.1. Contribution
We propose a rotation-equivariant CNN architecture
which shares weights over filter orientations to improve
generalization and to reduce sample complexity. A key
property of our network is that its filters are learned such
that they are steerable. This approach avoids interpolation
artifacts which can be severe at the small length scale of
typical filter kernels. We accomplish the steerability of the
learned filters by representing them as linear combinations
of a fixed system of atomic steerable filters.
In all intermediate layers of the network, we utilize group
convolutions to ensure an equivariant mapping of feature
maps. Group-convolutional networks were proposed by Cohen and Welling [2] who considered four filter orientations.
An advantage of our construction is that we can achieve an
arbitrary angular resolution w.r.t. the sampled filter orientations. Indeed, our experiments show that results improve
significantly when using more than four orientations.
An important practical aspect of CNNs is a proper
weight initialization. Since the weights to be learned serve
as expansion coefficients for the steerable function space,
common weight initialization schemes need to be adapted.
Here, we generalize the results found by Glorot and Bengio [3] and He et al. [4] to networks which learn filters as a
composition of (not necessarily steerable) atomic filters.
Our network achieves state-of-the-art results on two
important rotation-equivariant/invariant recognition tasks:
(i) The proposed approach is the first to obtain an accuracy
higher than 99% on the rotated MNIST dataset, which is
the standard benchmark for rotation-invariant classification.
(ii) A processing pipeline based on the proposed SFCNN
layers ranks among the top three entries in the ISBI 2012
electron microscopy segmentation challenge [5].
Figure 1 gives an overview over the key concepts utilized
in Steerable Filter CNNs.
1849

