Clinical Skin Lesion Diagnosis using Representations Inspired by
Dermatologist Criteria

†

Jufeng Yang† , Xiaoxiao Sun† , Jie Liang† , Paul L. Rosin‡
College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
‡
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK

yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn, {sunxiaoxiaozrt,liang27jie}@163.com, RosinPL@cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract

Diagnosing by Dermatologist

A
B

The skin is the largest organ in human body. Around
30%-70% of individuals worldwide have skin related health
problems, for whom effective and efficient diagnosis is necessary. Recently, computer aided diagnosis (CAD) systems
have been successfully applied to the recognition of skin
cancers in dermatoscopic images. However, little work has
concentrated on the commonly encountered skin diseases
in clinical images captured by easily-accessed cameras or
mobile phones. Meanwhile, for a CAD system, the representations of skin lesions are required to be understandable
for dermatologists so that the predictions are convincing.
To address this problem, we present effective representations inspired by the accepted dermatological criteria for
diagnosing clinical skin lesions. We demonstrate that the
dermatological criteria are highly correlated with measurable visual components. Accordingly, we design six medical
representations considering different criteria for the recognition of skin lesions, and construct a diagnosis system for
clinical skin disease images. Experimental results show that
the proposed medical representations can not only capture
the manifestations of skin lesions effectively, and consistently with the dermatological criteria, but also improve the
prediction performance with respect to the state-of-the-art
methods based on uninterpretable features.

1. Introduction
The skin is directly exposed to the air, which leads to
skin disease being one of the most common human illnesses. It pervades all cultures, occurs at all ages, and affects the health of 30% to 70% of individuals, with even
higher rates for the at-risk subpopulations [21, 22]. A common technique used by dermatologists for diagnosing skin
diseases is the dermoscope which enables observation of
the latent structures of skin lesions, i.e., a region suffering
from disease, whose effects are otherwise invisible to the

C
D
Dermatologist

Prediction

Criteria

Diagnosing by Computer

Representation

Clinical Images

Computer

Classifier

Prediction

Figure 1. Given a patient with a common skin disease (the left
box), dermatologists make a diagnosis by observing the appearance of the lesions (the top right box). This paper aims to design
a skin disease recognition system (the bottom right box) based
on clinical images and dermatological criteria. Firstly, the medical
information observed by the doctors during diagnosis is exploited.
Then, measurable medical representations for skin lesions are designed for diagnosis.

naked eye. Dermoscopy is usually used for melanomas and
other kinds of skin cancers with pigmentation [13]. However, it is difficult to access a dermoscope in resource-poor
regions [20], and moreover it is unnecessary for most of the
common skin diseases. Therefore, developing an effective
skin disease diagnosis system based on easily accessed clinical images would be beneficial and could provide low-cost,
universal access to more people.
Experienced dermatologists diagnose skin diseases
based on comprehensive medical criteria which have been
verified to be useful, e.g., the ABCD rule [1, 32] and the
7-point checklist [3], etc. There are also specialized criteria for individual aspects [38] which focus on the diagnosis
of a specific kind of skin disease, e.g., the structure difference [12].
Computer aided diagnosis (CAD) systems based on dermoscopic images and medical criteria have been developed
over the past decade [4, 25], yet few of them attempt to diagnose the lesions of clinical skin disease images. Moreover, dermoscopy based diagnosis is limited by the enor-

1258

