Gaze Prediction in Dynamic 360◦ Immersive Videos
Yanyu Xu, Yanbing Dong, Junru Wu, Zhengzhong Sun, Zhiru Shi, Jingyi Yu, and Shenghua Gao∗
ShanghaiTech University
{xuyy2, dongyb, wujr1, sunzhy, shizhr, yujingyi, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper explores gaze prediction in dynamic 360◦ immersive videos, i.e., based on the history scan path and
VR contents, we predict where a viewer will look at an
upcoming time. To tackle this problem, we first present
the large-scale eye-tracking in dynamic VR scene dataset.
Our dataset contains 208 360◦ videos captured in dynamic scenes, and each video is viewed by at least 31 subjects. Our analysis shows that gaze prediction depends on its history scan path and image contents. In terms of the
image contents, those salient objects easily attract viewers’ attention. On the one hand, the saliency is related to
both appearance and motion of the objects. Considering
that the saliency measured at different scales is different,
we propose to compute saliency maps at different spatial scales: the sub-image patch centered at current gaze point,
the sub-image corresponding to the Field of View (FoV), and
the panorama image. Then we feed both the saliency maps
and the corresponding images into a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) for feature extraction. Meanwhile, we also
use a Long-Short-Term-Memory (LSTM) to encode the history scan path. Then we combine the CNN features and
LSTM features for gaze displacement prediction between
gaze point at a current time and gaze point at an upcoming time. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness
of our method for gaze prediction in dynamic VR scenes.

1. Introduction
There is an emerging interest in viewing 360◦ VR contents in head-mounted displays (HMD) in place of a rectangular one on the screen. Commodity omnidirectional cameras such as Google Jump, Nokia OZO, Facebook 360, etc.
are readily available to generate high quality 360◦ video
contents and provide viewers with an immersive viewing
experience. Social media platforms including YouTube and
Facebook also support viewing 360◦ videos with or without
HMDs. Same as 2D images and videos, the most intrigu∗ Corresponding author

ing problem in 360◦ videos, from both the commercial and
technology perspectives, is to determine where a user would
look at in the video. A successful solution will greatly benefit VR content creation.
The link between our task and 360◦ video setup. i)
In gaze prediction on standard videos, users PASSIVELY
watch the videos. In 360◦ immersive videos, users can ACTIVELY rotate the heads and body and decide where he
looks. ii) Previous saliency detection in 360◦ videos watches STILL scene, so they can directly collect the eye fixation
of all participants at the same scene for generating groundtruth. Our scene is DYNAMIC, for each frame, where a
participant looks depends on its starting point and his decision on movement direction. So it is extremely difficult
to annotate ground-truth for saliency detection. iii) our task
is doable because we can collect the ground-truth, and this
task is useful for many applications (as listed below).
This paper explores gaze prediction in 360◦ videos, aiming to study the user gaze behavior in 360◦ immersive
videos. It shows the necessity and challenges for gaze prediction in this dynamic 360◦ immersive videos because of
its importance for user behavior analysis while watching
360◦ VR videos and benefiting the data compression in VR
data transmission [41]. Further, VR gaze prediction can also benefit applications beyond 360 videos: once we predict
the viewing region of each participant viewer in upcoming
frames, we can further improve user-computer interactions
by tailoring the interactions for this specific viewer. In VR
games, it is essential to effectively design different difficulty levels of the game for different players. For example, if
we can reliably detect gaze in the current frame and predict
its motion in future frames, we can change the degree of difficulty of the game on the fly: positioning rewards closer
to the gaze region to make it easier or farther away to make
it more difficult.
Despite tremendous efforts and achievements on saliency detection and gaze tracking, there is only a handful of
work that focuses on studying how users watch a 360◦
video, largely due to difficulties in tracking gaze beneath
the HMD: the eyes are covered by the HMD and traditional
camera-based tracking is not directly applicable. The diffi-

5333

