Scalable and Effective Deep CCA via Soft Decorrelation
Xiaobin Chang1 , Tao Xiang1 , Timothy M. Hospedales2
Queen Mary University of London1 , The University of Edinburgh2
{x.chang, t.xiang}@qmul.ac.uk t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Recently the widely used multi-view learning model,
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) has been generalised to the non-linear setting via deep neural networks.
Existing deep CCA models typically first decorrelate the
feature dimensions of each view before the different views
are maximally correlated in a common latent space. This
feature decorrelation is achieved by enforcing an exact
decorrelation constraint; these models are thus computationally expensive due to the matrix inversion or SVD operations required for exact decorrelation at each training
iteration. Furthermore, the decorrelation step is often separated from the gradient descent based optimisation, resulting in sub-optimal solutions. We propose a novel deep CCA
model Soft CCA to overcome these problems. Specifically,
exact decorrelation is replaced by soft decorrelation via a
mini-batch based Stochastic Decorrelation Loss (SDL) to be
optimised jointly with the other training objectives. Extensive experiments show that the proposed soft CCA is more
effective and efficient than existing deep CCA models. In
addition, our SDL loss can be applied to other deep models
beyond multi-view learning, and obtains superior performance compared to existing decorrelation losses.

1. Introduction
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [12, 7] is widely
used for multi-view learning. These views could be camera
views, e.g., the images of a face from different view angles,
or modalities, e.g., an image and its caption. CCA aims
to learn a joint embedding space where different views of
a single data item are maximally correlated/aligned. Many
tasks can be accomplished in this space such as cross-view
recognition, retrieval and synthesis [8, 49, 14, 1, 36, 2].
A standard CCA model is linear in the sense that the projection between the feature space and the embedding space
is linear. For learning richer non-linear embeddings, Kernel CCA (KCCA) [10] extended linear CCA via kernelisation. Both linear CCA and KCCA are shallow models and
the training procedure usually requires accessing the whole

batch data. As a result, KCCA has poor scalability. The
recently proposed deep CCA [1, 36, 41, 37] aims to learn
nonlinear projections with deep neural networks rather than
kernels and has been shown to be more effective than shallow CCA and KCCA.
However, scalability issues remain for deep CCA. This
is because existing deep CCA models [1, 36, 41, 37] aim to
implement an exact or ‘hard’ decorrelation. More precisely,
before being projected into the common embedding space,
the extracted deep feature vector for each view is decorrelated by forcing its correlation matrix over the training
batch to be an identity matrix. This decorrelation operation
is exact but computationally expensive. Either matrix inversion [1, 36] or singular value decomposition (SVD) [37]
is required at each iteration which severely limits scalability. Furthermore, existing deep CCA models such as [37]
typically employ two separate and independent optimisation steps: The feature representation for each data view is
first decorrelated exactly as described above. These decorrelation operations do not directly affect the following gradient computation and subsequent backpropagation. Without jointly optimising the decorrelation constraint and other
learning objectives, this could lead to sub-optimal solutions.
In this paper, we propose Soft CCA, a novel approach
to deep CCA. In our model, decorrelation is formulated as
a soft constraint to be jointly optimised with other training objectives. Specifically, a robust decorrelation loss,
called Stochastic Decorrelation Loss (SDL), is introduced,
which is mini-batch based and approximates the full-batch
statistics efficiently and effectively by using stochastic incremental learning. SDL is a softer constraint as the loss is
only minimised rather than enforced to be zero. Comparing
with existing deep CCA models, Soft CCA has two advantages: First, it is more efficient and scalable – by avoiding computationally expensive operations such as SVD, its
cost is quadratic O(k 2 ) rather than cubic O(k 3 ) with a kdimensional feature input. Second, by jointly optimising
the decorrelation loss with other losses such as the distance
between views in the embedding space, more globally optimal solutions can be achieved resulting in more effective

1488

