Learning Monocular 3D Human Pose Estimation from Multi-view Images
Helge Rhodin1
Frédéric Meyer3
1

Jörg Spörri2,4
Erich Müller4

CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
3
UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Isinsu Katircioglu1
Victor Constantin1
Mathieu Salzmann1
Pascal Fua1
2

Balgrist University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland
University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria

4

Abstract
Accurate 3D human pose estimation from single images
is possible with sophisticated deep-net architectures that
have been trained on very large datasets. However, this still
leaves open the problem of capturing motions for which no
such database exists. Manual annotation is tedious, slow,
and error-prone. In this paper, we propose to replace most
of the annotations by the use of multiple views, at training
time only. Specifically, we train the system to predict the
same pose in all views. Such a consistency constraint is necessary but not sufficient to predict accurate poses. We therefore complement it with a supervised loss aiming to predict
the correct pose in a small set of labeled images, and with a
regularization term that penalizes drift from initial predictions. Furthermore, we propose a method to estimate camera pose jointly with human pose, which lets us utilize multiview footage where calibration is difficult, e.g., for pan-tilt
or moving handheld cameras. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on established benchmarks, as well as
on a new Ski dataset with rotating cameras and expert ski
motion, for which annotations are truly hard to obtain.

1. Introduction
With the advent of Deep Learning, the effectiveness
of monocular 3D human pose estimation algorithms has
greatly improved. This is especially true when capturing human motions for which there is enough annotated
data to properly train the deep nets. Walking and upright
poses are prime examples of this, and state-of-the-art algorithms [18, 27, 20, 15, 17] now deliver impressive real-time
results in uncontrolled environments. However, this is not
yet the case for more unusual motions for which the training
data is harder to obtain, such as sports. Skiing is a good example of this, because pose estimation is crucial to biomechanical and performance analysis, and data cannot easily
be acquired in a laboratory.
The brute-force approach to tackle such unusual motions

Figure 1. Multi-view constraints as weak supervision. Our approach lets us effectively train a deep network to predict 3D pose
for actions where only little annotated data is available. This is the
case for skiing, which cannot be captured in a laboratory.

would be to annotate video data. However, achieving high
accuracy would require a great deal of annotation, which is
tedious, slow, and error-prone. As illustrated by Fig. 1, we
therefore propose to replace most of the annotations by the
use of multiple views, at training time only. Specifically, we
use them to provide weak supervision and force the system
to predict the same pose in all views.
While such view consistency constraints increase accuracy, they are unfortunately not sufficient. For example, the
network can learn to always predict the same pose, independently of the input image. To prevent this, we use a small set
of images with ground-truth poses, which serve a dual purpose. First, they provide strong supervision during training.
Second, they let us regularize the multi-view predictions by
encouraging them to remain close to the predictions of a
network trained with the scarce supervised data only.
In addition, we propose to use a normalized pose distance to evaluate all losses involving poses. It disentangles
pose from scale, and we found it to be key to maintain accuracy when the annotated data is scarce.
Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
weakly-supervised multi-view training strategy on several
18437

