SPLATNet: Sparse Lattice Networks for Point Cloud Processing
Hang Su
UMass Amherst

Varun Jampani
NVIDIA

Evangelos Kalogerakis
UMass Amherst

Deqing Sun
NVIDIA

Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced

Subhransu Maji
UMass Amherst
Jan Kautz
NVIDIA

Abstract
We present a network architecture for processing point
clouds that directly operates on a collection of points represented as a sparse set of samples in a high-dimensional
lattice. Naı̈vely applying convolutions on this lattice scales
poorly, both in terms of memory and computational cost, as
the size of the lattice increases. Instead, our network uses
sparse bilateral convolutional layers as building blocks.
These layers maintain efficiency by using indexing structures to apply convolutions only on occupied parts of the lattice, and allow flexible specifications of the lattice structure
enabling hierarchical and spatially-aware feature learning,
as well as joint 2D-3D reasoning. Both point-based and
image-based representations can be easily incorporated in
a network with such layers and the resulting model can be
trained in an end-to-end manner. We present results on 3D
segmentation tasks where our approach outperforms existing state-of-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
Data obtained with modern 3D sensors such as laser
scanners is predominantly in the irregular format of point
clouds or meshes. Analysis of point clouds has several useful applications such as robot manipulation and autonomous
driving. In this work, we aim to develop a new neural network architecture for point cloud processing.
A point cloud consists of a sparse and unordered set of
3D points. These properties of point clouds make it difficult
to use traditional convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures for point cloud processing. As a result, existing
approaches that directly operate on point clouds are dominated by hand-crafted features. One way to use CNNs for
point clouds is by first pre-processing a given point cloud
in a form that is amenable to standard spatial convolutions.
Following this route, most deep architectures for 3D point
cloud analysis require pre-processing of irregular point
clouds into either voxel representations (e.g., [43, 35, 42])
or 2D images by view projection (e.g., [39, 32, 24, 9]).

Input point cloud

...
Input images

SPLATNet3D

3D predictions

...

SPLATNet2D-3D
2D & 3D predictions

Figure 1: From point clouds and images to semantics.
SPLATNet3D directly takes point cloud as input and predicts labels for each point. SPLATNet2D-3D , on the other
hand, jointly processes both point cloud and the corresponding multi-view images for better 2D and 3D predictions.
This is due to the ease of implementing convolution operations on regular 2D or 3D grids. However, transforming
point cloud representation to either 2D images or 3D voxels
would often result in artifacts and more importantly, a loss
in some natural invariances present in point clouds.
Recently, a few network architectures [31, 33, 46] have
been developed to directly work on point clouds. One of
the main drawbacks of these architectures is that they do
not allow a flexible specification of the extent of spatial
connectivity across points (filter neighborhood). Both [31]
and [33] use max-pooling to aggregate information across
points either globally [31] or in a hierarchical manner [33].
This pooling aggregation may lose surface information because the spatial layouts of points are not explicitly considered. It is desirable to capture spatial relationships in point
clouds through more general convolution operations while
being able to specify filter extents in a flexible manner.
In this work, we propose a generic and flexible neural
network architecture for processing point clouds that alleviates some of the aforementioned issues with existing deep
architectures. Our key observation is that the bilateral convolution layers (BCLs) proposed in [22] have several favorable properties for point cloud processing. BCL provides a
systematic way of filtering unordered points while enabling
12530

