Coupled End-to-end Transfer Learning with Generalized Fisher Information
Shixing Chen1
Caojin Zhang2
Ming Dong1
1 Department of Computer Science
2 Department of Mathematics
Wayne State University
{schen, czhang, mdong}@wayne.edu

Abstract
In transfer learning, one seeks to transfer related information from source tasks with sufficient data to help with the
learning of target task with only limited data. In this paper,
we propose a novel Coupled End-to-end Transfer Learning
(CETL) framework, which mainly consists of two convolutional neural networks (source and target) that connect to a
shared decoder. A novel loss function, the coupled loss, is
used for CETL training. From a theoretical perspective, we
demonstrate the rationale of the coupled loss by establishing a learning bound for CETL. Moreover, we introduce the
generalized Fisher information to improve multi-task optimization in CETL. From a practical aspect, CETL provides
a unified and highly flexible solution for various learning
tasks such as domain adaption and knowledge distillation.
Empirical result shows the superior performance of CETL
on cross-domain and cross-task image classification.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, deep learning models such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have successfully been
applied to analyzing images, e.g., ImageNet [22], and
achieved superior performance than other machine learning
methods. However, such advances are often on account of
the availability of a large amount of labeled training data. In
many cases, manually labeling data can be very expensive,
and when the labeled data is limited, CNN’s performance
will be compromised.
Transfer learning provides a framework to address this
challenge. In transfer learning, one seeks to transfer related
information from source tasks with sufficient data to help
with the learning of target task with only limited data [29].
Recently, the ability to learn and transfer representations in
CNN models has been shown to be important and effective
[11, 34]. In [39], the transferability of features from various
layers in neural networks was discussed. More recently, in
[25], several factors (including width, depth, density, etc.)
affecting the transferability for CNNs were compared.
As a special case of transfer learning, domain adaptation

considers the problem when no labels of the target domain
are available. It assumes that only source domain is labeled,
and source and target domains have different distributions
(domain discrepancy) but share the same task [29]. In recent
years, various works [12, 10, 13, 8, 26] attempt to address
the domain adaptation problem for deep CNNs. Usually,
the domain discrepancy is modeled using Kullback-Leibler
divergence or Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD). Then,
a target domain network is fine-tuned from the source network by jointly minimizing the source domain classification
error and the domain discrepancy. However, due to the relative low model accuracy and extra optimization procedures,
domain adaptation remains a challenging research problem.
Knowledge distillation [17] can be considered as another
special case of transfer learning, in which the knowledge
from a teacher CNN is transferred to a much more concise
student CNN by emulating teacher’s soft-targets (a variation of softmax outputs). In this setting, teacher and student
networks share the same data distribution and classification
objectives. Later, FitNets [30] was proposed to include the
transfer between intermediate feature maps of CNNs to improve the performance of the student CNN.
In this work, we propose a Coupled End-to-end Transfer
Learning (CETL) framework to transfer the knowledge between CNNs for related tasks, and address the issues caused
by domain discrepancy. Our major contributions are summarized as follows:
• CETL provides a unified transfer learning solution that
can also be adapted for knowledge distillation and domain adaptation tasks, while prior works typically only
consider one of these problems. In addition, through
its novel architecture, CETL has great flexibility on the
choice of the source network and on the architecture of
the target network.
• Different from most prior work on transfer learning,
the training of CETL neither uses the source data nor
directly tunes on the source network. From a computation perspective, this is critical as the source dataset is
usually large, and the pre-trained source network can
be very big, both leading to a long training time.

4329

