Convolutional Image Captioning
Jyoti Aneja∗, Aditya Deshpande∗, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{janeja2, ardeshp2, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Image captioning is an important task, applicable to
virtual assistants, editing tools, image indexing, and support of the disabled. In recent years significant progress
has been made in image captioning, using Recurrent Neural Networks powered by long-short-term-memory (LSTM)
units. Despite mitigating the vanishing gradient problem,
and despite their compelling ability to memorize dependencies, LSTM units are complex and inherently sequential
across time. To address this issue, recent work has shown
benefits of convolutional networks for machine translation
and conditional image generation [9, 34, 35]. Inspired by
their success, in this paper, we develop a convolutional image captioning technique. We demonstrate its efficacy on
the challenging MSCOCO dataset and demonstrate performance on par with the LSTM baseline [16], while having
a faster training time per number of parameters. We also
perform a detailed analysis, providing compelling reasons
in favor of convolutional language generation approaches.

1. Introduction
Image captioning, i.e., describing the content observed
in an image, has received a significant amount of attention in recent years. It is applicable in various scenarios,
e.g., recommendation in editing applications, usage in virtual assistants, for image indexing, and support of the disabled. With the availability of large datasets, deep neural
network (DNN) based methods have been shown to achieve
impressive results on image captioning tasks [16, 37].
These techniques are largely based on recurrent neural nets
(RNNs), often powered by a Long-Short-Term-Memory
(LSTM) [10] component.
LSTM nets have been considered as the de-facto standard for vision-language tasks of image captioning [5, 16,
37, 39, 38], visual question answering [3, 30, 28], question generation [14, 20], and visual dialog [7, 13], due
to their compelling ability to memorize long-term depen∗ Denotes equal contribution.

dencies through a memory cell. However, the complex
addressing and overwriting mechanism combined with inherently sequential processing, and significant storage required due to back-propagation through time (BPTT), poses
challenges during training. Also, in contrast to CNNs,
that are non-sequential, LSTMs often require more careful engineering, when considering a novel task. Previously,
CNNs have not matched up to the LSTM performance on
vision-language tasks. Inspired by the recent successes of
convolutional architectures on other sequence-to-sequence
tasks – conditional image generation [34], machine translation [9, 35] – we study convolutional architectures for the
vision-language task of image captioning. To the best of
our knowledge, ours is the first convolutional network for
image captioning that compares favorably to LSTM-based
methods.
Our key contributions are: a) A convolutional (CNNbased) image captioning method that shows comparable
performance to an LSTM based method [16] (Section 6.2,
Table 1 and Table 2); b) Improved performance with a CNN
model that uses attention mechanism to leverage spatial image features. With attention, we outperform the attention
baseline [39] and qualitatively demonstrate that our method
finds salient objects in the image. (Figure 5, Table 2); c)
We analyze the characteristics of CNN and LSTM nets and
provide useful insights such as – CNNs produce more entropy (useful for diverse predictions), better classification
accuracy, and do not suffer from vanishing gradients (Section 6 and Figure 6, 7 and 8). We evaluate our architecture
on the challenging MSCOCO [18] dataset, and compare it
to an LSTM [16] and an LSTM+Attention baseline [39].
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives our
notation, Section 3 reviews the RNN based approach, Section 4 describes our convolutional method, Section 5 gives
the details of CNN architecture, Section 6 contains results
and Section 7 discusses related work.

2. Problem Setup and Notation
For image captioning, we are given an input image I and
we want to generate a sequence of words y = (y1 , . . . , yN ).
The possible words yi at time-step i are subsumed in a discrete set Y of options. Its size, |Y|, easily reaches several

5561

