FFNet: Video Fast-Forwarding via Reinforcement Learning
Shuyue Lan 1
1
2

Rameswar Panda 2

Qi Zhu 1

Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury 2

Northwestern University. {slan@u., qzhu@}northwestern.edu

University of California, Riverside. {rpand002@, amitrc@ece.}ucr.edu
Abstract

Normal Playing
Skipping Actions

For many applications with limited computation, communication, storage and energy resources, there is an imperative need of computer vision methods that could select
an informative subset of the input video for efficient processing at or near real time. In the literature, there are
two relevant groups of approaches: generating a “trailer”
for a video or fast-forwarding while watching/processing
the video. The first group is supported by video summarization techniques, which require processing of the entire
video to select an important subset for showing to users.
In the second group, current fast-forwarding methods depend on either manual control or automatic adaptation of
playback speed, which often do not present an accurate representation and may still require processing of every frame.
In this paper, we introduce FastForwardNet (FFNet), a reinforcement learning agent that gets inspiration from video
summarization and does fast-forwarding differently. It is an
online framework that automatically fast-forwards a video
and presents a representative subset of frames to users on
the fly. It does not require processing the entire video, but
just the portion that is selected by the fast-forward agent,
which makes the process very computationally efficient. The
online nature of our proposed method also enables the
users to begin fast-forwarding at any point of the video.
Experiments on two real-world datasets demonstrate that
our method can provide better representation of the input
video (about 6%-20% improvement on coverage of important frames) with much less processing requirement (more
than 80% reduction in the number of frames processed).

1. Introduction
Leveraging video input has become increasingly important in many intelligent Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications, such as environment monitoring, search and rescue,
smart surveillance, and wearable devices. In these systems,
large amount of video needs to be collected and processed
by users (human operators or autonomous agents), either lo-

Video Stream

Fast-Forwarding

Figure 1. Overview of Our Proposed Method. Given a video
stream, our FFNet decides which frame to process next and
presents it to users while skipping the irrelevant frames in an online manner. Top-row shows the representative frames in the normal playing portion and bottom-row shows the irrelevant frames
in the fast-forwarding portion. Best viewed in color.

cally or remotely through network transmission (or a combination of both). For better system performance, the processing often needs to be done at or near real time. On the
other hand, the local nodes/devices typically have limited
computation and storage capability and often run on batteries, while the communication network is constrained by
bandwidth, speed and reliability [1, 19, 40]. Such discrepancy presents an urgent need for new vision methods that
can automatically select an informative subset of the input
video for processing, to reduce computation, communication and storage requirements and to conserve energy.
In the relevant literature, with ever expanding volume
of video data, there is significant interest in video summarization techniques, which compute a short and informative subset of the original video for human consumption or further processing [4, 9, 26, 49, 50, 51]. However, these techniques require the processing of entire video
and often take a long time to generate the subset. There
are also video fast-forwarding techniques where the playback speed of the video is adjusted to meet the needs of
users [3, 10, 13, 31, 32, 34, 38], but they often do not present
an accurate representation and may still require processing
of the entire video. Both types of approaches are not suitable for the resource-limited and time-critical systems we
discussed above. To address this problem, we started by
asking the following question: Is it possible to develop a
16771

