Cross-View Image Synthesis using Conditional GANs
Krishna Regmi and Ali Borji
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
krishna.regmi7@gmail.com, aborji@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Learning to generate natural scenes has always been
a challenging task in computer vision. It is even more
painstaking when the generation is conditioned on images
with drastically different views. This is mainly because understanding, corresponding, and transforming appearance
and semantic information across the views is not trivial.
In this paper, we attempt to solve the novel problem of
cross-view image synthesis, aerial to street-view and vice
versa, using conditional generative adversarial networks
(cGAN). Two new architectures called Crossview Fork (XFork) and Crossview Sequential (X-Seq) are proposed to
generate scenes with resolutions of 64×64 and 256×256
pixels. X-Fork architecture has a single discriminator and
a single generator. The generator hallucinates both the image and its semantic segmentation in the target view. X-Seq
architecture utilizes two cGANs. The first one generates
the target image which is subsequently fed to the second
cGAN for generating its corresponding semantic segmentation map. The feedback from the second cGAN helps the
first cGAN generate sharper images. Both of our proposed
architectures learn to generate natural images as well as
their semantic segmentation maps. The proposed methods
show that they are able to capture and maintain the true semantics of objects in source and target views better than the
traditional image-to-image translation method which considers only the visual appearance of the scene. Extensive
qualitative and quantitative evaluations support the effectiveness of our frameworks, compared to two state of the
art methods, for natural scene generation across drastically
different views.

1. Introduction
In this work, we address the problem of synthesizing
ground-level images from overhead imagery and vice versa
using conditional Generative Adversarial Networks [20].
Primarily, such models try to generate new images from
conditioning variables as input. Preliminary works in GANs
utilize unsupervised learning to generate samples from latent representations or from a random noise vector [9].
View synthesis is a long-standing problem in computer

cGAN

Aerial Images

Street-view Images

Figure 1: Example images in overhead/aerial view (left) and
ground-level/street-view (right). The images reflect the great diversity and richness of features in two views implying that the network needs to learn a lot for meaningful cross-view generation.
We propose to use cGANs to solve this problem.

vision. This task is more challenging when views are drastically different, fields of views have little or no overlap, and
objects are occluded. Furthermore, two objects that are similar in one view may look quite different in another (i.e., the
view-invariance problem). For example, the aerial view of
a building (i.e., the roof) tells very little about the color and
design of the building seen from the street-view. The generation process is generally easier when the image contains a
single object in a uniform background. In contrast, when the
scene contains multiple objects, generating other view becomes much more challenging. This is due to the increase in
underlying parameters that contribute to the variations (e.g.,
occlusions, shadows, etc). An example scenario, addressed
here, is generating street-view (a.k.a ground level) image of
a location from its aerial (a.k.a overhead) imagery. Figure 1
illustrates some corresponding images in two views.
Isola et al. [12] put forward a general-purpose framework to solve multiple image translation tasks. Their work
translates images of objects or scenes which are represented
by RGB images, gradient fields, edge maps, aerial images,
sketches, etcetera between these representations. Thus,
their method operates on representations in a single view.
Formulating our problem as an image translation task between the views, we use their method as a baseline and extend it for cross-view image generation.
Inspired by recent works of [12, 35], we formulate the
cross-view image synthesis problem as an image-to-image
translation problem and solve it using the conditional generative adversarial network. Previous works in view synthesis [8, 38, 31] have generated images with single objects in
13501

