Globally Optimal Inlier Set Maximization for Atlanta Frame Estimation
Tae-Hyun Oh2
In So Kweon1
Jean-Charles Bazin3
Kyungdon Joo1
1
2
3
RCV Lab., KAIST
MIT CSAIL
CML, KAIST
{kdjoo369, thoh.mit.edu}@gmail.com

{iskweon, bazinjc}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this work, we describe man-made structures via an appropriate structure assumption, called Atlanta world, which
contains a vertical direction (typically the gravity direction)
and a set of horizontal directions orthogonal to the vertical
direction. Contrary to the commonly used Manhattan world
assumption, the horizontal directions in Atlanta world are
not necessarily orthogonal to each other. While Atlanta
world permits to encompass a wider range of scenes, this
makes the solution space larger and the problem more challenging. Given a set of inputs, such as lines in a calibrated
image or surface normals, we propose the first globally optimal method of inlier set maximization for Atlanta direction estimation. We define a novel search space for Atlanta
world, as well as its parameterization, and solve this challenging problem by a branch-and-bound framework. Experimental results with synthetic and real-world datasets have
successfully confirmed the validity of our approach.

1. Introduction
Man-made structures, such as buildings and room layouts, consist of a set of parallel and orthogonal planes or
lines. These structures are commonly approximated by the
Manhattan world (MW) assumption [7], which is defined by
three orthogonal directions. By virtue of its orthogonality
and simplicity, MW assumption has been exploited in many
vision applications [1, 5, 3, 8, 18]. On the other hand, MW
assumption is not verified for a wide range of man-made
structures whose horizontal directions are not orthogonal to
each other (Fig. 1), for example, non-orthogonal walls [31].
To alleviate this limitation, Schindler et al. [26] proposed
Atlanta world (AW): the horizontal directions are orthogonal to the vertical (typically gravity) direction, but contrary
*K. Joo and I. S. Kweon were supported by the Technology Innovation
Program (No. 2017-10069072) funded by the Ministry of Trade, Industry
& Energy, Korea. J.-C. Bazin was partly supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government
(Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning) (No. 01180339). Part of this
work was done when T.-H. Oh was in KAIST, and he was partly funded by
HBKU QCRI at MIT.

Top-down view

Figure 1: Atlanta frame estimation from surface normals (top) and
line normals in a calibrated image (bottom). Left: Examples of 3D
point clouds (defining surface normals) from NYUv2 dataset [28]
and lines from York urban dataset [8]. Middle: Distribution of the
input normals and the estimated Atlanta directions on the sphere.
Right: Visualization of the clustered surface normals (segmentation) and lines with respect to the estimated Atlanta directions.

to MW [7], these horizontal directions do not have to be orthogonal to each other. Therefore AW permits to handle a
wider range of scenes. However, AW has been surprisingly
explored only little [26, 1] and requires specific methods.
In addition, MW allows taking advantage of the full orthogonality constraint to greatly reduce the search space. This
constraint does not exist in AW, which makes the problem
more challenging.
In this paper, we want to estimate the Atlanta world directions. We consider two kinds of input data: surface normals (e.g., from RGBD cameras and laser scanners) and
line normals in intrinsically calibrated images, as shown in
Fig. 1. To estimate the Atlanta world directions, we need
to know which normal verifies the AW (inlier/outlier detection) and which normal belongs to which Atlanta world
direction (clustering). To handle outliers and estimate the
clustering, we follow the popular strategy of inlier set maximization [14], which aims to maximize the number of inliers (the number of clustered normals) and estimate the underlying model (the Atlanta directions). Several methods
have been proposed for inlier set maximization, but none
of them is fully satisfactory because they might return a
local optimum or are not designed for AW. For example,
RANSAC [9] is the most popular method of this strategy
but is non-deterministic and does not guarantee to return
the optimal solution (in terms of inlier set cardinality).
15726

