DeepVoting: A Robust and Explainable Deep Network
for Semantic Part Detection under Partial Occlusion
Zhishuai Zhang1∗

Cihang Xie1∗ Jianyu Wang2∗ Lingxi Xie1( )
Johns Hopkins University1 Baidu Research USA2

Alan L. Yuille1

{zhshuai.zhang, cihangxie306, wjyouch, 198808xc, alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study the task of detecting semantic
parts of an object, e.g., a wheel of a car, under partial occlusion. We propose that all models should be trained without
seeing occlusions while being able to transfer the learned
knowledge to deal with occlusions. This setting alleviates
the difficulty in collecting an exponentially large dataset to
cover occlusion patterns and is more essential. In this scenario, the proposal-based deep networks, like RCNN-series,
often produce unsatisfactory results, because both the proposal extraction and classification stages may be confused
by the irrelevant occluders. To address this, [25] proposed a
voting mechanism that combines multiple local visual cues
to detect semantic parts. The semantic parts can still be detected even though some visual cues are missing due to occlusions. However, this method is manually-designed, thus
is hard to be optimized in an end-to-end manner.
In this paper, we present DeepVoting, which incorporates
the robustness shown by [25] into a deep network, so that
the whole pipeline can be jointly optimized. Specifically, it
adds two layers after the intermediate features of a deep
network, e.g., the pool-4 layer of VGGNet. The first layer
extracts the evidence of local visual cues, and the second
layer performs a voting mechanism by utilizing the spatial
relationship between visual cues and semantic parts. We
also propose an improved version DeepVoting+ by learning
visual cues from context outside objects. In experiments,
DeepVoting achieves significantly better performance than
several baseline methods, including Faster-RCNN, for semantic part detection under occlusion. In addition, DeepVoting enjoys explainability as the detection results can be
diagnosed via looking up the voting cues.

1. Introduction
Deep networks have been successfully applied to a wide
range of vision tasks, in particular object detection [7, 20,
∗ The first three authors contributed equally to this work.

19, 13, 29]. Recently, object detection is dominated by a
family of proposal-based approaches [7, 20], which first
generates a set of object proposals for an image, followed
by a classifier to predict objects’ score for each proposal.
However, semantic part detection, despite its importance,
has been much less studied. A semantic part is a fraction of
an object which has semantic meaning and can be verbally
described, such as a wheel of a car or a chimney of a train.
Detecting semantic parts is a human ability, which enables
us to recognize or parse an object at a finer scale.
In the real world, semantic parts of an object are frequently occluded, which makes detection much harder. In
this paper, we investigate semantic part detection especially
when these semantic parts are partially or fully occluded.
We use the same datasets as in [25], i.e., the VehicleSemanticPart dataset and the VehicleOcclusion dataset. Some typical semantic part examples are shown in Figure 1. Note
that, the VehicleOcclusion dataset is a synthetic occlusion
dataset, where the target object is randomly superimposed
with two, three or four irrelevant objects (named occluders)
and the occlusion ratios of the target object is constrained.
To the best of our knowledge, VehicleOcclusion is the only
public occlusion dataset that provides accurate occlusion
annotations of semantic parts like the occlusion ratio and
number of occluders. This allows us to evaluate different
methods under different occlusion difficulty levels.
One intuitive solution of dealing with occlusion is to
train a model on the dataset that covers different occlusion
cases. However, it is extremely difficult yet computationally
intractable to collect a dataset that covers occlusion patterns
of different numbers, appearances and positions. To overcome this difficulty, we suggest a more essential solution,
i.e, training detectors only on occlusion-free images, but allowing the learned knowledge (e.g., the spatial relationship
between semantic parts, etc.) to be transferred from nonocclusion images to occlusion images. This motivates us to
design models that are inherently robust to occlusions. A
related work is [25], which pointed out that proposal-based
deep networks are less robust to occlusion, and instead proposed a voting mechanism that accumulates evidences from

1372

