Local and Global Optimization Techniques in Graph-based Clustering
Daiki Ikami

Toshihiko Yamasaki
Kiyoharu Aizawa
The University of Tokyo, Japan

{ikami, yamasaki, aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The goal of graph-based clustering is to divide a dataset
into disjoint subsets with members similar to each other
from an affinity (similarity) matrix between data. The most
popular method of solving graph-based clustering is spectral clustering. However, spectral clustering has drawbacks. Spectral clustering can only be applied to macroaverage-based cost functions, which tend to generate undesirable small clusters. This study first introduces a novel
cost function based on micro-average. We propose a local
optimization method, which is widely applicable to graphbased clustering cost functions. We also propose an initialguess-free algorithm to avoid its initialization dependency.
Moreover, we present two global optimization techniques.
The experimental results exhibit significant clustering performances from our proposed methods, including 100%
clustering accuracy in the COIL-20 dataset.

1. Introduction
Clustering is an important technique with many applications in computer vision and machine learning, such as image segmentation [19] and motion segmentation [6]. This
study focuses on graph-based clustering, which is the optimization problem maximizing the following objective function:
k
X
z⊤
j Azj
,
(1)
E(Z) =
fj (Z)
j=1
where A ∈ Rn×n is the affinity matrix of n data points, and
Z = [z1 , · · · , zk ] ∈ Z ,Z = {Z ∈ {0, 1}n×k |Z1 = 1} is
an assignment matrix, in which k is the number of clusters
and 1 is the all-one vector. f (Z) denotes the functions defined by each cost function described in Section 1.1. In contrast to representative-based clustering (e.g., k-means clustering and Gaussian mixture model clustering), graph-based
clustering enables clustering on associations between data,
such as by the k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) graph for A, and
shows a good clustering performance.
Clustering performances are mainly determined by three

primary factors in graph-based clustering: construction of
the affinity matrix A, the objective function, and optimization method. We briefly review the related works regarding
these three subjects.
Notation: In this study, bold uppercase letters (e.g. X),
bold lowercase letters (e.g. x), and plain lowercase letters
(e.g. x) denote matrices, column vectors, and scalars, respectively. 0, 1, and In are the all-zero vector, all-one vector, and n × n identity matrix, respectively. X[S, T ] is a
submatrix in X with row subset S and column subset T .

1.1. Related Work
Affinity matrix: The choice of an affinity matrix is important in graph-based clustering. The most simple approaches are distance-based, such as k-NN graph or the
Gaussian kernel of Euclidean distances [24, 26]. Other
methods are learning an affinity matrix from the data,
such as based on sparse [6, 25] or low-rank [13, 23] selfrepresentation. In these methods, an affinity matrix is represented by a coefficient matrix of linear combinations of
data. Some recent studies integrated the two problems of
learning affinity and clustering into one optimization problem [17, 12].
Objective function: If fj (Z) is a constant and aij ≥ 0
for all i, j, we can easily find that the global optimal solution is obtained by assigning all data points to a single
cluster. fj (Z) is designed to avoid this trivial solution and
encourage the cluster size not to be too large. For example, fj (Z) = 1⊤ zj is used in a macro-average association,
while fj (Z) = 1⊤ Azj is used in a normalized cut [19].
Please refer to [20, 5] for more details. These objective
functions are based on macro average (ı.e., lth cluster’s energy z⊤
j Azj is divided by the lth cluster size). Optimizing
such macro-average-based cost functions tends to yield undesirable small clusters.
Accordingly, Chen et al. proposed a objective function
to balance the cluster sizes [3], which in this study we call
balanced association (BA), to overcome undesirable small
clusters problem. The objective function of BA is
k
k
X
X

⊤
⊤
2
z⊤
zj . (2)
z⊤
Az
+
λkZ
Zk
=
j
j A − λ11
j
F
j=1

13456

j=1

