LSTM Pose Machines
Yue Luo1 Jimmy Ren1 Zhouxia Wang1 Wenxiu Sun1 Jinshan Pan1 Jianbo Liu1 Jiahao Pang1 Liang Lin1,2
1

SenseTime Research
Sun Yat-sen University, China
1
{luoyue, rensijie, wangzhouxia, sunwenxiu, panjinshan, liujianbo, pangjiahao, linliang}@sensetime.com
2

Abstract
We observed that recent state-of-the-art results on single image human pose estimation were achieved by multistage Convolution Neural Networks (CNN). Notwithstanding the superior performance on static images, the application of these models on videos is not only computationally
intensive, it also suffers from performance degeneration and
flicking. Such suboptimal results are mainly attributed to
the inability of imposing sequential geometric consistency,
handling severe image quality degradation (e.g. motion
blur and occlusion) as well as the inability of capturing the
temporal correlation among video frames. In this paper, we
proposed a novel recurrent network to tackle these problems. We showed that if we were to impose the weight sharing scheme to the multi-stage CNN, it could be re-written
as a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). This property decouples the relationship among multiple network stages and
results in significantly faster speed in invoking the network
for videos. It also enables the adoption of Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) units between video frames. We found such
memory augmented RNN is very effective in imposing geometric consistency among frames. It also well handles input quality degradation in videos while successfully stabilizes the sequential outputs. The experiments showed that
our approach significantly outperformed current state-ofthe-art methods on two large-scale video pose estimation
benchmarks. We also explored the memory cells inside the
LSTM and provided insights on why such mechanism would
benefit the prediction for video-based pose estimations.1

1. Introduction
Estimating joint locations of human bodies is a challenging problem in computer vision which finds many real applications in areas including augmented reality, animation
and automatic photo editing. Previous methods [2, 6, 38]
1 Code is publicly available at https://github.com/lawy623/
LSTM_Pose_Machines.

Figure 1. Comparison of results produced by Convolutional Pose
Machine (CPM) [36] after setting the video as a series of static images (Up) and our method (Down). Several problems occur during
pose estimation on videos: a) Errors and our correct results in estimating symmetric joints. b) Errors and our correct results when
joints are occluded. c) Flicking results and our results when the
body moves rapidly.

mainly addressed this problem by well designed graphical
models. Newly developed approaches [5, 23, 36] achieved
higher performance with deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN).
Nevertheless, those state-of-the-art models were trained
on still images, limiting their performance on videos. Figure 1 demonstrates some unsatisfactory situations. For instance, the lack of geometric consistency makes the previous methods prone to making obvious errors. Mistakes
caused by serious occlusion and large motion are not uncommon as well. In addition, those models usually have
a deep architecture and would be computationally very intensive for real-time applications. Therefore, a relatively
light-weight model is preferable if we want to deploy it in a

5207

