Large Scale Fine-Grained Categorization and Domain-Specific Transfer
Learning

1

Yin Cui1,2∗ Yang Song3 Chen Sun3 Andrew Howard3 Serge Belongie1,2
2
3
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
Cornell Tech
Google Research

Abstract
Transferring the knowledge learned from large scale
datasets (e.g., ImageNet) via fine-tuning offers an effective
solution for domain-specific fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) tasks (e.g., recognizing bird species or car
make & model). In such scenarios, data annotation often
calls for specialized domain knowledge and thus is difficult
to scale. In this work, we first tackle a problem in large scale
FGVC. Our method won first place in iNaturalist 2017 large
scale species classification challenge. Central to the success of our approach is a training scheme that uses higher
image resolution and deals with the long-tailed distribution of training data. Next, we study transfer learning via
fine-tuning from large scale datasets to small scale, domainspecific FGVC datasets. We propose a measure to estimate
domain similarity via Earth Mover’s Distance and demonstrate that transfer learning benefits from pre-training on a
source domain that is similar to the target domain by this
measure. Our proposed transfer learning outperforms ImageNet pre-training and obtains state-of-the-art results on
multiple commonly used FGVC datasets.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) aims to distinguish subordinate visual categories. Examples include
recognizing natural categories such as species of birds [58,
54], dogs [28] and plants [39, 59]; or man-made categories
such as car make & model [32, 63]. A successful FGVC
model should be able to discriminate categories with subtle
differences, which presents formidable challenges for the
model design yet also provides insights to a wide range of
applications such as rich image captioning [3], image generation [5], and machine teaching [27, 37].
Recent advances on Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) for visual recognition [33, 48, 51, 20] have fueled remarkable progress on FGVC [36, 11, 69]. In general, to achieve reasonably good performance with CNNs,
∗ Work done during internship at Google Research.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed transfer learning scheme.
Given the target domain of interest, we pre-train a CNN on the
selected subset from the source domain based on the proposed domain similarity measure, and then fine-tune on the target domain.

one needs to train networks with vast amounts of supervised
data. However, collecting a labeled fine-grained dataset often requires expert-level domain knowledge and therefore
is difficult to scale. As a result, commonly used FGVC
datasets [58, 28, 32] are relatively small, typically containing around 10k of labeled training images. In such a scenario, fine-tuning the networks that are pre-trained on large
scale datasets such as ImageNet [12] is often adopted.
This common setup poses two questions: 1) What are
the important factors to achieve good performance on large
scale FGVC? Although other large scale generic visual
datasets like ImageNet contain some fine-grained categories, their images are usually iconic web images that
contain objects in the center with similar scale and simple
backgrounds. With the limited availability of large scale
FGVC datasets, how to design models that perform well
on large scale non-iconic images with fine-grained categories remains an underdeveloped area. 2) How does one
effectively conduct transfer learning, by first training the
network on a large scale dataset and then fine-tuning it
on domain-specific fine-grained datasets? Modern FGVC
methods overwhelmingly use ImageNet pre-trained networks for fine-tuning. Given the fact that the target finegrained domain is known, can we do better than ImageNet?
This paper aims to answer the two aforementioned problems, with the recently introduced iNaturalist 2017 large
scale fine-grained dataset (iNat) [55]. iNat contains 675,170
14109

