Deep Density Clustering of Unconstrained Faces
Wei-An Lin

Jun-Cheng Chen Carlos D. Castillo Rama Chellappa
University of Maryland, College Park

walin@umd.edu pullpull@cs.umd.edu carlos@cs.umd.edu rama@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of grouping a
collection of unconstrained face images in which the number of subjects is not known. We propose an unsupervised
clustering algorithm called Deep Density Clustering (DDC)
which is based on measuring density affinities between local
neighborhoods in the feature space. By learning the minimal covering sphere for each neighborhood, information
about the underlying structure is encapsulated. The encapsulation is also capable of locating high-density region of
the neighborhood, which aids in measuring the neighborhood similarity. We theoretically show that the encapsulation asymptotically converges to a Parzen window density
estimator. Our experiments show that DDC is a superior
candidate for clustering unconstrained faces when the number of subjects is unknown. Unlike conventional linkage and
density-based methods that are sensitive to the selection operating points, DDC attains more consistent and improved
performance. Furthermore, the density-aware property reduces the difficulty in finding appropriate operating points.

1. Introduction
Given a collection of unseen face images, humans have
the capability of grouping and summarizing how many distinct subjects are present by exploiting previously learned
knowledge about essential components of a face and possible variations of faces from the same person. In computer
vision research, this corresponds to the task of grouping visual data into clusters with targeted semantics. Most existing unsupervised algorithms group data into visually similar clusters, unaware of the underlying semantics. The success in clustering handwritten digits or faces appearing in
consecutive video frames is mainly based on the fact that
images that belong to the same category are visually similar. For visual data that have extreme intra-class variations, these methods may not be applicable. In this work,
we focus on clustering unconstrained face images without
prior knowledge of the number of distinct subjects. Vi-

Input: Unlabeled Images

Deep Feature Extraction

Feature Normalization

Agglomerative Merging

Density-based Similarity Measure

Output: Clustered Images

Figure 1: We introduce Deep Density Clustering (DDC) for
unconstrained face images. DDC is a density-based clustering algorithm, which exploits the local structure of deep
features for improved similarity measure.

sual variations caused by nuisance factors such as pose, illumination and expressions may be larger than variations
between subjects. To our knowledge, few previous works
have addressed this challenging problem. Recent works on
face clustering first extract feature vectors using deep neural networks (DNNs), and then group data directly in the
feature space. Face clustering based on deep features generally has advantages over other unsupervised methods due
to side information present in the training data. However,
since clustering algorithms generally deal with unseen data,
these methods will suffer from the shift in data distribution
across different domains. Therefore, the underlying structure should be considered to prevent performance degradation.
To tackle the challenges discussed above, we propose
a clustering framework, named Deep Density Clustering
(DDC) that exploits the neighborhood structure of deep
representations. DDC consists of three main steps: extracting deep features, computing density-based similarity,
and merging clusters. The novelty is mainly in the second step: DDC first associates each data point with an ǫneighborhood. Points inside the neighborhood are then represented by a minimal covering sphere which encapsulates
local information. Finally, DDC computes pairwise similarity by evaluating data points on the functionals defined by
18128

