IQA: Visual Question Answering in Interactive Environments
Daniel Gordon1 Aniruddha Kembhavi2 Mohammad Rastegari2,4
Joseph Redmon1 Dieter Fox1,3 Ali Farhadi1,2
1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
4
Nvidia
Xnor.ai

Abstract

Question and answer

We introduce Interactive Question Answering (IQA),
the task of answering questions that require an autonomous
agent to interact with a dynamic visual environment. IQA
presents the agent with a scene and a question, like: “Are
there any apples in the fridge?” The agent must navigate
around the scene, acquire visual understanding of scene elements, interact with objects (e.g. open refrigerators) and
plan for a series of actions conditioned on the question.
Popular reinforcement learning approaches with a single
controller perform poorly on IQA owing to the large and
diverse state space. We propose the Hierarchical Interactive Memory Network (HIMN), consisting of a factorized
set of controllers, allowing the system to operate at multiple levels of temporal abstraction. To evaluate HIMN,
we introduce IQUAD V 1, a new dataset built upon AI2THOR [35], a simulated photo-realistic environment of configurable indoor scenes with interactive objects. IQUAD V 1
has 75,000 questions, each paired with a unique scene configuration. Our experiments show that our proposed model
outperforms popular single controller based methods on
IQUAD V 1. For sample questions and results, please view
our video: https://youtu.be/pXd3C-1jr98.

Q: Is there bread in
the room?
A: No

1. Introduction
A longstanding goal of the artificial intelligence community has been to create agents that can perform manual
tasks in the real world and can communicate with humans
via natural language. For instance, a household robot might
be posed the following questions: Do we need to buy more
milk? which would require it to navigate to the kitchen,
open the fridge and check to see if there is sufficient milk
in the milk jug, or How many boxes of cookies do we have?
which would require the agent to navigate to the cabinets,
open several of them and count the number of cookie boxes.
Towards this goal, Visual Question Answering (VQA), the
problem of answering questions about visual content, has
received significant attention from the computer vision and
natural language processing communities. While there has
been a lot of progress on VQA, research by and large focuses on answering questions passively about visual con-

Initial Image

Scene View

Q: How many mugs
are in the room?
A: 3

Q: Is there a tomato
in the fridge?
A: Yes

Figure 1. Samples from IQUAD V 1: Each row shows a question
paired with the agent’s initial view and a scene view of the environment (which is not provided to the agent). In the scene view, the
agent is shown in black, and the locations of the objects of interest
for each question are outlined. Note that none of the questions can
be answered accurately given only the initial image.

tent, i.e. without the ability to interact with the environment
generating the content. An agent that is only able to answer
questions passively is limited in its capacity to aid humans
in their tasks.
We introduce Interactive Question Answering (IQA),
the task of answering questions that require the agent to interact with a dynamic environment. IQA poses several key
challenges in addition to the ones posed by VQA. First,
the agent must be able to navigate through the environment.
Second, it must acquire an understanding of its environment including objects, actions, and affordances. Third,
the agent must be able to interact with objects in the environment (such as opening the microwave, picking up books,
etc.). Fourth, the agent must be able to plan and execute
a series of actions in the environment conditioned on the
questions asked of it.
To address these challenges, we propose HIMN (Hierarchical Interactive Memory Network). Figure 2 provides an
overview of HIMN. Akin to past works on hierarchical reinforcement learning, HIMN is factorized into a hierarchy
14089

