RotationNet: Joint Object Categorization and Pose Estimation
Using Multiviews from Unsupervised Viewpoints
Asako Kanezaki1 , Yasuyuki Matsushita2 , and Yoshifumi Nishida1
1
2

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Object classification accuracy can be enhanced by the
use of multiple different views of a target object [4, 23]. Recent remarkable advances in image recognition and collection of 3D object models enabled the learning of multi-view
representations of objects in various categories. However,
in real-world scenarios, objects can often only be observed
from limited viewpoints due to occlusions, which makes
it difficult to rely on multi-view representations that are
learned with the whole circumference. The desired property for the real-world object classification is that, when a
viewer observes a partial set (≥ 1 images) of the full multiview images of an object, it should recognize from which
directions it observed the target object to correctly infer the

“Chair”

B

C

…

We propose a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)based model “RotationNet,” which takes multi-view images
of an object as input and jointly estimates its pose and object category. Unlike previous approaches that use known
viewpoint labels for training, our method treats the viewpoint labels as latent variables, which are learned in an unsupervised manner during the training using an unaligned
object dataset. RotationNet is designed to use only a partial set of multi-view images for inference, and this property
makes it useful in practical scenarios where only partial
views are available. Moreover, our pose alignment strategy enables one to obtain view-specific feature representations shared across classes, which is important to maintain
high accuracy in both object categorization and pose estimation. Effectiveness of RotationNet is demonstrated by its
superior performance to the state-of-the-art methods of 3D
object classification on 10- and 40-class ModelNet datasets.
We also show that RotationNet, even trained without known
poses, achieves the state-of-the-art performance on an object pose estimation dataset.

A

C

RotationNet

Multi-view images

A

B
Object category and pose

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method RotationNet. RotationNet takes a partial set (≥ 1 images) of the full multi-view
images of an object as input and predicts its object category by
rotation, where the best pose is selected to maximize the object
category likelihood. Here, viewpoints from which the images are
observed are jointly estimated to predict the pose of the object.

category of the object. It has been understood that if the
viewpoint is known the object classification accuracy can
be improved. Likewise, if the object category is known,
that helps infer the viewpoint. As such, object classification and viewpoint estimation is a tightly coupled problem,
which can best benefit from their joint estimation.
We propose a new Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) model that we call RotationNet, which takes multiview images of an object as input and predicts its pose and
object category (Fig. 1). RotationNet outputs viewpointspecific category likelihoods corresponding to all predefined discrete viewpoints for each image input, and then
selects the object pose that maximizes the integrated object
category likelihood. Whereas, at the training phase, RotationNet uses a complete set of multi-view images of an
object captured from all the pre-defined viewpoints, for inference it is able to work with only a partial set of all the
multi-view images – a single image at minimum – as input.
In addition, RotationNet does not require the multi-view images to be provided at once but allows their sequential input
15010

