Low-Shot Learning from Imaginary Data
Yu-Xiong Wang1,2
1

Ross Girshick1

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

2

Martial Hebert2

Bharath Hariharan1,3

Carnegie Mellon University

3

Cornell University

Abstract
Humans can quickly learn new visual concepts, perhaps
because they can easily visualize or imagine what novel
objects look like from different views. Incorporating this
ability to hallucinate novel instances of new concepts might
help machine vision systems perform better low-shot learning, i.e., learning concepts from few examples. We present
a novel approach to low-shot learning that uses this idea.
Our approach builds on recent progress in meta-learning
(“learning to learn”) by combining a meta-learner with a
“hallucinator” that produces additional training examples,
and optimizing both models jointly. Our hallucinator can
be incorporated into a variety of meta-learners and provides significant gains: up to a 6 point boost in classification accuracy when only a single training example is available, yielding state-of-the-art performance on the challenging ImageNet low-shot classification benchmark.

1. Introduction
The accuracy of visual recognition systems has grown
dramatically. But modern recognition systems still need
thousands of examples of each class to saturate performance. This is impractical in cases where one does not
have enough resources to collect large training sets or that
involve rare visual concepts. It is also unlike the human visual system, which can learn a novel visual concept from
even a single example [28]. This challenge of learning new
concepts from very few labeled examples, often called lowshot or few-shot learning, is the focus of this work.
Many recently proposed approaches to this problem fall
under the umbrella of meta-learning [33]. Meta-learning
methods train a learner, which is a parametrized function
that maps labeled training sets to classifiers. Meta-learners
are trained by sampling small training sets and test sets
from a large universe of labeled examples, feeding the sampled training set to the learner to get a classifier, and then
computing the loss of the classifier on the sampled test set.
These methods directly frame low-shot learning as an optimization problem.
However, generic meta-learning methods treat images as

blue heron

Figure 1. Given a single image of a novel visual concept, such as a
blue heron, a person can visualize what the heron would look like
in other poses and different surroundings. If computer recognition
systems could do such hallucination, they might be able to learn
novel visual concepts from less data.

black boxes, ignoring the structure of the visual world. In
particular, many modes of variation (for example camera
pose, translation, lighting changes, and even articulation)
are shared across categories. As humans, our knowledge of
these shared modes of variation may allow us to visualize
what a novel object might look like in other poses or surroundings (Figure 1). If machine vision systems could do
such “hallucination” or “imagination”, then the hallucinated
examples could be used as additional training data to build
better classifiers.
Unfortunately, building models that can perform such
hallucination is hard, except for simple domains like handwritten characters [20]. For general images, while considerable progress has been made recently in producing realistic
samples, most current generative modeling approaches suffer from the problem of mode collapse [26]: they are only
able to capture some modes of the data. This may be insufficient for low-shot learning since one needs to capture many
modes of variation to be able to build good classifiers. Furthermore, the modes that are useful for classification may
be different from those that are found by training an image generator. Prior work has tried to avoid this limitation
17278

