Geometry-Aware Learning of Maps for Camera Localization
Samarth Brahmbhatt1
1

Jinwei Gu2

Kihwan Kim2

{samarth.robo, hays}@gatech.edu
1

2

James Hays1

Jan Kautz2

{jinweig, kihwank, jkautz}@nvidia.com

Georgia Institute of Technology

2

NVIDIA

Abstract
Maps are a key component in image-based camera localization and visual SLAM systems: they are used to establish geometric constraints between images, correct drift
in relative pose estimation, and relocalize cameras after lost
tracking. The exact definitions of maps, however, are often
application-specific and hand-crafted for different scenarios (e.g. 3D landmarks, lines, planes, bags of visual words).
We propose to represent maps as a deep neural net called
MapNet, which enables learning a data-driven map representation. Unlike prior work on learning maps, MapNet exploits cheap and ubiquitous sensory inputs like visual
odometry and GPS in addition to images and fuses them
together for camera localization. Geometric constraints expressed by these inputs, which have traditionally been used
in bundle adjustment or pose-graph optimization, are formulated as loss terms in MapNet training and also used
during inference. In addition to directly improving localization accuracy, this allows us to update the MapNet (i.e.,
maps) in a self-supervised manner using additional unlabeled video sequences from the scene. We also propose a
novel parameterization for camera rotation which is better suited for deep-learning based camera pose regression.
Experimental results on both the indoor 7-Scenes dataset
and the outdoor Oxford RobotCar dataset show significant
performance improvement over prior work. The MapNet
project webpage is https://goo.gl/mRB3Au.

1. Introduction
Camera localization i.e. recovering the 3D position and
orientation of a moving camera is one of the fundamental
tasks in computer vision with a wide variety of applications in robotics, autonomous driving, and AR/VR. A key
component in camera localization, including various visual
SLAM systems [20, 42, 56] and image-based localization
methods [35, 46, 47] is the concept of a map. A map is an
abstract summary of the input data that establishes geometric constraints between observations and can be queried to
get the camera pose when tracking is drifting or lost. Maps,
however, are usually defined in an application-specific man-

Figure 1: Camera localization results for outdoor (left) and
indoor (right) scenes from the Oxford RobotCar [38] and 7Scenes [48] datasets. As shown, prior DNN-based methods (e.g.,
PoseNet [32, 30, 31]) result in noisy estimations, while traditional
visual odometry based methods (e.g., stereo VO or DSO [18]) often drift over time. In contrast, MapNet gives accurate camera
pose estimates by including various geometric constraints in DNN
training and inference.

ner with hand-crafted features. Examples include 3D landmarks for general visual SLAM methods [34, 35, 42], 3D
lines and patches in semi-dense SLAM methods and indoor scenes [20, 43, 56], object-level context in semantic
SLAM methods [10, 45], bag of visual word features on
key frames for camera relocalization [12, 46, 47]. Being
application-specific, these map representations may ignore
useful (sometimes, the only available) features in environments they were not designed for, and are inflexible to update as more input data come in.
Is there a general map representation for camera localization that addresses these drawbacks? In this paper, we take a
step towards answering this question. We propose to represent maps as a DNN, called MapNet, which learns the map
representation directly from input data, with the flexibility
to fuse multiple sensory inputs and to improve over time
using unlabeled data. MapNet aims to be a part that can be
easily plugged into any visual SLAM or image-based localization systems. We are inspired by both the recent DNNbased camera localization work (e.g., PoseNet [32] and its
variants [11, 31, 40, 55]) in the context of structure-frommotion, as well as the traditional map optimization methods
(e.g., bundle adjustment (BA) [22, 23, 39], pose graph optimization (PGO) [8, 17, 37]) in the context of visual SLAM.
Compared to these prior works, our approach makes the fol12616

