Progressive Attention Guided Recurrent Network for Salient Object Detection
Xiaoning Zhang1∗, Tiantian Wang1∗, Jinqing Qi1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Gang Wang2
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Alibaba AILabs, China
xiaoningzhang42@gmail.com, tiantianwang.ice@gmail.com,
{jinqing, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, wg134231@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Salient object detection, which simulates the human vision system to judge the importance of image regions, has
received increasing attention in recent years. During the
past two decades, many salient object detection methods
have been proposed. Conventional saliency methods usually utilize hand-crafted low-level features such as color, intensity, contrast to predict saliency. However, it is of great
difficulty for these low-level features based approaches to
detect salient objects in complex scenarios.
∗ denotes equal contributions.

Input image
GT
SA

(a)

(b)

(c)

Input image

Channel-wise Attention

0.3289

conv5_5
13
36

0.0756

56

1

GT

Effective convolutional features play an important role
in saliency estimation but how to learn powerful features
for saliency is still a challenging task. FCN-based methods directly apply multi-level convolutional features without distinction, which leads to sub-optimal results due to
the distraction from redundant details. In this paper, we
propose a novel attention guided network which selectively
integrates multi-level contextual information in a progressive manner. Attentive features generated by our network
can alleviate distraction of background thus achieve better
performance. On the other hand, it is observed that most
of existing algorithms conduct salient object detection by
exploiting side-output features of the backbone feature extraction network. However, shallower layers of backbone
network lack the ability to obtain global semantic information, which limits the effective feature learning. To address
the problem, we introduce multi-path recurrent feedback to
enhance our proposed progressive attention driven framework. Through multi-path recurrent connections, global
semantic information from the top convolutional layer is
transferred to shallower layers, which intrinsically refines
the entire network. Experimental results on six benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our algorithm performs favorably
against the state-of-the-art approaches.

Spatial Attention

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of spatial and channel-wise attention.

Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs),
which intelligently extract high-level and multi-scale complex representations from raw images directly, have
achieved superior performance in many vision tasks. Due to
the semantic information obtained from high-level features,
CNN based saliency detection approaches have successfully broken the bottleneck of hand-crafted features. How to
design a reasonable network which is able to learn effective features and how to process these features for saliency
estimation become the key issues to be addressed.
Many state-of-the-art methods design saliency models
by integrating multi-level convolutional features together.
However, not all features are of equal importance to saliency detection and some even cause interference. Attention
mechanisms, which add weights on image features, provide
a feasible solution. To the best of my knowledge, there are
not many works that utilize attention mechanisms to process features for saliency estimation. In this paper, we ap-

714

