Deep Learning of Graph Matching
Andrei Zanfir2 and Cristian Sminchisescu1,2
andrei.zanfir@imar.ro, cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se
1

Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy

Abstract
The problem of graph matching under node and pairwise constraints is fundamental in areas as diverse as combinatorial optimization, machine learning or computer vision, where representing both the relations between nodes
and their neighborhood structure is essential. We present an
end-to-end model that makes it possible to learn all parameters of the graph matching process, including the unary
and pairwise node neighborhoods, represented as deep feature extraction hierarchies. The challenge is in the formulation of the different matrix computation layers of the model
in a way that enables the consistent, efficient propagation
of gradients in the complete pipeline from the loss function, through the combinatorial optimization layer solving
the matching problem, and the feature extraction hierarchy. Our computer vision experiments and ablation studies
on challenging datasets like PASCAL VOC keypoints, Sintel and CUB show that matching models refined end-to-end
are superior to counterparts based on feature hierarchies
trained for other problems.

1. Introduction and Related Work
The problem of graph matching – establishing correspondences between two graphs represented in terms of
both local node structure and pair-wise relationships, be
them visual, geometric or topological – is important in areas like combinatorial optimization, machine learning, image analysis or computer vision, and has applications in
structure-from-motion, object tracking, 2d and 3d shape
matching, image classification, social network analysis, autonomous driving, and more. Our emphasis in this paper
is on matching graph-based image representations but the
methodology applies broadly, to any graph matching problem where the unary and pairwise structures can be represented as deep feature hierarchies with trainable parameters.
Unlike other methods such as RANSAC [12] or iterative closest point [4], which are limited to rigid displacements, graph matching naturally encodes structural infor-

mation that can be used to model complex relationships
and more diverse transformations. Graph matching operates with affinity matrices that encode similarities between
unary and pairwise sets of nodes (points) in the two graphs.
Typically it is formulated mathematically as a quadratic integer program [25, 3], subject to one-to-one mapping constraints, i.e. each point in the first set must have an unique
correspondence in the second set. This is known to be NPhard so methods often solve it approximately by relaxing
the constraints and finding local optima [19, 38].
Learning the parameters of the graph affinity matrix has
been investigated by [7, 20] or, in the context of the more
general hyper-graph matching model [10], by [21]. In those
cases, the number of parameters is low, often controlling geometric affinities between pairs of points rather than the image structure in the neighborhood of those points. Recently
there has been a growing interest in using deep features for
both geometric and semantic visual matching tasks, either
by training the network to directly optimize a matching objective [8, 27, 16, 36] or by using pre-trained, deep features
[23, 14] within established matching architectures, all with
considerable success.
Our objective in this paper is to marry the (shallow)
graph matching to the deep learning formulations. We propose to build models where the graphs are defined over
unary node neighborhoods and pair-wise structures computed based on learned feature hierarchies. We formulate a
complete model to learn the feature hierarchies so that graph
matching works best: the feature learning and the graph
matching model are refined in a single deep architecture
that is optimized jointly for consistent results. Methodologically, our contributions are associated to the construction of
the different matrix layers of the computation graph, obtaining analytic derivatives all the way from the loss function
down to the feature layers in the framework of matrix backpropagation, the emphasis on computational efficiency for
backward passes, as well as a voting based loss function.
The proposed model applies generally, not just for matching different images of a category, taken in different scenes
(its primary design), but also to different images of the same

2684

