Progressively Complementarity-aware Fusion Network
for RGB-D Salient Object Detection
Hao Chen
Youfu Li*
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
{hchen47-c@my., meyfli@}cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
How to incorporate cross-modal complementarity
sufficiently is the cornerstone question for RGB-D salient
object detection. Previous works mainly address this issue
by simply concatenating multi-modal features or
combining unimodal predictions. In this paper, we answer
this question from two perspectives: (1) We argue that if the
complementary part can be modelled more explicitly, the
cross-modal complement is likely to be better captured. To
this end, we design a novel complementarity-aware fusion
(CA-Fuse) module when adopting the Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN). By introducing cross-modal
residual
functions
and
complementarity-aware
supervisions in each CA-Fuse module, the problem of
learning complementary information from the paired
modality is explicitly posed as asymptotically
approximating the residual function. (2) Exploring the
complement across all the levels. By cascading the
CA-Fuse module and adding level-wise supervision from
deep to shallow densely, the cross-level complement can be
selected and combined progressively. The proposed
RGB-D fusion network disambiguates both cross-modal
and cross-level fusion processes and enables more
sufficient fusion results. The experiments on public datasets
show the effectiveness of the proposed CA-Fuse module and
the RGB-D salient object detection network.

1. Introduction
The aim of salient object detection is to identify the
object/objects attracting human beings most in a scene [2,
3]. Salient object detection is useful for a large range of
computer vision and robotic vision tasks such as object
recognition [4], image retrieval [5] and SLAM [6].
Traditional saliency detection models [3, 7-10] are
performed merely on RGB images and can be categorized
as bottom-up and top-down pipelines. Based on these two
frameworks, various hand-crafted saliency features have
been proposed. Recently, to overcome the lack of high-level
* Corresponding author

3051

Figure 1: Traditional architectures of the CNN-based RGB-D
salient object detection networks. (a) ‘Early fusion’ scheme
adopted in [13] and (b) ‘late fusion’ scheme adopted in [14].

contexts and the difficulty in exploring saliency-specific
prior knowledge, a large body of deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [11-17] have been designed for
RGB-induced salient object detection and have achieved
appealing performance. However, when the salient object
and background share similar appearance, these
RGB-induced saliency detection models may be powerless
to discriminate the salient object from background. In this
case, the paired depth data, which contain affluent spatial
structure and 3D layout information, can contribute a lot of
additional saliency cues. Also, the robustness of depth
sensors (e.g., Microsoft Kinect or Intel RealSense) to
lighting changes will benefit a lot in extending the
application scenarios of saliency detection. Accordingly, it
is practically promising to involve the paired depth data in
saliency detection. For the RGB-D saliency detection task,
how to fuse the RGB and depth information sufficiently is
the key issue. Most of previous models address this problem
by directly concatenating RGB and depth features, or
combining unimodal predictions. Recently, regarding that
CNNs are more powerful in learning discriminative
representations, a number of CNNs have been proposed for
various RGB-D computer vision tasks, such as saliency
detection [18, 19], semantic segmentation [20-23] and
object recognition [1, 24-26]. Although encouraging
performance has been achieved by these networks, there is

