Action Sets: Weakly Supervised Action Segmentation without Ordering
Constraints
Alexander Richard, Hilde Kuehne, Juergen Gall
University of Bonn, Germany
{richard,kuehne,gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Action detection and temporal segmentation of actions in
videos are topics of increasing interest. While fully supervised systems have gained much attention lately, full annotation of each action within the video is costly and impractical for large amounts of video data. Thus, weakly supervised action detection and temporal segmentation methods
are of great importance. While most works in this area assume an ordered sequence of occurring actions to be given,
our approach only uses a set of actions. Such action sets
provide much less supervision since neither action ordering nor the number of action occurrences are known. In
exchange, they can be easily obtained, for instance, from
meta-tags, while ordered sequences still require human annotation. We introduce a system that automatically learns to
temporally segment and label actions in a video, where the
only supervision that is used are action sets. An evaluation
on three datasets shows that our method still achieves good
results although the amount of supervision is significantly
smaller than for other related methods.

1. Introduction
Due to the huge amount of publicly available video
data, there is an increasing interest in methods to analyze these data. In the field of human action recognition, considerable advances have been made in recent years.
A lot of research has been published on action recognition, i.e. action classification on pre-segmented video clips
[35, 30, 11]. While current methods already achieve high
accuracies on large datasets such as UCF-101 [32] and
HMDB-51 [14], the assumption of having pre-segmented
action clips does not apply for most realistic tasks. Therefore, there is a growing interest in efficient methods for
finding actions in temporally untrimmed videos. With the
availability of large scale datasets such as Thumos [9], Activity Net [5], or Breakfast [12], many new approaches to
temporally locate and classify actions in untrimmed videos

emerged [27, 21, 39, 29, 24, 18]. However, these approaches usually rely on fully supervised data, i.e. the exact
temporal location of each action occurring in the training
videos is known. Creation of such training data requires
manual annotation on video frame level which is very expensive as well as impractical for large datasets. Thus, there
is a need for methods that can learn temporal action segmentation and labeling with less supervision. A commonly
made assumption is that instead of full supervision, only
an ordered sequence of the actions occurring in the video
is provided [2, 15, 6, 25]. Although this kind of weak supervision is already much easier to obtain, e.g. from movie
scripts or subtitles, for a vast amount of real world tasks,
such information still can not be assumed to be available.
Instead, weak labels often arise in form of meta tags or unordered lists from document indexing.
To address this problem, we propose a weakly supervised method that can learn temporal action segmentation
and labeling from unordered action labels, which we refer to
as action sets. In contrast to the above mentioned methods
(cf . Figure 1a), we assume that neither ordering nor number of occurrences of actions is provided during training.
Instead, only a set of actions occurring within the video is
given (cf . Figure 1b). This task is much more difficult than
the case where ordered action transcripts are given. Consider, for instance, a video with T frames and a transcript
)!
of C ordered actions. Then, there are (C+T
C!T ! possible labelings for the video. If the actions are not ordered, there
are already C T possible labelings. For a very short video of
100 frames and C = 5, this means that using unordered actions sets as supervision already allows for about 1060 times
more possible labelings than when provided ordered action
transcripts.
In order to deal with such an enormously large search
space, we propose three model components that aim at
decomposing the search space on three different levels of
granularity. The coarsest level is addressed by a context
model that restricts the space of possible action sequences.
On a finer level, a length model restricts the durations of
actions to a reasonable length. On the lowest, most fine15987

