A Network Architecture for Point Cloud Classification
via Automatic Depth Images Generation
Riccardo Roveri1† , Lukas Rahmann1† , A. Cengiz Öztireli2∗, Markus Gross1
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
2
Disney Research Zürich
†

Equal contribution from both authors

{rroveri, grossm}@inf.ethz.ch, lrahmann@student.ethz.ch, cengiz.oztireli@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
We propose a novel neural network architecture for point
cloud classification. Our key idea is to automatically transform the 3D unordered input data into a set of useful 2D
depth images, and classify them by exploiting well performing image classification CNNs. We present new differentiable module designs to generate depth images from a point
cloud. These modules can be combined with any network
architecture for processing point clouds. We utilize them
in combination with state-of-the-art classification networks,
and get results competitive with the state of the art in point
cloud classification. Furthermore, our architecture automatically produces informative images representing the input point cloud, which could be used for further applications such as point cloud visualization.

1. Introduction
Point clouds are an important and common representation of 3D data. In this paper, we tackle point cloud classification: being able to automatically classify point clouds
is a challenging task that can have impact in many other
problems in Computer Vision and Graphics, such as scene
understanding and surface reconstruction.
Even though 3D scanners are becoming cheaper and
more available, 2D images still represent the majority of
our graphical information. Thanks to significantly large image datasets [4], and a growing interest in the research community, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for image
classification have been well studied and achieved state of
the art results. Inspired by their high quality results, we
build a novel neural network architecture which allows us
to exploit the strengths of 2D image based CNNs for classifying 3D point clouds. Unlike some very recent deep
learning methods [17, 13, 22], which handle unordered 3D

data by directly processing and classifying them, our idea is
to design a set of trainable network components that automatically transform the 3D input to informative 2D images,
which are then input to image classification networks. Contrary to previous works [23] that classify 3D meshes by exploiting rendered images, in our method, the images are not
generated in a pre-processing step, but rather learned within
the network.
In particular, our completely differentiable architecture
first intrinsically predicts one or multiple views, which are
informative about the shape and features of the input point
cloud. Secondly, another differentiable module generates
the corresponding depth images of the point cloud rendered
from those views. These depth images are produced by extending the work presented in [21] to handle point clouds
with multiple layers of depth, occlusions and overlapping
structures. Finally, a third component combines the images and uses an image classification CNN [9] to classify
them. Thanks to the generated depth images and high performance of CNNs for image classification, we obtain competitive classification results to the recent methods in the
field. Furthermore, the views intrinsically generated by our
network can be extracted as an additional output at testing
time, and used for point cloud visualization.
To summarize, the contributions of this paper are the following:
• We propose a novel neural network architecture for
point cloud classification that achieves results competitive with the state of the art, even for difficult noisy
datasets. The key idea is to automatically transform
the unordered 3D points to informative 2D images and
exploit the well studied image based classification network architectures (and their pre-trained weights on
large image datasets).
• Our architecture produces one or a set of informative
depth images of the point cloud, by predicting meaningful view directions. We illustrate that the learned

∗ Work done while at ETH Zürich

4176

