Every Smile is Unique: Landmark-Guided Diverse Smile Generation
Wei Wang1,4 , Xavier Alameda-Pineda2 , Dan Xu1 , Pascal Fua4 , Elisa Ricci1,3 , and Nicu Sebe1
1

Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science (DISI), University of Trento, Italy,
2
Inria, Grenoble-Alpes University, France, 3 Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK), Italy.
4
Computer Vision Laboratory, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
{wei.wang,dan.xu,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it
eliricci@fbk.eu xavier.alameda-pineda@inria.fr pascal.fua@epfl.ch

Abstract
Each smile is unique: one person surely smiles in different ways (e.g. closing/opening the eyes or mouth). Given
one input image of a neutral face, can we generate multiple smile videos with distinctive characteristics? To tackle
this one-to-many video generation problem, we propose a
novel deep learning architecture named Conditional MultiMode Network (CMM-Net). To better encode the dynamics of facial expressions, CMM-Net explicitly exploits facial
landmarks for generating smile sequences. Specifically, a
variational auto-encoder is used to learn a facial landmark
embedding. This single embedding is then exploited by a
conditional recurrent network which generates a landmark
embedding sequence conditioned on a specific expression
(e.g. spontaneous smile). Next, the generated landmark embeddings are fed into a multi-mode recurrent landmark generator, producing a set of landmark sequences still associated to the given smile class but clearly distinct from each
other. Finally, these landmark sequences are translated into
face videos. Our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our CMM-Net in generating realistic videos
of multiple smile expressions.

1. Introduction
Facial expressions are one of the –if not the– most prominent non-verbal signals for human communication [40]. For
a few decades, researchers in computer vision studied how
to automatically recognize such signals [51, 30, 12, 52].
Classically, the analysis of facial expressions has been tackled with a plethora of discriminative approaches, aiming to
learn the boundaries between various categories in different video sequence representation spaces. Naturally, these
approaches focus on recognizing the dynamics of the different facial expressions. Even if their performance is, specially lately, very impressive, these methods do not posses
the ability to reproduce the dynamics of the patterns they
accurately classify. How to generate realistic facial expressions is a scientific challenge yet to be soundly addressed.

Figure 1. Two different sequences of spontaneous smiles and associated landmarks. While there is a common average pattern, the
changes from one sequence to another are clearly visible.

In particular, we are interested in generating different facial expressions, for instance, posed vs. spontaneous smiles.
In reality, one can smile in different ways. As shown in Figure 1, both videos are spontaneous smile of the same person, but they are quite different (e.g. closed vs. open eyes
and mouth). The underlying research question is, given one
single neutral face, can we generate diverse face expression
videos conditioned on one facial expression label?
Thanks to the proliferation of deep neural architectures, and in particular of generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [13, 7] and variational auto-encoders (VAE) [22],
the popularity of image generation techniques has increased
in the recent past. Roughly speaking, these methods are able
to generate realistic images from encoded representations
that are learned in an automatic fashion. Remarkably, the
literature on video generation is far less populated and few
studies addressing the generation of videos [29, 36, 38] or
the generation of predicted actions in videos [21] exist. In
this context, it is still unclear how to generate distinct video
sequences given a single input image.
The dynamics of facial expressions, and of many other
facial (static and dynamic) attributes are encoded in the facial landmarks. For instance, it has been shown that landmarks can be used to detect whether a person is smiling
spontaneously or in a posed manner [9]. Action units (e.g.
17083

