Edit Probability for Scene Text Recognition
Fan Bai1∗
Zhanzhan Cheng2
Yi Niu2
Shiliang Pu2
Shuigeng Zhou1†
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of
Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
Hikvision Research Institute, China
{fbai17,sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn
{chengzhanzhan,niuyi,pushiliang}@hikvision.com

Abstract
We consider the scene text recognition problem under
the attention-based encoder-decoder framework, which is
the state of the art. The existing methods usually employ
a frame-wise maximal likelihood loss to optimize the models. When we train the model, the misalignment between the
ground truth strings and the attention’s output sequences of
probability distribution, which is caused by missing or superfluous characters, will confuse and mislead the training
process, and consequently make the training costly and degrade the recognition accuracy. To handle this problem,
we propose a novel method called edit probability (EP)
for scene text recognition. EP tries to effectively estimate
the probability of generating a string from the output sequence of probability distribution conditioned on the input
image, while considering the possible occurrences of missing/superfluous characters. The advantage lies in that the
training process can focus on the missing, superfluous and
unrecognized characters, and thus the impact of the misalignment problem can be alleviated or even overcome. We
conduct extensive experiments on standard benchmarks, including the IIIT-5K, Street View Text and ICDAR datasets.
Experimental results show that the EP can substantially
boost scene text recognition performance.

1. Introduction
Text recognition in natural scene images has recently attracted much research interest of the computer vision community [18, 25, 31]. The sequence-learning-based text
recognition techniques, which have been advancing rapidly
in recent years [7, 25, 32], generally consist of an encod∗ Fan Bai did most of this work when he was an intern in Hikvision
Research Institute.
† Corresponding author.

ing module and a decoding module. The encoding module usually encodes the input images to vectors of ﬁxed
dimensionality with a certain encoding technique, such
as convolution neural network (CNN) [32], or recurrent
neural network (RNN) including long short-term memory
(LSTM) [16, 31, 34] and gate recurrent neural network
(GRU) [4, 8, 32]. While the decoding module decodes the
encoded feature vectors into the target strings by exploiting
RNN, connectionist temporal classiﬁcation (CTC) [12, 31]
or attention mechanism [3, 5, 32] etc.
The state-of-the-art of scene text recognition is the
attention-based encoder-decoder framework [7, 25, 32]. It
outputs a sequence of probability distribution (pd) that is
expected to be aligned with the characters of the text in
the input image. In model training, the probability of the
ground-truth text (gt in short), calculated by the corresponding output pd sequence in a frame-wise style, is utilized to
estimate the likelihood of model parameters. In this paper,
we call this joint probability frame-wise probability (FP),
and the existing frame-wise loss based methods FP based
methods in the sequel.
However, in both the training and predicting processes
of the attention-based text recognition models, some characters may be missing or superﬂuous, which results in misalignment between the gt and the output sequence of pd. In
a recent work, Cheng et al. [7] considered this phenomenon
as a result of attention drift, and solved it by introducing
the Focusing Attention Net (FAN). This method achieved
the state of the art performance. But the training of FAN
requires extra pixel-wise supervising information, which is
expensive to provide. And the training process is timeconsuming due to the large amount of pixel-wise calculation.
Fig. 1 provides examples to illustrate the phenomenon of
missing and superﬂuous characters in training an attentionbased text recognition model on the ground truth “DOVE#”.
Here, ‘#’ represents the End-Of-Sequence (EOS) symbol,
11508

