Memory Based Online Learning of Deep Representations from Video Streams
Federico Pernici, Federico Bartoli, Matteo Bruni and Alberto Del Bimbo
MICC – Media Integration and Communcation Center
University Of Florence – Italy
{federico.pernici, federico.bartoli, matteo.bruni, alberto.delbimbo}@unifi.it

Abstract

Memory
1000110101
0010101000

We present a novel online unsupervised method for face
identity learning from video streams. The method exploits
deep face descriptors together with a memory based learning mechanism that takes advantage of the temporal coherence of visual data. Specifically, we introduce a discriminative descriptor matching solution based on Reverse Nearest
Neighbour and a forgetting strategy that detect redundant
descriptors and discard them appropriately while time progresses. It is shown that the proposed learning procedure
is asymptotically stable and can be effectively used in relevant applications like multiple face identification and tracking from unconstrained video streams. Experimental results
show that the proposed method achieves comparable results
in the task of multiple face tracking and better performance
in face identification with offline approaches exploiting future information. Code will be publicly available.

1. Introduction
Visual data is massive and is growing faster than our
ability to store and index it, nurtured by the diffusion and
widespread use of social platforms. Their fundamental
role in advancing object representation, object recognition
and scene classification research have been undoubtedly assessed by the achievements of Deep Learning [1]. However, the cost of supervision remains the most critical factor
for the applicability of such learning methods as linear improvements in performance require an exponential number
of labeled examples [2]. Efforts to collect large quantities
of annotated images, such as ImageNet [3] and Microsoft
coco [4], while having an important role in advancing object recognition, don’t have the necessary scalability and are
hard to be extended, replicated or improved. They may also
impose a ceiling on the performance of systems trained in
this manner. Semi or unsupervised Deep Learning from image data still remains hard to achieve.
An attracting alternative would be to learn the object appearance from video streams with no supervision, both exploiting the large quantity of video available in the Internet and the fact that adjacent video frames contain semantically similar information. This provides a variety of con-

1010010101
0010101001
1010101001
0101010100
1010101001
1010011010

...
1000101001
1001101010
0010101001
1010011010

Figure 1. Memory based appearance representation. Left: Each
element in the memory consists of a descriptor with an associated
identity (indicated by box color) and an associated scalar value
reflecting the degree of redundancy (indicated by gray box area)
with respect to the current representation. Right: The shaded regions show the original appearance representation (i.e. VGGface).
The descriptors outside those regions are learned from the video
and extend the original appearance representation.

ditions in which an object can be framed, and therefore a
comprehensive representation of its appearance can be obtained. Accordingly, tracking a subject in the video could, at
least in principle, support a sort of unsupervised incremental learning of its appearance. This would avoid or reduce
the cost of annotation as time itself would provide a form
of self-supervision. However, this solution is not exempt
of problems [5]. On the one hand, parameter re-learning
of Deep Networks, to adequately incorporate the new information without catastrophic interference, is still an open
challenge [6, 7], especially when re-learning should be done
in real time while tracking, without the availability of labels
and with data coming from a stream which is often nonstationary. On the other hand, classic object tracking [8] has
substantially divergent goals from continuous incremental
learning. While in tracking the object appearance is learned
only for detecting the object in the next frame (the past information is gradually forgotten), continuous incremental
learning would require that all the past visual information
of the object observed so far is collected in a comprehensive
and cumulative representation. This requires that tracking
does not drift in the presence of occlusions or appearance
changes and that incremental learning should be asymptotically stable in order to converge to an univocal representa12324

