FeaStNet: Feature-Steered Graph Convolutions for 3D Shape Analysis
Nitika Verma

Edmond Boyer

Jakob Verbeek

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have massively
impacted visual recognition in 2D images, and are now
ubiquitous in state-of-the-art approaches. CNNs do not
easily extend, however, to data that are not represented by
regular grids, such as 3D shape meshes or other graphstructured data, to which traditional local convolution operators do not directly apply. To address this problem, we
propose a novel graph-convolution operator to establish
correspondences between filter weights and graph neighborhoods with arbitrary connectivity. The key novelty of
our approach is that these correspondences are dynamically computed from features learned by the network, rather
than relying on predefined static coordinates over the graph
as in previous work. We obtain excellent experimental results that significantly improve over previous state-of-theart shape correspondence results. This shows that our approach can learn effective shape representations from raw
input coordinates, without relying on shape descriptors.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has dramatically improved
the state of the art in several research domains including
computer vision, speech recognition, and natural language
processing [13]. In particular, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have now become ubiquitous in computational solutions to visual recognition problems such as image classification [8], semantic segmentation [34], object
detection [21], and image captioning [32]. CNNs also extend beyond 2D visual information, and easily generalize to
other data that come in the form of regular rectangular grids.
This has been demonstrated with for instance 1D convolution for audio signal [18] and 3D convolution over space
and time for video signal [28].
Of particular interest beyond 2D image understanding
are 3D shape models for which two main categories of representations can be considered. Extrinsic or Eulerian rep-

Figure 1. Three examples of texture transfer from a reference
shape in neutral pose (left) using shape correspondences predicted
by FeaStNet (multi-scale architecture, without refinement).

resentations are based on parametrizations external to the
shape, the most common being voxel grids. Such representations enable standard CNNs to be applied over 3D grids,
but lack invariance to even the most basic transformations of
the shape. A simple rigid transformation of the shape can
lead to significant changes in the 3D grid representation.
Moreover, discretizing space instead of shapes tends to be
inefficient, in particular with moving and deforming objects
for which a significant part of the space grid can be empty,
resulting in representations with poor shape resolutions [7],
or requiring special data structures to handle sparse inputs
and/or outputs [22, 26]. On the other hand, intrinsic or Lagrangian representations, for example 3D meshes or volumetric quantizations, are robust to many shape transformations and describe 3D entities more efficiently with discretizations that are attached to shapes and not to the surrounding space. CNNs are, however, not readily extended
to such representations with irregular structures represented
as graphs where nodes can have a varying number of neighbors. The challenge is to define convolution-like operators
over irregular local supports which can be used as layers in
deep networks for prediction tasks such as shape correspondence over 3D meshes, see Figure 1.
A number of architectures that generalize beyond data
12598

