Deep Spatial Feature Reconstruction for Partial Person Re-identification:
Alignment-free Approach

1

Lingxiao He∗1,2 , Jian Liang∗1,2 , Haiqing Li1,2 , and Zhenan Sun1,2,3
CRIPAC & NLPR, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{lingxiao.he, jian.liang, hqli, znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Partial person re-identification (re-id) is a challenging
problem, where only several partial observations (images)
of people are available for matching. However, few studies have provided flexible solutions to identifying a person
in an image containing arbitrary part of the body. In this
paper, we propose a fast and accurate matching method to
address this problem. The proposed method leverages Fully
Convolutional Network (FCN) to generate fix-sized spatial
feature maps such that pixel-level features are consistent.
To match a pair of person images of different sizes, a novel
method called Deep Spatial feature Reconstruction (DSR)
is further developed to avoid explicit alignment. Specifically, DSR exploits the reconstructing error from popular
dictionary learning models to calculate the similarity between different spatial feature maps. In that way, we expect
that the proposed FCN can decrease the similarity of coupled images from different persons and increase that from
the same person. Experimental results on two partial person datasets demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of
the proposed method in comparison with several state-ofthe-art partial person re-id approaches. Additionally, DSR
achieves competitive results on a benchmark person dataset
Market1501 with 83.58% Rank-1 accuracy.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) has witnessed great
progress in recent years. Existing approaches generally
assume that each image covers a full glance of one person. However, the assumption of person re-id on full and
frontal images does not always hold in real-world scenarios,
where we merely have access to some partial observations
of each person (dubbed partial person images) for idnetification. For instance, as shown in Fig. 1, a person in the
wild are easily be occluded by moving obstacles (e.g., cars,
∗ Authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Examples of partial person images.

other persons) and static ones (e.g., trees, barriers), resulting in partial person images. Hence, partial person re-id
has attracted significant research attention as the demand
of identification using images captured by CCTV cameras
and video surveillance systems has been rapidly growing.
However, few studies have focused on identification with
partial person images, making partial person re-id an urgent
yet unsolved challenging problem. From this perspective, it
is necessary and important for both academic and industrial
society to study the partial person re-id problem.
Most existing person re-id approaches fail to identify a
person when the body region is severely occluded in the image provided. To match an arbitrary patch of a person, some
researchers resort to re-scale an arbitrary patch of the person to a fixed-size image. However, the performance would
be significantly degraded due to the undesired deformation
(see Fig. 2(a)). Sliding Window Matching (SWM) [32] indeed introduces a possible solution for partial person re-id
by constructing a sliding window of the same size as the
probe image and utilizing it to search for the most similar region within each gallery image (see Fig. 2(b)). However, SWM would not work well when the size of the probe
person is bigger than the size of the gallery person. Some
person re-id approaches further consider a part-based model
which offers an alternative solution of partial person re-id in
Fig. 2(c). However, their computational costs are extensive
17073

