Monocular Relative Depth Perception with Web Stereo Data Supervision
Ke Xian† , Chunhua Shen‡ , Zhiguo Cao†∗, Hao Lu† , Yang Xiao† , Ruibo Li† , Zhenbo Luo⋄
†
School of Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
‡
⋄
The University of Adelaide, Australia
Samsung Research Beijing, China
e-mail: kexian@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper we study the problem of monocular relative depth perception in the wild. We introduce a simple yet
effective method to automatically generate dense relative
depth annotations from web stereo images, and propose a
new dataset that consists of diverse images as well as corresponding dense relative depth maps. Further, an improved
ranking loss is introduced to deal with imbalanced ordinal
relations, enforcing the network to focus on a set of hard
pairs. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed
approach not only achieves state-of-the-art accuracy of relative depth perception in the wild, but also benefits other
dense per-pixel prediction tasks, e.g., metric depth estimation and semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation is a long-standing task in
Computer Vision, which beneﬁts many applications, such
as 2D-to-3D conversion, 3D modeling, and robotics. Although signiﬁcant progress [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] has been witnessed
in recent years due to the success of deep convolutional networks (ConvNets), depth estimation from monocular images still remains challenging, especially for images in the
wild. Most state-of-the-art methods trained on one dataset
often perform worse on a different one. For example, models trained on an indoor dataset (e.g., NYUDv2) fail to predict satisfactory depth in outdoor scenes. Our goal is thus
to use one single model to predict relative depth in general
scenes, which happens to agree with the spirit of Robust
Vision Challenge 20181 .
Actually, many applications only need relative depth,
e.g., 2D-to-3D conversion [7] and depth-of-ﬁeld [8]. To
recover relative depth for monocular images in the wild,
Chen et al. [6] proposed a “Depth in the Wild” (DIW)
dataset consisting of 495k web images, where each image
∗ Part of the work was carried out when K. Xian was visiting The University of Adelaide. Z. Cao is the corresponding author.
1 http://www.robustvision.net/index.php

Figure 1. Learning relative depth with one pair of ordinal relation
is prone to yield confused predictions [6] (top right). Pre-training
a ConvNet on the NYUDv2 dataset with multiple pairs of supervision helps make better predictions [6] (bottom left). We train a
ConvNet on our proposed ReDWeb dataset with multiple pairs of
ordinal relations to perceive relative depth in the wild and achieve
state-of-the-art performance (bottom right). For a relative depth
map, the darker the pixel is, the closer it should be, and vice versa.

was manually annotated with two points of ordinal relation
(closer ’<’ and further ’>’). However, training with only
one pair of ordinal relation is not sufﬁcient to get satisfactory predictions (see Figure 1). Based on above observations, a question arises: how to cheaply get diverse images
as well as corresponding dense relative depth maps?
Since a disparity map represents the relative depth of a
scene, in this paper, we introduce an effective method to
automatically produce disparity maps from web stereo images. Considering that web stereo image pairs are not always well-calibrated and the horizontal component of a correspondence map can be seen as a disparity map, we opt to
compute correspondence maps by a state-of-the-art optical

311

