Creating Capsule Wardrobes from Fashion Images
Wei-Lin Hsiao
UT-Austin

Kristen Grauman
UT-Austin

kimhsiao@cs.utexas.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose to automatically create capsule wardrobes.
Given an inventory of candidate garments and accessories,
the algorithm must assemble a minimal set of items that provides maximal mix-and-match outfits. We pose the task as
a subset selection problem. To permit efficient subset selection over the space of all outfit combinations, we develop
submodular objective functions capturing the key ingredients of visual compatibility, versatility, and user-specific
preference. Since adding garments to a capsule only expands its possible outfits, we devise an iterative approach
to allow near-optimal submodular function maximization.
Finally, we present an unsupervised approach to learn visual compatibility from “in the wild” full body outfit photos; the compatibility metric translates well to cleaner catalog photos and improves over existing methods. Our results on thousands of pieces from popular fashion websites
show that automatic capsule creation has potential to mimic
skilled fashionistas in assembling flexible wardrobes, while
being significantly more scalable.

1. Introduction
The fashion domain is a magnet for computer vision.
New vision problems are emerging in step with the fashion industry’s rapid evolution towards an online, social, and
personalized business. Style models [22, 38, 34, 17, 27],
trend forecasting [1], interactive search [44, 24], and recommendation [41, 18, 31] all require visual understanding
with rich detail and subtlety. Research in this area is poised
to have great influence on what people buy, how they shop,
and how the fashion industry analyzes its enterprise.
A capsule wardrobe is a set of garments that can be assembled into many visually compatible outfits (see Fig. 1).
Capsules are currently the purview of fashion experts, magazine editors, and bloggers. A capsule creator manually analyzes an inventory to puzzle together a relatively small set
of clothing items and accessories that mix and match well.
A curated capsule can help consumers get the best value
for their dollars (“do more with less”), help vendors pro-

Capsule pieces
Outfit #1

Outfit #2

Outfit #3

Outfit #4

Outfit #5

Figure 1: A capsule wardrobe is a minimal set of garments that
can mix and match to compose many visually compatible outfits.

pose appealing wardrobes from their catalogs, and help a
subscription service (e.g., StitchFix, LeTote) ship a targeted
box that amplifies a customer’s wardrobe.
We propose to automate capsule wardrobe generation.
There are two key technical challenges. First, capsules
hinge on having an accurate model of visual compatibility. Whereas visual similarity asks “what looks like this?”,
and is fairly well understood [11, 32, 42, 30], compatibility instead asks “what complements this?” It requires capturing how multiple visual items interact, often according
to subtle visual properties. Existing compatibility methods [41, 14, 35, 16, 31, 39] assume supervision via labels or
co-purchase data, which limits scope and precision, as we
will discuss in Sec. 3. Furthermore, they largely cater only
to pairwise compatibility. The second challenge is that capsule generation is a complex combinatorial problem. Of all
possible garments, we seek the subset that maximizes versatility and compatibility, and, critically, the addition of any
one garment introduces multiple new outfit combinations.
We introduce an approach to automatically create capsule wardrobes that addresses both of these issues. We first
cast capsule creation as a subset selection problem. We de17161

