CodeSLAM — Learning a Compact, Optimisable Representation for Dense
Visual SLAM
Michael Bloesch, Jan Czarnowski, Ronald Clark, Stefan Leutenegger, Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Laboratory at Imperial College, Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
m.bloesch@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
The representation of geometry in real-time 3D perception systems continues to be a critical research issue.
Dense maps capture complete surface shape and can be
augmented with semantic labels, but their high dimensionality makes them computationally costly to store and process, and unsuitable for rigorous probabilistic inference.
Sparse feature-based representations avoid these problems,
but capture only partial scene information and are mainly
useful for localisation only.
We present a new compact but dense representation of
scene geometry which is conditioned on the intensity data
from a single image and generated from a code consisting
of a small number of parameters. We are inspired by work
both on learned depth from images, and auto-encoders. Our
approach is suitable for use in a keyframe-based monocular
dense SLAM system: While each keyframe with a code can
produce a depth map, the code can be optimised efficiently
jointly with pose variables and together with the codes of
overlapping keyframes to attain global consistency. Conditioning the depth map on the image allows the code to only
represent aspects of the local geometry which cannot directly be predicted from the image. We explain how to learn
our code representation, and demonstrate its advantageous
properties in monocular SLAM.

1. Introduction
The underlying representation of scene geometry is a
crucial element of any localisation and mapping algorithm.
Not only does it influence the type of geometric qualities
that can be mapped, but also dictates what algorithms can
be applied. In SLAM in general, but especially in monocular vision, where scene geometry cannot be retrieved from
a single view, the representation of geometrical uncertainties is essential. However, uncertainty propagation quickly
becomes intractable for large degrees of freedom. This difficulty has split mainstream SLAM approaches into two cat-

Figure 1. Two view reconstruction on selected frames from the
EuRoC dataset. The proposed compact representation of 3D geometry enables joint optimisation of the scene structure and relative camera motion without explicit priors and in near real-time
performance.

egories: sparse SLAM [5, 16, 20] which represents geometry by a sparse set of features and thereby allows joint probabilistic inference of structure and motion (which is a key
pillar of probabilistic SLAM [6]) and dense or semi-dense
SLAM [21, 9] that attempts to retrieve a more complete description of the environment at the cost of approximations
to the inference methods (often discarding cross-correlation
of the estimated quantities and relying on alternating optimisation of pose and map [22, 8]).
However, the conclusion that a dense representation of
the environment requires a large number of parameters is
not necessarily correct. The geometry of natural scenes is
not a random collection of occupied and unoccupied space
but exhibits a high degree of order. In a depth map, the
values of neighbouring pixels are highly correlated and can
often be accurately represented by well known geometric
smoothness primitives. But more strongly, if a higher level

2560

