V2V-PoseNet: Voxel-to-Voxel Prediction Network for Accurate 3D Hand and
Human Pose Estimation from a Single Depth Map
Gyeongsik Moon
ASRI, Seoul National University

Ju Yong Chang
Kwangwoon University

Kyoung Mu Lee
ASRI, Seoul National University

mks0601@snu.ac.kr

juyong.chang@gmail.com

kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Most of the existing deep learning-based methods for 3D
hand and human pose estimation from a single depth map
are based on a common framework that takes a 2D depth
map and directly regresses the 3D coordinates of keypoints,
such as hand or human body joints, via 2D convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). The first weakness of this approach is the presence of perspective distortion in the 2D
depth map. While the depth map is intrinsically 3D data,
many previous methods treat depth maps as 2D images that
can distort the shape of the actual object through projection from 3D to 2D space. This compels the network to perform perspective distortion-invariant estimation. The second weakness of the conventional approach is that directly
regressing 3D coordinates from a 2D image is a highly nonlinear mapping, which causes difficulty in the learning procedure. To overcome these weaknesses, we firstly cast the
3D hand and human pose estimation problem from a single depth map into a voxel-to-voxel prediction that uses a
3D voxelized grid and estimates the per-voxel likelihood for
each keypoint. We design our model as a 3D CNN that provides accurate estimates while running in real-time. Our
system outperforms previous methods in almost all publicly
available 3D hand and human pose estimation datasets and
placed first in the HANDS 2017 frame-based 3D hand pose
estimation challenge. The code is available in 1 .

ΔY
ΔX

3D to 2D
projection

ΔZ

3D point cloud

2D depth maps

3D pose
estimation

3D pose
estimation

Hand keypoints

Figure 1: Visualization of perspective distortion in 2D depth
image. The 3D point cloud has one-to-one relation with
a 3D pose, but the 2D depth image has many-to-one relation because of perspective distortion. Thus, the network
is compelled to perform perspective distortion-invariant estimation. The 2D depth maps are generated by translating
the 3D point cloud by ∆X = -300, 0, 300 mm (from left
to right) and ∆Y = -300, 0, 300 mm (from bottom to top).
In all cases, ∆Z is set to 0 mm. Similar values to the real
human hand size and camera projection parameters in the
MSRA dataset were used for our visualization.

1. Introduction
Accurate 3D hand and human pose estimation is an important requirement for activity recognition with diverse
applications, such as human-computer interaction or augmented reality [33]. It has been studied for decades in
computer vision community and has attracted considerable
research interest again due to the introduction of low-cost
depth cameras.
Recently, powerful discriminative approaches based on
1 https://github.com/mks0601/V2V-PoseNet_RELEASE

convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are outperforming
existing methods in various computer vision tasks including 3D hand and human pose estimation from a single depth
map [2, 10, 13, 15, 28]. Although these approaches achieved
significant advancement in 3D hand and human pose estimation, they still suffer from inaccurate estimation because
of severe self-occlusions, highly articulated shapes of target
objects, and low quality of depth images. Analyzing previous deep learning-based methods for 3D hand and human
pose estimation from a single depth image, most of these

5079

