Curve Reconstruction via the Global Statistics of Natural Curves
Ehud Barnea and Ohad Ben-Shahar
Dept. of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University
Beer-Sheva, Israel
{barneaeh, ben-shahar}@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Reconstructing the missing parts of a curve has been
the subject of much computational research, with applications in image inpainting, object synthesis, etc. Different
approaches for solving that problem are typically based on
processes that seek visually pleasing or perceptually plausible completions. In this work we focus on reconstructing the
underlying physically likely shape by utilizing the global
statistics of natural curves. More specifically, we develop
a reconstruction model that seeks the mean physical curve
for a given inducer configuration. This simple model is both
straightforward to compute and it is receptive to diverse additional information, but it requires enough samples for all
curve configurations, a practical requirement that limits its
effective utilization. To address this practical issue we explore and exploit statistical geometrical properties of natural curves, and in particular, we show that in many cases
the mean curve is scale invariant and oftentimes it is extensible. This, in turn, allows to boost the number of examples
and thus the robustness of the statistics and its applicability. The reconstruction results are not only more physically
plausible but they also lead to important insights on the reconstruction problem, including an elegant explanation why
certain inducer configurations are more likely to yield consistent perceptual completions than others.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Curve reconstruction via global statistics of natural
curves. (a) To measure natural curve prior for a given relative
inducer configuration, curve fragments having the desired relative inducers (end points + tangent orientation) are collected from
ground truth curves labeled by humans [8]. (b) The curves are then
normalized to the same frame of reference and sampled along their
arc length with n equally spaced points. In this example n = 5
and to avoid clutter only 4 curves are shown. (c) Each point i
along the arc length of the reconstructed curve is calculated as the
mean of the corresponding points in the dataset, or more abstractly,
as the expected value of the distribution of all ith points of curves
that match the same inducers. (d) While some variance is observed
among the centers of all 245 curves, the distribution appears rather
tight, somewhat anisotropic, and approximately normal, suggesting that the expected value nicely represents the likely outcome.

The reconstruction of visual curves is the process of filling in curve fragments that are completely unobservable due
to occlusion or adversarial acquisition conditions. When attempting this task one could pursue one of two different
goals, either the original physical shape or the perceived
one. (Note that oftentimes these two curves are quite different.). Different models for the generation of missing parts
of curves were indeed suggested [25, 13, 18, 11, 2, 10, 19,
33] and employed in various applications such as image inpainting [26, 23, 24, 29], and computer graphics [10, 9].
With much of the theoretical work done in the context of

curve completion that supports perceptual plausibility (i.e.,
matching the perceived completion under cases such as occlusion), most studies have focused on defining different
shape criteria for the generation of visually pleasing curves
(for example those with minimal total curvature [25, 18, 11]
or minimal change of curvature [13]) rather than relying on
any measurable prior on natural curves. Additionally, the
computation of these curves entails a minimization procedure that usually requires an iterative scheme that is susceptive to local minima and cannot be easily expanded to
13099

