Iterative Learning with Open-set Noisy Labels
Yisen Wang1, 2 Weiyang Liu2 Xingjun Ma3 James Bailey3 Hongyuan Zha2 Le Song2 Shu-Tao Xia1
1
Tsinghua University 2 Georgia Institute of Technology 3 The University of Melbourne
wangys14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wyliu@gatech.edu, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Large-scale datasets possessing clean label annotations
are crucial for training Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). However, labeling large-scale data can be very
costly and error-prone, and even high-quality datasets are
likely to contain noisy (incorrect) labels. Existing works
usually employ a closed-set assumption, whereby the samples associated with noisy labels possess a true class contained within the set of known classes in the training data.
However, such an assumption is too restrictive for many applications, since samples associated with noisy labels might
in fact possess a true class that is not present in the training
data. We refer to this more complex scenario as the open-set
noisy label problem and show that it is nontrivial in order
to make accurate predictions. To address this problem, we
propose a novel iterative learning framework for training
CNNs on datasets with open-set noisy labels. Our approach
detects noisy labels and learns deep discriminative features
in an iterative fashion. To benefit from the noisy label detection, we design a Siamese network to encourage clean
labels and noisy labels to be dissimilar. A reweighting module is also applied to simultaneously emphasize the learning
from clean labels and reduce the effect caused by noisy labels. Experiments on CIFAR-10, ImageNet and real-world
noisy (web-search) datasets demonstrate that our proposed
model can robustly train CNNs in the presence of a high
proportion of open-set as well as closed-set noisy labels.

1. Introduction
The success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
[20] is highly tied to the availability of large-scale annotated datasets, e.g., ImageNet [10]. However, large-scale
datasets with high-quality label annotations are not always
available for a new domain, due to the significant time and
effort it takes for human experts. There exist several cheap
but imperfect surrogates for collecting labeled data, such as
crowd-sourcing from non-experts or annotations from the
web, especially for images (e.g., extracting tags from the
surrounding text or query keywords from search engines).
These approaches provide the possibility to scale the acquisition of training labels, but invariably result in the intro-

Figure 1. An illustration of closed-set vs open-set noisy labels.

Figure 2. An overview of our framework that iteratively learns discriminative representations on a “jasmine-cat” dataset with openset noisy labels. It not only learns a proper decision boundary (the
black line separating jasmine and cat) but also pulls away noisy
samples (green and purple) from clean samples (blue and red).

duction of some noisy (incorrect) labels. Moreover, even
high-quality datasets are likely to have noisy labels, as data
labeling can be subjective and error-prone. The presence of
noisy labels for training samples may adversely affect representation learning and deteriorate prediction performance
[27]. Training accurate CNNs against noisy labels is therefore of great practical importance.
We will refer to samples whose classes are mislabeled/incorrectly annotated as noisy samples and denote
their labels as noisy labels. Such noisy labels can fall into
two types, closed-set and open-set. More specifically, a
closed-set noisy label occurs when a noisy sample possesses
a true class that is contained within the set of known classes
in the training data. While, an open-set noisy label occurs
when a noisy sample possesses a true class that is not contained within the set of known classes in the training data.
The former scenario has been studied in previous work, but
the latter one is a new direction we explore in this paper.
18688

