Thoracic Disease Identification and Localization with Limited Supervision
Zhe Li1∗, Chong Wang3 , Mei Han2∗ , Yuan Xue3 , Wei Wei3 , Li-Jia Li3 , Li Fei-Fei3
1
Syracuse University, 2 PingAn Technology, US Research Lab, 3 Google Inc.
1

3

zli89@syr.edu, 2 ex-hanmei001@pingan.com.cn,
{chongw, yuanxue, wewei, lijiali, feifeili}@google.com

Abstract

Localization for
Cardiomegaly

Chest X-ray Image
Unified diagnosis network

Accurate identification and localization of abnormalities from radiology images play an integral part in clinical diagnosis and treatment planning. Building a highly
accurate prediction model for these tasks usually requires
a large number of images manually annotated with labels
and finding sites of abnormalities. In reality, however, such
annotated data are expensive to acquire, especially the ones
with location annotations. We need methods that can work
well with only a small amount of location annotations. To
address this challenge, we present a unified approach that
simultaneously performs disease identification and localization through the same underlying model for all images.
We demonstrate that our approach can effectively leverage
both class information as well as limited location annotation, and significantly outperforms the comparative reference baseline in both classification and localization tasks.

1. Introduction
Automatic image analysis is becoming an increasingly
important technique to support clinical diagnosis and treatment planning. It is usually formulated as a classification
problem where medical imaging abnormalities are identified as different clinical conditions [25, 4, 26, 28, 34]. In
clinical practice, visual evidence that supports the classification result, such as spatial localization [2] or segmentation [35, 38] of sites of abnormalities is an indispensable
part of clinical diagnosis which provides interpretation and
insights. Therefore, it is of vital importance that the image
analysis method is able to provide both classification results
and the associated visual evidence with high accuracy.
Figure 1 is an overview of our approach. We focus on
chest X-ray image analysis. Our goal is to both classify
the clinical conditions and identify the abnormality locations. A chest X-ray image might contain multiple sites
of abnormalities with monotonous and homogeneous image
features. This often leads to the inaccurate classification of
clinical conditions. It is also difficult to identify the sites of
∗ This work was done when Zhe Li and Mei Han were at Google.

Atelectasis: 0.7189
Cardiomegaly: 0.8573
Consolidation:0.0352
Edema:0.0219

......

Pathology
Diagnosis

Figure 1. Overview of our chest X-ray image analysis network for
thoracic disease diagnosis. The network reads chest X-ray images
and produces prediction scores and localization for the diseases

abnormalities because of their variances in the size and location. For example, as shown in Figure 2, the presentation
of “Atelectasis” (alveoli are deflated down) is usually limited to local regions of a lung [10] but possible to appear
anywhere on both sides of lungs; while “Cardiomegaly”
(enlarged heart) always covers half of the chest and is always around the heart.
The lack of large-scale datasets also stalls the advancement of automatic chest X-ray diagnosis. Wang et al.
provides one of the largest publicly available chest x-ray
datasets with disease labels1 along with a small subset
with region-level annotations (bounding boxes) for evaluation [29]2 . As we know, the localization annotation is much
more informative than just a single disease label to improve
the model performance as demonstrated in [19]. However,
getting detailed disease localization annotation can be difficult and expensive. Thus, designing models that can work
well with only a small amount of localization annotation is
a crucial step for the success of clinical applications.
In this paper, we present a unified approach that simultaneously improves disease identification and localization
with only a small amount of X-ray images containing disease location information. Figure 1 demonstrates an example of the output of our model. Unlike the standard object
detection task in computer vision, we do not strictly predict
bounding boxes. Instead, we produce regions that indicate
the diseases, which aligns with the purpose of visualizing
1 While abnormalities, findings, clinical conditions, and diseases have
distinct meanings in the medical domain, here we simply refer them as
diseases and disease labels for the focused discussion in computer vision.
2 The method proposed in [29] did not use the bounding box information for localization training.

18290

