Learning to Compare: Relation Network for Few-Shot Learning
Flood Sung Yongxin Yang3 Li Zhang2
1
Queen Mary University of London

Tao Xiang1 Philip H.S. Torr2 Timothy M. Hospedales3
2
University of Oxford 3 The University of Edinburgh

floodsung@gmail.com
{lz, phst}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a conceptually simple, flexible, and general
framework for few-shot learning, where a classifier must
learn to recognise new classes given only few examples from
each. Our method, called the Relation Network (RN), is
trained end-to-end from scratch. During meta-learning, it
learns to learn a deep distance metric to compare a small
number of images within episodes, each of which is designed to simulate the few-shot setting. Once trained, a RN
is able to classify images of new classes by computing relation scores between query images and the few examples of
each new class without further updating the network. Besides providing improved performance on few-shot learning, our framework is easily extended to zero-shot learning.
Extensive experiments on five benchmarks demonstrate that
our simple approach provides a unified and effective approach for both of these two tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved great success in visual recognition tasks [22, 15, 35]. However, these supervised learning models need large amounts of labelled data
and many iterations to train their large number of parameters. This severely limits their scalability to new classes due
to annotation cost, but more fundamentally limits their applicability to newly emerging (eg. new consumer devices)
or rare (eg. rare animals) categories where numerous annotated images may simply never exist. In contrast, humans
are very good at recognising objects with very little direct
supervision, or none at all i.e., few-shot [23, 9] or zero-shot
[24] learning. For example, children have no problem generalising the concept of “zebra” from a single picture in
a book, or hearing its description as looking like a stripy
horse. Motivated by the failure of conventional deep learning methods to work well on one or few examples per class,
and inspired by the few- and zero-shot learning ability of
humans, there has been a recent resurgence of interest in
machine one/few-shot [8, 39, 32, 18, 20, 10, 27, 36, 29] and

t.xiang@qmul.ac.uk

{yongxin.yang, t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk

zero-shot [11, 3, 24, 45, 25, 31] learning.
Few-shot learning aims to recognise novel visual categories from very few labelled examples. The availability
of only one or very few examples challenges the standard
‘fine-tuning’ practice in deep learning [10]. Data augmentation and regularisation techniques can alleviate overfitting in such a limited-data regime, but they do not solve
it. Therefore contemporary approaches to few-shot learning
often decompose training into an auxiliary meta learning
phase where transferrable knowledge is learned in the form
of good initial conditions [10], embeddings [36, 39] or optimisation strategies [29]. The target few-shot learning problem is then learned by fine-tuning [10] with the learned optimisation strategy [29] or computed in a feed-forward pass
[36, 39, 4, 32] without updating network weights. Zero-shot
learning also suffers from a related challenge. Recognisers
are trained by a single example in the form of a class description (c.f., single exemplar image in one-shot), making
data insufficiency for gradient-based learning a challenge.
While promising, most existing few-shot learning approaches either require complex inference mechanisms [23,
9], complex recurrent neural network (RNN) architectures
[39, 32], or fine-tuning the target problem [10, 29]. Our
approach is most related to others that aim to train an effective metric for one-shot learning [39, 36, 20]. Where they
focus on the learning of the transferrable embedding and
pre-define a fixed metric (e.g., as Euclidean [36]), we further aim to learn a transferrable deep metric for comparing
the relation between images (few-shot learning), or between
images and class descriptions (zero-shot learning). By expressing the inductive bias of a deeper solution (multiple
non-linear learned stages at both embedding and relation
modules), we make it easier to learn a generalisable solution to the problem.
Specifically, we propose a two-branch Relation Network
(RN) that performs few-shot recognition by learning to
compare query images against few-shot labeled sample images. First an embedding module generates representations
of the query and training images. Then these embeddings
are compared by a relation module that determines if they

1199

