Multi-Frame Quality Enhancement for Compressed Video
Ren Yang, Mai Xu∗, Zulin Wang and Tianyi Li
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{yangren, maixu, wzulin, tianyili}@buaa.edu.cn

The past few years have witnessed great success in applying deep learning to enhance the quality of compressed
image/video. The existing approaches mainly focus on enhancing the quality of a single frame, ignoring the similarity between consecutive frames. In this paper, we investigate that heavy quality ﬂuctuation exists across compressed video frames, and thus low quality frames can be
enhanced using the neighboring high quality frames, seen
as Multi-Frame Quality Enhancement (MFQE). Accordingly, this paper proposes an MFQE approach for compressed
video, as a ﬁrst attempt in this direction. In our approach,
we ﬁrstly develop a Support Vector Machine (SVM) based
detector to locate Peak Quality Frames (PQFs) in compressed video. Then, a novel Multi-Frame Convolutional Neural Network (MF-CNN) is designed to enhance the
quality of compressed video, in which the non-PQF and its
nearest two PQFs are as the input. The MF-CNN compensates motion between the non-PQF and PQFs through the
Motion Compensation subnet (MC-subnet). Subsequently,
the Quality Enhancement subnet (QE-subnet) reduces compression artifacts of the non-PQF with the help of its nearest PQFs. Finally, the experiments validate the effectiveness and generality of our MFQE approach in advancing the state-of-the-art quality enhancement of compressed
video. The code of our MFQE approach is available at
https://github.com/ryangBUAA/MFQE.git.

1. Introduction
During the past decades, video has become signiﬁcantly popular over the Internet. According to the Cisco Data
Trafﬁc Forecast [7], video generates 60% of Internet trafﬁc in 2016, and this ﬁgure is predicted to reach 78% by
2020. When transmitting video over the bandwidth-limited
Internet, video compression has to be applied to signiﬁcantly save the coding bit-rate. However, the compressed video
inevitably suffers from compression artifacts, which may
severely degrade the Quality of Experience (QoE). Therefore, it is necessary to study on quality enhancement for
∗ Mai Xu is the corresponding author of this paper.

HEVC

PSNR (dB)

Abstract

81

Our MFQE approach

85

90

Compressed frame 93

95

PQF

100

Compressed frame 96

105

Frames

Compressed frame 97

MF-CNN of our MFQE approach
DS-CNN [38]

Enhanced frame 96

Enhanced frame 96

Raw frame 96

Figure 1. Example for quality ﬂuctuation (top) and quality enhancement
performance (bottom).

compressed video.
Recently, there has been increasing interest in enhancing the visual quality of compressed image/video [25, 10,
18, 33, 6, 9, 35, 12, 24, 24, 38]. For example, Dong et
al. [9] designed a four-layer Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [22], named AR-CNN, which considerably
improves the quality of JPEG images. Later, Yang et al. designed a Decoder-side Scalable CNN (DS-CNN) for video
quality enhancement [38, 39]. However, when processing a single frame, all existing quality enhancement approaches do not take any advantage of information in the
neighbouring frames, and thus their performance is largely limited. As Figure 1 shows, the quality of compressed
video dramatically ﬂuctuates across frames. Therefore, it
is possible to use the high quality frames (i.e., Peak Quality Frames, called PQFs1 ) to enhance the quality of their
neighboring low quality frames (non-PQFs). This can be
seen as Multi-Frame Quality Enhancement (MFQE), similar to multi-frame super-resolution [20, 3].
This paper proposes an MFQE approach for compressed
video. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst investigate that there exists
large quality ﬂuctuation across frames, for video sequences
compressed by almost all coding standards. Thus, it is nec1 PQFs are deﬁned as the frames whose quality is higher than their previous and subsequent frames.

6664

