Rethinking Feature Distribution for Loss Functions in Image Classification
Weitao Wan1∗
Yuanyi Zhong1,2∗†
Tianpeng Li1
Jiansheng Chen1‡
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA
wwt16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
yuanyiz2@illinois.edu
ltp16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
jschenthu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a large-margin Gaussian Mixture (L-GM)
loss for deep neural networks in classification tasks. Different from the softmax cross-entropy loss, our proposal
is established on the assumption that the deep features of
the training set follow a Gaussian Mixture distribution. By
involving a classification margin and a likelihood regularization, the L-GM loss facilitates both a high classification
performance and an accurate modeling of the training feature distribution. As such, the L-GM loss is superior to the
softmax loss and its major variants in the sense that besides
classification, it can be readily used to distinguish abnormal
inputs, such as the adversarial examples, based on their
features’ likelihood to the training feature distribution. Extensive experiments on various recognition benchmarks like
MNIST, CIFAR, ImageNet and LFW, as well as on adversarial examples demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposal.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks have substantially improved the state-of-the-art performances of various challenging classiﬁcation tasks, including image based object
recognition [17, 14, 10], face recognition [25, 36] and speech
recognition [5, 6]. In these tasks, the softmax cross-entropy
loss, or the softmax loss for short, has been widely adopted
as the classiﬁcation loss function for various deep neural
networks [31, 10, 35, 19, 12]. For example in image classiﬁcation, the afﬁnity score of an input sample to each class
is ﬁrst computed by a linear transformation on the extracted
deep feature. Then the posterior probability is modeled as
the normalized afﬁnity scores using the softmax function.
Finally, the cross-entropy between the posterior probability
∗ These two authors contributed equally.
† This work was done when Y. Zhong was with Tsinghua University.
‡ Corresponding author.

and the class label is used as the loss function. The softmax loss has its probabilistic interpretation in that, for a
large class of distributions, the posterior distribution complies with the softmax transformation of linear functions of
the feature vectors [1]. It can also be derived from a binary
Markov Random Field or a Boltzmann Machine model [3].
However, the relationship between the afﬁnity score and the
probability distribution of the training feature space is vague.
In other words, for an extracted feature, its likelihood to the
training feature distribution is not well formulated.
Several variants have been proposed to enhance the effectiveness of the softmax loss. The Euclidean distances between each pair [36] or among each triplet [25] of extracted
features are added as an additional loss to the softmax loss.
Alternatively, in [32] the Euclidean distance between each
feature vector and its class centroid is used. However, under
the softmax loss formulation, the cosine distance based similarity metrics is more appropriate, indicating that using the
Euclidean distance based additional losses may not be the
most ideal choice. Based on this understanding, an angular
distance based margin is introduced in [22] to force extra
intra-class compactness and inter-class separability, leading
to better generalization of the trained models. Nevertheless,
the softmax loss is still indispensable and mostly dominates
the training process in these proposals. Therefore, the probabilistic modeling of the training feature space is still not
explicitly considered.
In this paper we propose a Gaussian Mixture loss (GM
loss) under the intuition that it is reasonable as well as
tractable to assume the learned features of the training set
to follow a Gaussian Mixture (GM) distribution, with each
component representing a class. As such, the posterior probability can be computed using the Bayes’ rule. The classiﬁcation loss is then calculated as the cross-entropy between
the posterior probability and the corresponding class labels.
To force the training samples to obey the assumed GM distribution, we further add a likelihood regularization term to
the classiﬁcation loss. As such, for a well trained model, the
probability distribution of the training features can now be

9117

