Self-calibrating Polarising Radiometric Calibration
Daniel Teo Guangwei1 Boxin Shi2∗ Yinqiang Zheng3 Sai-Kit Yeung1
1
Information Systems Technology and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of EECS, Peking University
3
Digital Content and Media Sciences Research Division, National Institute of Informatics

Abstract
We present a self-calibrating polarising radiometric calibration method. From a set of images taken from a single viewpoint under different unknown polarising angles,
we recover the inverse camera response function and the
polarising angles relative to the first angle. The problem is
solved in an integrated manner, recovering both of the unknowns simultaneously. The method exploits the fact that
the intensity of polarised light should vary sinusoidally as
the polarising filter is rotated, provided that the response is
linear. It offers the first solution to demonstrate the possibility of radiometric calibration through polarisation. We
evaluate the accuracy of our proposed method using synthetic data and real world objects captured using different
cameras. The self-calibrated results were found to be comparable with those from multiple exposure sequence.

1. Introduction
Shape from polarisation is a technique that recovers the
3D surface of an object by exploiting the polarisation states
of light. A surface normal map can be obtained by taking multiple images from a single viewpoint under different polarising angles. By integrating the surface normal
map, the 3D surface of an object can be reconstructed. Like
shape from shading or photometric stereo, shape from polarisation provides the surface normal map in a pixel-wise
manner, encoding much denser 3D information than multiview stereo. However, shape from polarisation is a passive approach where no active or controlled light sources
are placed and calibrated.
As shape from polarisation becomes more established,
it provides an avenue for consumers to perform 3D reconstruction simply with a consumer-grade camera and a polariser due to the low cost in comparison to structured light
scanners. Mobile phones with add-on polariser clips could
enable such a possibility. However, there are two problems
∗ Corresponding author: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

which hinder such a widespread application. The ﬁrst is that
most consumer cameras have a nonlinear mapping between
the measured intensity and the irradiance, whose relationship is established by the camera response function (CRF).
Such information is usually not provided by the manufacturers, which means that the camera has to be radiometrically calibrated to get polarisation information for 3D reconstruction more accurately. The second problem is due
to the fact that a typical shape from polarisation setup requires professional optical equipment to accurately control
the angle of polarisation, limiting the technique to the laboratory environment. If these two problems can be solved in
a self-calibrating manner, there is great potential to develop
a low-cost shape from polarisation 3D camera for daily use.
This work seeks to enable the shape from polarisation
technique for mass adoption by formulating a framework to
solve for both the inverse camera response function (ICRF)
and the polarising angles of the ﬁlter. As there have been
previous works describing radiometric calibration through
various techniques [14, 19, 27, 16], to the best of knowledge
none have attempted radiometric calibration using polarisation. Our work is specially designed for the shape from polarisation problem in a self-calibrating and integrated manner. The main contributions are twofold: 1) We solve for the
inverse CRF using polarisation information solely from input data in a self-calibrating manner; 2) We integrate the
solving of uncalibrated polariser angles with radiometric
calibration as a uniﬁed optimisation.
The key insight is that the transmitted radiance sinusoid
(TRS) under a linear response would be distorted should
the CRF be non-linear. By capturing multiple images of the
scene under unknown polarising angles, we analyze how the
CRF and unknown polarising angles affect the TRS and propose a uniﬁed optimisation to undistort the observed TRS,
from which the ICRF and polarising angles can be estimated. An overview of the problem this paper addresses
is illustrated in ﬁgure 1.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. After
reviewing related works in section 2, we provide a background summary of shape from polarisation in section 3 and
12831

