Feature Quantization for Defending Against Distortion of Images
Zhun Sun1,2 , Mete Ozay1 , Yan Zhang2 , Xing Liu1 , Takayuki Okatani1,2
1
Tohoku University 2 RIKEN Center for AIP
{sun, mozay, zhang, ryu, okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

Original Images

Abstract

Distorted Images

In this work, we address the problem of improving robustness of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to image
distortion. We argue that higher moment statistics of feature
distributions can be shifted due to image distortion, and the
shift leads to performance decrease and cannot be reduced
by ordinary normalization methods as observed in our experimental analyses. In order to mitigate this effect, we propose
an approach base on feature quantization. To be specific,
we propose to employ three different types of additional
non-linearity in CNNs: i) a floor function with scalable resolution, ii) a power function with learnable exponents, and iii)
a power function with data-dependent exponents. In the experiments, we observe that CNNs which employ the proposed
methods obtain better performance in both generalization
performance and robustness for various distortion types for
large scale benchmark datasets. For instance, a ResNet-50
model equipped with the proposed method (+HPOW) obtains
6.95%, 5.26% and 5.61% better accuracy on the ILSVRC-12
classification tasks using images distorted with motion blur,
salt and pepper and mixed distortions.

1. Introduction
Recognition of objects using distorted images is a challenge that has been studied extensively in computer vision
and pattern recognition in the last decade [3, 8, 13, 28, 30,
32, 34]. While convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved impressive progress for object classification and
recognition in various benchmark datasets [17, 20, 42, 45],
recent works [11, 12] show that their performance is severely
degraded for distorted images.
In this work, we consider a collection of image distortions
that are observed in real-world natural images. Specifically,
we consider the following types of distortion: i) distortion
caused by signal processing, ii) statistical noise and iii) occlusion (see Section 3.1 for details). Image distortions result
in change of statistical properties of datasets. In other words,
recognition of objects using distorted datasets can be posed
as a dataset shift problem. Suppose that Xtr and Xte are sets

Figure 1: Divergence between distributions of neuron activities can be observed between original and distorted input images. This effect is accumulated through layers of
CNNs, which can finally result in degraded performance.
The probability densities are calculated using VGG-16 [42]
for 5,000 original images, which belong to the validation set
of ILSVRC-12, and their manually distorted versions.

of features extracted from examples belonging to datasets
Dtr and Dte , respectively. Moreover, suppose that a CNN
model is trained using Dtr , and tested using Dte , a set of
distorted images. Then, the distortion (such as noisy pixels)

7957

