3D Semantic Trajectory Reconstruction from 3D Pixel Continuum
Jae Shin Yoon
University of Minnesota

Ziwei Li
University of Minnesota

Hyun Soo Park
University of Minnesota

jsyoon@umn.edu

lixx3686@umn.edu

hspark@umn.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a method to assign a semantic label to a 3D reconstructed trajectory from multiview image
streams. The key challenge of the semantic labeling lies
in the self-occlusion and photometric inconsistency caused
by object and social interactions, resulting in highly fragmented trajectory reconstruction with noisy semantic labels. We address this challenge by introducing a new representation called 3D semantic map—a probability distribution over labels per 3D trajectory constructed by a set of
semantic recognition across multiple views. Our conjecture
is that among many views, there exist a set of views that are
more informative than the others. We build the 3D semantic
map based on a likelihood of visibility and 2D recognition
confidence and identify the view that best represents the semantics of the trajectory. We use this 3D semantic map and
trajectory affinity computed by local rigid transformation
to precisely infer labels as a whole. This global inference
quantitatively outperforms the baseline approaches in terms
of predictive validity, representation robustness, and affinity effectiveness. We demonstrate that our algorithm can
robustly compute the semantic labels of a large scale trajectory set (e.g., millions of trajectories) involving real-world
human interactions with object, scenes, and people.

1. Introduction
Now cameras are deeply integrated in our daily lives,
e.g., Amazon Cloud Cam and Nest Cam, reaching soon towards 3D pixel continuum—every 3D point in our space is
observed by a network of ubiquitous cameras. Such cameras open up a unique opportunity to quantitatively analyze
our detailed interactions with scenes, objects, and people
continuously, which will facilitate behavioral monitoring
for the elderly, human-robot collaboration, and social telepresence. A 3D trajectory representation of human interactions [8, 19, 25, 41, 42] is a viable computational model
that measures microscopic actions at high spatial resolution
without prior scene assumptions. Unfortunately, the representation is lacking semantics, i.e., it is important to know

Ball
Head
Torso
U. arm
L. arm
U. leg
L. leg

3D semantic trajectory
Figure 1. Given 3D dense reconstructed trajectories, we assign
their semantic meaning using multiple view image streams. Each
trajectory is associated with semantic labels such as body parts and
objects (basketball). For illustrative purpose, the last 10 frames of
trajectories are visualized.

not only where a 3D point is but also what it means and
how associated with other points. For instance, Figure 1 illustrates semantic labeling of dense 3D trajectories that can
computationally describe the spatial and temporal relationship between basketball player’s hand and ball.
However, assigning a semantic label to each trajectory
in real-world scenes involves with two principal challenges.
(1) Missing data: interactions with objects and people inherently introduce self-occlusion, resulting in 3D reconstruction of highly fragmented trajectories, i.e., each trajectory
emerges and dissolves in different time instances where existing approaches of global spatial reasoning such as articulated body [42] and shape basis [8, 41] are not applicable.
(2) Noisy and coarse recognition: existing visual recognition systems were largely built on single view images,
which are often fragile to heavy background clutter, selfocclusion, and non-iconic object pose. This issue further
escalates when coarse recognition models such as a bounding box representation are used, i.e., not all pixels in a detection window belong to the same object class.
In this paper, we present a method to precisely assign the
15060

