Learning Compositional Visual Concepts with Mutual Consistency
Yunye Gong1 , Srikrishna Karanam3 , Ziyan Wu3 , Kuan-Chuan Peng3 , Jan Ernst3 , and Peter C. Doerschuk1,2
1
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca NY
2
Nancy E. and Peter C. Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca NY
3
Siemens Corporate Technology, Princeton NJ
olor‐
ags

{yg326,pd83}@cornell.edu,{first.last}@siemens.com
no training data
no training data
edge‐
edge‐
edge‐
olor‐ re onstr‐
olor‐ edge‐
olor‐ re onstr‐
shoes
ags
shoes
u
tions
ags
ags
shoes
u tions
shoes

Baseline CycleGAN

Proposed: ConceptGAN

Figure 1: We propose ConceptGAN, a framework that can jointly learn, transfer and compose concepts to generate semantically meaningful
images, even in subdomains with no training data (highlighted) while the state-of-the-art methods such as CycleGAN [49] fail to do so.

Abstract
Compositionality of semantic concepts in image
synthesis and analysis is appealing as it can help in decomposing known and generatively recomposing unknown
data. For instance, we may learn concepts of changing
illumination, geometry or albedo of a scene, and try to
recombine them to generate physically meaningful, but
unseen data for training and testing. In practice however
we often do not have samples from the joint concept space
available: We may have data on illumination change in one
data set and on geometric change in another one without
complete overlap. We pose the following question: How
can we learn two or more concepts jointly from different
data sets with mutual consistency where we do not have
samples from the full joint space? We present a novel
answer in this paper based on cyclic consistency over
multiple concepts, represented individually by generative
adversarial networks (GANs). Our method, ConceptGAN,
can be understood as a drop in for data augmentation to
improve resilience for real world applications. Qualitative
and quantitative evaluations demonstrate its efficacy in
generating semantically meaningful images, as well as one
shot face verification as an example application.

1. Introduction
In applications such as object detection and face recognition, a large set of training data with accurate annotation is critical for the success of modern deep learningbased methods. However, collecting and annotating such
data can be a laborious or even an essentially impossible
task. Conventional data augmentation techniques typically
involve either manual effort or simple transformations such
as translation and rotation of the available data, and may not
result in semantically meaningful data samples.
Recently, generative models have been shown to
successfully synthesize unseen data samples, such as
image-to-image translation and CycleGAN [12, 49]. Given
sufficient training data, these allow us, for instance, to translate from an image of a textured handbag to a corresponding
visually convincing image of a shoe with the same texture,
or from a color image of a handbag to a consistent line
drawing of a handbag. Starting with this limitation of
learning one concept at a time, naturally one would like to
continue learning more concepts to generate a wider variety
of data. However, samples from the joint distribution, in
our simple case of line drawings of shoes, may not be available for training. Going beyond two concepts, the joint
concept space certainly becomes exponential and unfeasible

8659

