Dynamic Zoom-in Network for Fast Object Detection in Large Images
Mingfei Gao1 Ruichi Yu1 Ang Li2∗ Vlad I. Morariu3∗ Larry S. Davis1
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 DeepMind 3 Adobe Research
{mgao,richyu,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

anglili@google.com

morariu@adobe.com

Abstract
We introduce a generic framework that reduces the computational cost of object detection while retaining accuracy
for scenarios where objects with varied sizes appear in high
resolution images. Detection progresses in a coarse-to-fine
manner, first on a down-sampled version of the image and
then on a sequence of higher resolution regions identified
as likely to improve the detection accuracy. Built upon reinforcement learning, our approach consists of a model (Rnet) that uses coarse detection results to predict the potential accuracy gain for analyzing a region at a higher resolution and another model (Q-net) that sequentially selects
regions to zoom in. Experiments on the Caltech Pedestrians dataset show that our approach reduces the number of
processed pixels by over 50% without a drop in detection
accuracy. The merits of our approach become more significant on a high resolution test set collected from YFCC100M
dataset, where our approach maintains high detection performance while reducing the number of processed pixels by
about 70% and the detection time by over 50%.

1. Introduction
Most recent convolutional neural network (CNN) detectors are applied to images with relatively low resolution,
e.g., VOC2007/2012 (about 500×400) [12, 13] and MS
COCO (about 600×400) [26]. At such low resolutions, the
computational cost of convolution is low. However, the resolution of everyday devices has quickly outpaced standard
computer vision datasets. The camera of a 4K smartphone,
for instance, has a resolution of 2,160×3,840 pixels and
a DSLR camera can reach 6,000×4,000 pixels. Applying
state-of-the-art CNN detectors directly to those high resolution images requires a large amount of processing time.
Additionally, the convolution output maps are too large for
the memory of current GPUs.
Prior works address some of these issues by simplifying
the network architecture [14, 41, 9, 23, 38] to speed up de∗ The work was done while the author was at the University of Maryland

R-net
State Representation
Fine
Detector

Q-net
Update
& Iterate

Fine
Detector

Step 1
Step 2

Zoom Region 1
Zoom Region 2

Figure 1: Illustration of our approach. The input is a downsampled version of the image to which a coarse detector is
applied. The R-net uses the initial coarse detection results to
predict the utility of zooming in on a region to perform detection at higher resolution. The Q-net, then uses the computed accuracy gain map and a history of previous zooms
to determine the next zoom that is most likely to improve
detection with limited computational cost.

tection and reduce GPU memory consumption. However,
these models are tailored to particular network structures
and may not generalize well to new architectures. A more
general direction is treating the detector as a black box that
is judiciously applied to optimize accuracy and efficiency.
For example, one could partition an image into sub-images
that satisfy memory constraints and apply the CNN to each
sub-image. However, this solution is still computationally
burdensome. One could also speed up detection process and
reduce memory requirements by running existing detectors
on down-sampled images. However, the smallest objects
may become too small to detect in the down-sampled images. Object proposal methods are the basis for most CNN

6926

