Tips and Tricks for Visual Question Answering:
Learnings from the 2017 Challenge
Damien Teney1
1

Peter Anderson2∗ Xiaodong He3

University of Adelaide,

2

Anton van den Hengel1

Australian National University,

3

JD AI Research

damien.teney@adelaide.edu.au, peter.anderson@anu.edu.au
xiaodong.he@jd.com, anton.vandenhengel@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Deep Learning has had a transformative impact on Computer Vision, but for all of the success there is also a significant cost. This is that the models and procedures used are
so complex and intertwined that it is often impossible to distinguish the impact of the individual design and engineering choices each model embodies. This ambiguity diverts
progress in the field, and leads to a situation where developing a state-of-the-art model is as much an art as a science. As a step towards addressing this problem we present
a massive exploration of the effects of the myriad architectural and hyperparameter choices that must be made in generating a state-of-the-art model. The model is of particular
interest because it won the 2017 Visual Question Answering
Challenge. We provide a detailed analysis of the impact of
each choice on model performance, in the hope that it will
inform others in developing models, but also that it might
set a precedent that will accelerate scientific progress in the
field.

1. Introduction
The task of Visual Question Answering (VQA) involves
an image and a related text question, to which the machine must determine the correct answer (see Fig. 1). The
task lies at the intersection of the fields of computer vision, natural language processing, and artificial intelligence.
This paper presents a relatively simple model for VQA that
achieves state-of-the-art results. It is based on a deep neural network that implements the well-known joint embedding approach. The details of its architecture and hyperparameters were carefully selected for optimal performance
on the VQA v2 benchmark [12]. Admittedly, a large part
of such a search is necessarily guided by empirical exploration and validation. Given the limited understanding of
neural networks trained on a task as complex as VQA, small
variations of hyperparameters and of network architectures
may have significant and sometimes unpredictable effects
on final performance [20]. The aim of this paper is to share
∗ Work performed while interning at Microsoft Research.

What is on the coffee table ?
candles

What color is the hydrant ?
black and yellow

What is on the bed ?
books

What is the long stick for ?
whipping

Figure 1. The task of visual question answering (VQA) relates
visual concepts with elements of language and, occasionally,
common-sense or general knowledge. Examples of training questions and their correct answer from the VQA v2 dataset [12].

the details of a successful model for VQA. The findings reported herein may serve as a basis for future development
of VQA systems and multimodal reasoning algorithms in
general.
The proposed model is based on the principle of a joint
embedding of the input question and image, followed by a
multi-label classifier over a set of candidate answers. While
this general approach forms the basis of many modern VQA
methods [33], the details of the model are critical to achieving a high quality result. We also complement our model
with a few key technical innovations that greatly enhance
its performance. We have conducted an extensive empirical study to explore the space of architectures and hyperparameters to determine the importance of the various components.
Our key findings are summarized with the following
characteristics of the proposed model, which enable its high
performance (see also Table 1).

4223

