Learning Visual Knowledge Memory Networks for Visual Question Answering
Zhou Su1∗, Chen Zhu2 , Yinpeng Dong3 , Dongqi Cai4 , Yurong Chen4 , Jianguo Li4
1
Tencent Wechat, 2 ShanghaiTech University, 3 Tsinghua University, 4 Intel Labs China
zhousu@tencent.com, zhuchen@shanghaitech.edu.cn, dyp17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{dongqi.cai,yurong.chen,jianguo.li}@intel.com

Abstract
Visual question answering (VQA) requires joint comprehension of images and natural language questions, where
many questions can’t be directly or clearly answered from
visual content but require reasoning from structured human
knowledge with confirmation from visual content. This paper proposes visual knowledge memory network (VKMN)
to address this issue, which seamlessly incorporates structured human knowledge and deep visual features into memory networks in an end-to-end learning framework. Comparing to existing methods for leveraging external knowledge for supporting VQA, this paper stresses more on two
missing mechanisms. First is the mechanism for integrating visual contents with knowledge facts. VKMN handles
this issue by embedding knowledge triples (subject, relation, target) and deep visual features jointly into the visual
knowledge features. Second is the mechanism for handling
multiple knowledge facts expanding from question and answer pairs. VKMN stores joint embedding using key-value
pair structure in the memory networks so that it is easy to
handle multiple facts. Experiments show that the proposed
method achieves promising results on both VQA v1.0 and
v2.0 benchmarks, while outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the knowledge-reasoning related questions.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is an emerging interdisciplinary research field in the last few years, which
attracts broad attention from both computer vision and natural language processing (NLP) communities. VQA aims to
help computer automatically answer natural language question about an image. The question answers can be divided
into the following types: yes/no answers, multi-choice answers, numeric answers, and open-ended word/phrase answers (for questions about what,where,who,...). VQA re∗ This work was done when Zhou Su worked at Intel Labs China, and
Yinpeng Dong was intern at Intel Labs China. Jianguo Li is the corresponding author.

Q: What is the color of the batter s shirt? Q: What is in the oven?
A: Red
A: Cookies

(a)

(b)

Q: What kind of animal would love to eat these fruits?
A: Monkey

(c)

Figure 1: Examples of different question objective categories in
VQA. (a) is an example of apparent objective that the answer is
clearly visible and can be easily answered using recognition results. (b) is an example of indiscernible objective that the answer
is unclear for visual recognition, and may need constraints from
common sense. (c) is an example of of invisible objective that the
answer requires deduction/reasoning from external knowledge.

quires comprehensive image and language understanding,
which constitutes a truly AI-complete task with similar spirit as Turing test [15, 27, 28].
Basically, VQA is formulated as a classification problem
in most researches, in which images and questions are input,
with answers as output categories (due to a limited number
of possible answers). As the VQA task was proposed after
deep learning approaches had already gained wide popularity, almost all current VQA solutions use CNN to model image input and recurrent neural network (RNN) to model the
question [49]. Attention mechanism has been heavily investigated in VQA. This includes visual attention [46, 44, 35]
which focuses on handling the problem where to look, and
question attention [33, 47, 11, 26] which focuses on solving
the problem where to read. As images and questions are
two different modalities, it is straightforward to jointly embed two modalities together for a unified description of the
image/question pair. Some works [14, 19, 20, 50, 48] even
consider putting the attention mechanism and multi-modal
joint embedding in one unified framework.
However, VQA is significantly more complex than other
vision and language tasks such as image captioning, since
explicit information (middle-level recognition results such
as objects, attributes, or even image captions, etc) are not
enough for accurate VQA. For instance, we investigated the
17736

