Revisiting Dilated Convolution: A Simple Approach for Weakly- and SemiSupervised Semantic Segmentation
Yunchao Wei1 Huaxin Xiao2 Honghui Shi3 Zequn Jie4 Jiashi Feng 2 Thomas S. Huang1
1
UIUC 2 NUS 3 IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center 4 Tencent AI Lab
{wychao1987, huaxinxiao89, shihonghui3, zequn.nus, jshfeng}@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress, weakly supervised segmentation approaches are still inferior to their fully supervised counterparts. We obverse the performance gap mainly comes from their limitation on learning to produce highquality dense object localization maps from image-level supervision. To mitigate such a gap, we revisit the dilated
convolution [1] and reveal how it can be utilized in a novel
way to effectively overcome this critical limitation of weakly
supervised segmentation approaches. Specifically, we find
that varying dilation rates can effectively enlarge the receptive fields of convolutional kernels and more importantly
transfer the surrounding discriminative information to nondiscriminative object regions, promoting the emergence of
these regions in the object localization maps. Then, we design a generic classification network equipped with convolutional blocks of different dilated rates. It can produce
dense and reliable object localization maps and effectively benefit both weakly- and semi- supervised semantic segmentation. Despite the apparent simplicity, our proposed
approach obtains superior performance over state-of-thearts. In particular, it achieves 60.8% and 67.6% mIoU scores on Pascal VOC 2012 test set in weakly- (only imagelevel labels are available) and semi- (1,464 segmentation
masks are available) supervised settings, which are the new
state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Weakly-supervised image recognition approaches [11,
15, 16, 19, 23, 38–42, 44] have been extensively studied as
they do not require expensive human effort. Among them,
the most attractive one is learning to segment images from
only image-level annotations. For such approaches, the arguably most critical challenge remaining unsolved is how
to accurately and densely localize object regions to obtain
high-quality object cues for initiating and improving the
segmentation model training [1, 20, 45].
Recently, some top-down approaches [43, 46] propose to

huang@ifp.uiuc.edu

dog

Classifi atio
Net ork

d=ϭ

d=6

d=3

d=9

Output:
a

Large O je ts

S all O je ts

Figure 1. (a) Our proposed approach: equipping a standard classiﬁcation network with multiple dilated convolutional blocks of
different dilation rates for dense object localization. (b) Comparison between the state-of-the-art CAM [46] (the 2nd row) and ours
(the last row) on quality of the produced object localization maps. Our approach localizes target objects more accurately even in
presence of great scale variation.

leverage a classiﬁcation network to produce class-speciﬁc
attention cues for object localization. However, directly employing attentions produced by image classiﬁcation models
can only identify a small discriminative region of the target object, which is not sufﬁciently dense and extensive for
training a good segmentation model. For instance, some
samples of class-speciﬁc region localization produced by
the state-of-the-art Class Activation Mapping (CAM) [46]
are shown in the second row of Figure 1 (b). One can ob-

7268

