Adversarially Learned One-Class Classifier for Novelty Detection
Mohammad Sabokrou1 , Mohammad Khalooei2 , Mahmood Fathy1 , Ehsan Adeli3
1
Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences
2
Amirkabir University of Technology 3 Stanford University

Abstract
Novelty detection is the process of identifying the observation(s) that differ in some respect from the training
observations (the target class). In reality, the novelty class
is often absent during training, poorly sampled or not well
defined. Therefore, one-class classifiers can efficiently model
such problems. However, due to the unavailability of data
from the novelty class, training an end-to-end deep network
is a cumbersome task. In this paper, inspired by the success
of generative adversarial networks for training deep models
in unsupervised and semi-supervised settings, we propose an
end-to-end architecture for one-class classification. Our architecture is composed of two deep networks, each of which
trained by competing with each other while collaborating to
understand the underlying concept in the target class, and
then classify the testing samples. One network works as the
novelty detector, while the other supports it by enhancing
the inlier samples and distorting the outliers. The intuition
is that the separability of the enhanced inliers and distorted
outliers is much better than deciding on the original samples. The proposed framework applies to different related
applications of anomaly and outlier detection in images
and videos. The results on MNIST and Caltech-256 image
datasets, along with the challenging UCSD Ped2 dataset
for video anomaly detection illustrate that our proposed
method learns the target class effectively and is superior to
the baseline and state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Novelty detection is the process of identifying the new or
unexplained set of data to determine if they are within the
norm (i.e., inliers) or outside of it (i.e., outliers). Novelty
refers to the unusual, new observations that do not occur regularly or is simply different from the others. Such problems
are especially of great interest in computer vision studies,
as they are closely related to outlier detection [47, 52], image denoising [8], anomaly detection in images [10, 23]
and videos [39]. Novelty detection can be portrayed in the
context of one-class classiﬁcation [30, 13, 18], which aims

(a)

Noisy Inlier Samples

Outlier Samples

X

(b)

R(X)
D(X)
D(R(X))

0.75
0.85

0.72
0.91

0.53
0.25

0.27
0.10

Figure 1. Example outputs of the proposed model, trained to detect
Penguins (a), in response to inlier and outlier samples (b). The
ﬁrst row of (b) shows some example images, and the second row
contains the output of the R network on them, i.e., R(X). As can
be seen, R enhanced the inlier samples (even in the presence of
noise) but distorted the outliers. Two last rows show the score of
D applied to X and R(X), respectively. R(X) is indeed more
separable than only using the original input image, X.

to build classiﬁcation models when the negative class is
absent, poorly sampled or not well deﬁned. As such, the
negative class can be considered as the novelty (i.e., outlier or anomaly), while the positive (or target) class is well
characterized by instances in the training data.
To accurately chart the intrinsic geometry of the positive
class, the ﬁrst step is to efﬁciently represent the data in a
way that can entangle more or less the different explanatory factors of variation in the data. Recently, deep learning
approaches have gained immense success in representing
visual data for various vision-based applications [43, 44],
especially in cases that they are trained in an end-to-end
13379

