Cube Padding for Weakly-Supervised Saliency Prediction in 360◦ Videos
Hsien-Tzu Cheng1 , Chun-Hung Chao1 , Jin-Dong Dong1 , Hao-Kai Wen2 , Tyng-Luh Liu3 , Min Sun1
1
National Tsing Hua University 2 Taiwan AI Labs 3 Academia Sinica
hsientzucheng@gapp.nthu.edu.tw
hao.kai@ailabs.tw

{raul.c.chao, mark840205}@gmail.com

liutyng@iis.sinica.edu.tw

sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Automatic saliency prediction in 360◦ videos is critical
for viewpoint guidance applications (e.g., Facebook 360
Guide). We propose a spatial-temporal network which is
(1) weakly-supervised trained and (2) tailor-made for 360◦
viewing sphere. Note that most existing methods are less
scalable since they rely on annotated saliency map for training. Most importantly, they convert 360◦ sphere to 2D images (e.g., a single equirectangular image or multiple separate Normal Field-of-View (NFoV) images) which introduces distortion and image boundaries. In contrast, we
propose a simple and effective Cube Padding (CP) technique as follows. Firstly, we render the 360◦ view on six
faces of a cube using perspective projection. Thus, it introduces very little distortion. Then, we concatenate all six
faces while utilizing the connectivity between faces on the
cube for image padding (i.e., Cube Padding) in convolution, pooling, convolutional LSTM layers. In this way, CP
introduces no image boundary while being applicable to almost all Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) structures.
To evaluate our method, we propose Wild-360, a new 360◦
video saliency dataset, containing challenging videos with
saliency heatmap annotations. In experiments, our method
outperforms baseline methods in both speed and quality.

1. Introduction
The power of 360◦ camera is to capture the entire viewing sphere (referred to as sphere for simplicity) surrounding its optical center, providing a complete picture of the
visual world. This ability goes beyond the traditional perspective camera and the human visual system which both
have a limited Field of View (FoV). Videos captured using 360◦ camera (referred to as 360◦ videos) are expected
to have a great impact in domains like virtual reality (VR),
autonomous robots, surveillance systems in the near future.
For now, 360◦ videos already gained its popularity thanks
to low-cost hardware on the market, and supports of video
streaming on YouTube and Facebook.
Despite the immersive experience and complete view-

Figure 1. Saliency prediction in a 360◦ video. Panel (a) shows a
challenging frame in equirectangular projection with two marine
creatures. One is near the north polar and the other is near the horizontal boundary. Panel (b) shows that Cubemap projection with
Cube Padding (CP) mitigate distortion and cuts at image boundaries. As a result, we predict high-quality saliency map on the
Cubemap. In panel (c), when visualizing our predicted saliency
map on equirectangular, both marine creatures are recalled. In
panel (d), desirable Normal Field of Views (NFoVs) are obtained
from high-quality saliency map.

point selection freedom provided by 360◦ videos, many
works recently show that it is important to guide viewers’
attention. [22, 27, 52, 51] focus on selecting the optimal
viewing trajectory in a 360◦ video so that viewers can watch
the video in Normal FoV (NFoV). [30, 29] focus on providing various visual guidance in VR display so that the viewers are aware of all salient regions. Most recently, Chou et
al. [10] propose to guide viewers’ attention according to the
scripts in a narrated video such as a tour guide video. Yu
et al. [64] propose to generate a highlight video according
to spatial-temporal saliency in a 360◦ video. All methods
above involve predicting or require the existence of spatialtemporal saliency map in a 360◦ video.
Existing methods face two challenges in order to predict saliency on 360◦ videos. Firstly, 360◦ videos capture
the world in a wider variety of viewing angles compared
to videos with an NFoV. Hence, existing image [9, 24]
11420

