Lean Multiclass Crowdsourcing
Grant Van Horn
Caltech

Steve Branson
Caltech

Scott Loarie
iNaturalist

Serge Belongie
Cornell Tech

Pietro Perona
Caltech

Abstract
We introduce a method for efficiently crowdsourcing
multiclass annotations in challenging, real world image
datasets. Our method is designed to minimize the number of
human annotations that are necessary to achieve a desired
level of confidence on class labels. It is based on combining models of worker behavior with computer vision. Our
method is general: it can handle a large number of classes,
worker labels that come from a taxonomy rather than a flat
list, and can model the dependence of labels when workers
can see a history of previous annotations. Our method may
be used as a drop-in replacement for the majority vote algorithms used in online crowdsourcing services that aggregate
multiple human annotations into a final consolidated label.
In experiments conducted on two real-life applications we
find that our method can reduce the number of required annotations by as much as a factor of 5.4 and can reduce the
residual annotation error by up to 90% when compared with
majority voting. Furthermore, the online risk estimates of
the models may be used to sort the annotated collection and
minimize subsequent expert review effort.

1. Introduction
Multiclass crowdsourcing is emerging as an important
technique in science and industry. For example, a growing number of websites support sharing observations (photographs) of specimens from the natural world and facilitate
collaborative, community-driven identification of those observations. Websites such as iNaturalist, eBird, Mushroom
Observer, HerpMapper, and LepSnap accumulate large collections of images and identifications, often using majority
voting to produce the final species label. Ultimately, this information is aggregated into datasets (e.g. GBIF [33]) that
enable global biodiversity studies [29]. Thus, the label accuracy of these datasets can have a direct impact on science,
conservation and policy. Thanks to the recent dramatic improvements in our field [16, 8, 30, 9], observations collected
by these websites can be used to train classification services
(e.g. see merlin.allaboutbirds.org and inaturalist.org), helping novices label their observations. The result is an even
larger collection of observations, but with potentially nois-

Snowy Egret

©mikewitkowski

Great Egret

SE
GE

t

Figure 1: iNaturalist Community Identification. A user uploads image xi (top-left) with an initial species prediction zi1 = Great Egret (GE),
one out of 1.5k North American bird species. Later, two additional users
(potentially alerted that a GE has been spotted) come along and, after inspecting the image and the previous identifications, contribute their subjective identifications of the bird species zi2 = GE and zi3 = GE, agreeing
with the uploader. Finally, a fourth user provides a different identification
zi4 = Snowy Egret (SE). In the plot below the images, two models (red,
green) integrate the information differently, with the y axis representing
likelihood of SE vs. GE. Majority voting (yellow arrow) simply tallies the
vote, and GE is the chosen answer after four votes. Our model (blue arrow) continuously analyzes the users’ skills across other observations and
is therefore capable of updating the likelihood of the predicted label much
more frequently. Knowing that the fourth user is highly skilled on these
taxa, our model overrides previous users and predicts SE. The underlying
ground truth answer is indeed SE. In this work we design and compare several models that estimate user skill and use it to weigh votes appropriately.
(View on iNat: https://www.inaturalist.org/observations/4599411)

ier labels as the number of people taking photos and submitting observations far outpaces the speed at which experts
can verify them. The benefits of a simple algorithm like majority vote are lost when the skill of the people contributing
labels is uncertain. Thus, there is need for improved meth-

2714

