An End-to-End TextSpotter with Explicit Alignment and Attention
Tong He1,∗ , Zhi Tian1,4,∗ , Weilin Huang3 , Chunhua Shen1,† , Yu Qiao4 , Changming Sun2
1

University of Adelaide, Australia 2 CSIRO Data61, Australia
3
Malong Technologies Co., Ltd, Shenzhen, China
4
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
Abstract
Text detection and recognition in natural images have
long been considered as two separate tasks that are processed sequentially. Jointly training two tasks is non-trivial
due to significant differences in learning difficulties and
convergence rates. In this work, we present a conceptually simple yet efficient framework that simultaneously processes the two tasks in a united framework. Our main
contributions are three-fold: (1) we propose a novel textalignment layer that allows it to precisely compute convolutional features of a text instance in arbitrary orientation, which is the key to boost the performance; (2) a character attention mechanism is introduced by using character spatial information as explicit supervision, leading to
large improvements in recognition; (3) two technologies,
together with a new RNN branch for word recognition, are
integrated seamlessly into a single model which is end-toend trainable. This allows the two tasks to work collaboratively by sharing convolutional features, which is critical to identify challenging text instances. Our model obtains impressive results in end-to-end recognition on the
ICDAR 2015 [19], significantly advancing the most recent
results [2], with improvements of F-measure from (0.54,
0.51, 0.47) to (0.82, 0.77, 0.63), by using a strong, weak
and generic lexicon respectively. Thanks to joint training,
our method can also serve as a good detector by achieving a new state-of-the-art detection performance on related
benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.
com/tonghe90/textspotter.

1. Introduction
The goal of text spotting is to map an input natural image
into a set of character sequences or word transcripts and corresponding locations. It has attracted increasing attention in
the vision community, due to its numerous potential applications. It has made rapid progress riding on the wave of reThe first two authors contribute equally. C. Shen is the corresponding
author (e-mail: chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au).

Figure 1: Illustrations of the results on ICDAR 2015 by
our proposed method, which can detect all possible text
regions and recognize relevant transcriptions in a unified
framework.
cent deep learning technologies, as substantiated by recent
works [17, 8, 2, 23, 12, 35, 43, 31, 33, 22, 26]. However,
text spotting in the wild still remains an open problem, since
text instances often exhibit vast diversity in font, scale and
orientation with various illumination effects, which often
come with a highly complicated background.
Past works in text spotting often consider it as two separate tasks: text detection and word recognition, which are
implemented sequentially. The goal of text detection is to
precisely localize all text instances (e.g., words) in a natural
image, and then a recognition model is processed repeatedly
through all detected regions for recognizing corresponding text transcripts. Recent approaches for text detection
are mainly extended from general object detectors (such as
Faster R-CNN [29] and SSD [25]) by directly regressing
a bounding box for each text instance, or from semantic
segmentation methods (e.g., Fully Convolutional Networks
(FCN) [27]) by predicting a text/non-text probability at each
pixel. With careful model design and development, these
approaches can be customized properly towards this highly

5020

