Learning Spatial-Aware Regressions for Visual Tracking
Chong Sun1,2 , Dong Wang1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Ming-Hsuan Yang2
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Merced, USA
waynecool@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wdice,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we analyze the spatial information of deep
features, and propose two complementary regressions for
robust visual tracking. First, we propose a kernelized ridge
regression model wherein the kernel value is defined as the
weighted sum of similarity scores of all pairs of patches between two samples. We show that this model can be formulated as a neural network and thus can be efficiently solved.
Second, we propose a fully convolutional neural network
with spatially regularized kernels, through which the filter
kernel corresponding to each output channel is forced to focus on a specific region of the target. Distance transform
pooling is further exploited to determine the effectiveness
of each output channel of the convolution layer. The outputs from the kernelized ridge regression model and the fully
convolutional neural network are combined to obtain the
ultimate response. Experimental results on two benchmark
datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking, which aims to continuously estimate the
positions and scales of a pre-specified target, has been a hot
topic for the last decades. It is widely used in numerous
vision tasks, such as video surveillance, augmented reality
and so on. Current algorithms have achieved very impressive results, however, many problems remain to be solved.
With the emergence of large-scale datasets, deep neural
networks have shown their great capacity in object classification, image identification, to name a few. It has been verified in many prior papers [31, 25, 22] that trackers based
on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can significantly
improve the tracking performance. Usually, these methods
pretrain their networks on a large scale dataset, and finetune
the networks with the ground-truth data in the first frame of
a sequence. In addition to the CNN-based trackers, methods based on the kernelized correlation filter (KCF) are also very popular in recent years for the efficiency and capacity to utilize large numbers of negative samples. As is

ECO

DeepSRDCF

CF2

LSART

Figure 1. Example tracking results of different methods on the OTB dataset. Our tracker (LSART) has comparable results compared
with the state-of-the-art algorithms.

described in [17], the KCF method is essentially the kernelized ridge regression (KRR) with cyclically shifted samples.
Methods based on the KCF usually take a region of interest as the input, which makes it very difficult to exploit the
structural information of the target. In addition, the cyclically constructed samples also introduce the unwanted boundary effects. Compared to the KCF method, the dominating
reason why the conventional KRR is not widely applied is
that it has to compute a kernel matrix for large numbers of
samples, which results in heavy computational load.
Both the CNN-and KRR-based trackers have limitations
and they have complementarities. The CNN-based trackers
usually contain a large number of parameters which are difficult to be finetuned in the tracking problem. As a result,
the trained filter kernels in the convolution layer are usually
highly correlated and tend to overfit the training data. On
the contrary, the KRR-based trackers have limited model
parameters (equal to the number of training samples), and
cannot learn discriminative enough models when training
samples are correlated. In addition, the existing KRR-based

8962

