Webly Supervised Learning Meets Zero-shot Learning: A Hybrid Approach for
Fine-grained Classification
Li Niu, Ashok Veeraraghavan, and Ashu Sabharwal
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University
{ln7,vashok,ashu}@rice.edu

Abstract
Fine-grained image classification, which targets at distinguishing subtle distinctions among various subordinate
categories, remains a very difficult task due to the high
annotation cost of enormous fine-grained categories. To
cope with the scarcity of well-labeled training images, existing works mainly follow two research directions: 1) utilize
freely available web images without human annotation; 2)
only annotate some fine-grained categories and transfer the
knowledge to other fine-grained categories, which falls into
the scope of zero-shot learning (ZSL). However, the above
two directions have their own drawbacks. For the first direction, the labels of web images are very noisy and the
data distribution between web images and test images are
considerably different. For the second direction, the performance gap between ZSL and traditional supervised learning is still very large. The drawbacks of the above two directions motivate us to design a new framework which can
jointly leverage both web data and auxiliary labeled categories to predict the test categories that are not associated
with any well-labeled training images. Comprehensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there is a surge of advance in the field of
image classification due to the rapid progress in deep learning techniques and available large-scale image datasets like
ImageNet [11]. However, fine-grained image classification,
which aims to classify myriads of subcategories belonging
to one category such as dog breeds or bird species, remains
to be a very challenging problem. In order to distinguish
the subtle differences among fine-grained categories, a large
number of well-labeled training images are required. However, human annotation for large-scale fine-grained categories is a rather expertise and difficult task because of the
following reasons: 1) fine-grained annotation is usually in

high demand of professional knowledge; 2) the number of
subcategories belonging to one category is generally very
huge (e.g., 14, 000 species of birds in the world [19]) and
thus it is almost impossible to exhaustively collect training
images for all the species. Therefore, lack of well-labeled
training images becomes a critical issue for fine-grained
classification. In this paper, we consider an extreme case
in which we do not have any well-labeled training images
for a given set of test categories. In this case, there are currently two main research directions, i.e., Webly Supervised
Learning (WSL) approaches and Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL)
approaches, which will be detailed separately as follows.
The Webly Supervised Learning (WSL) approaches
crawl freely available web images from public website (e.g.,
Flickr) by using category names as queries. However, when
applying the classifier learnt based on web images to the test
images, the performance will drop sharply due to the label
noise issue and domain distribution mismatch. In particular,
on one hand, the labels of web images are usually very inaccurate. On the other hand, images may be compressed or
edited before being uploaded to public websites so that the
data distribution between the web images and the test images are quite different. Although several works [19, 48] on
utilizing web data for fine-grained classification have been
done to address the above issues, they involve various forms
of human intervention or strong supervision (e.g., part location and bounding box). Instead, we focus on learning from
web data without utilizing strong supervision or human intervention when crawling web images.
The Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [20] approaches assume
that there exist well-labeled training data for a set of finegrained categories (i.e., seen categories) while we need to
recognize the instances from another set of test categories
(i.e., unseen categories) which have no overlap with seen
categories, that being said, we have no training data for
test categories. The gap between seen categories and unseen categories are generally bridged by intermediate semantic information of all categories such as manually designed attributes [20] (e.g., color, shape, and material) or
word vectors [24, 34] corresponding to category names ob-

7171

