Convolutional Neural Networks with Alternately Updated Clique
Yibo Yang1,2 ,
1
2

Zhisheng Zhong2 ,

Tiancheng Shen1,2 ,

Zhouchen Lin2,3,∗

Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
3

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{ibo,zszhong,tianchengShen,zlin}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Improving information flow in deep networks helps to
ease the training difficulties and utilize parameters more
efficiently. Here we propose a new convolutional neural network architecture with alternately updated clique
(CliqueNet). In contrast to prior networks, there are both
forward and backward connections between any two layers
in the same block. The layers are constructed as a loop and
are updated alternately. The CliqueNet has some unique
properties. For each layer, it is both the input and output of
any other layer in the same block, so that the information
flow among layers is maximized. During propagation, the
newly updated layers are concatenated to re-update previously updated layer, and parameters are reused for multiple times. This recurrent feedback structure is able to
bring higher level visual information back to refine lowlevel filters and achieve spatial attention. We analyze the
features generated at different stages and observe that using
refined features leads to a better result. We adopt a multiscale feature strategy that effectively avoids the progressive
growth of parameters. Experiments on image recognition
datasets including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN and ImageNet show that our proposed models achieve the state-ofthe-art performance with fewer parameters 1 .

1. Introduction
In recent years, the structure and topology of deep neural
networks have attracted significant research interests, since
the convolutional neural network (CNN) based models have
achieved huge success in a wide range of tasks of computer
vision. A notable trend of those CNN architectures is that
the layers are going deeper, from AlexNet [23] with 5 convolutional layers, the VGG network and GoogleLeNet with
19 and 22 layers, respectively [32, 36], to recent ResNets
[13] whose deepest model has more than one thousand
layers. However, inappropriately designed deep networks
∗ Corresponding author
1 Code address: http://github.com/iboing/CliqueNet

0

0
Block

1

unfold

2

1
3

4

2
3
4
Stage-I feature

1

2

3

4

Stage-II feature

Figure 1. An illustration of a block with 4 layers. Any layer is
both the input and output of another one. Node 0 denotes the input
layer of this block.

would make it hard for latter layer to access the gradient information from previous layers, which may cause gradient
vanishing and parameter redundancy problems [17, 18].
Successfully adopted in ResNet [13] and Highway Network [34], skip connection is an efficient way to make
top layers accessible to the information from bottom layers, and ease the network training at the same time, due
to its relief of the gradient vanishing problem. The residual block structure in ResNet [13] also inspires a series
of ResNet variations, including ResNext [40], WRN [41],
PolyNet [44], etc. To further activate the gradient and information flow in networks, DenseNet [17] is a newly proposed structure, where any layer in a block is the output of
all preceding layers, and the input of all subsequent layers.
Recent studies show that the skip connection mechanism
can be extrapolated as a recurrent neural network (RNN)
or LSTM [14], when weights are shared among different
layers [27, 5, 21]. In this way, the deep residual network

2413

