Boosting Domain Adaptation by Discovering Latent Domains
Massimiliano Mancini1,2 , Lorenzo Porzi3 , Samuel Rota Bulò3 , Barbara Caputo1,4 , Elisa Ricci2,5
1
Sapienza University of Rome, 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, 3 Mapillary Research,
4
Italian Institute of Technology, 5 University of Trento
{mancini,caputo}@diag.uniroma1.it, {lorenzo,samuel}@mapillary.com, eliricci@fbk.eu

1. Introduction
The problem that trained models perform poorly when
tested on data from a different distribution is commonly referred to as domain shift. This issue is especially relevant
in computer vision, as visual data is characterized by large
appearance variability, e.g. due to differences in resolution,
changes in camera pose, occlusions and illumination variations. To address this problem, several transfer learning
and domain adaptation approaches have been proposed in
the last decade [35].
Domain Adaptation (DA) methods are specifically designed to transfer knowledge from a source domain to the
domain of interest, i.e. the target domain, in the form of
learned models or invariant feature representations. The
problem has been widely studied and both theoretical re-

Source

Domain Alignment

Current Domain Adaptation (DA) methods based on
deep architectures assume that the source samples arise
from a single distribution. However, in practice most
datasets can be regarded as mixtures of multiple domains.
In these cases exploiting single-source DA methods for
learning target classifiers may lead to sub-optimal, if not
poor, results. In addition, in many applications it is difficult
to manually provide the domain labels for all source data
points, i.e. latent domains should be automatically discovered. This paper introduces a novel Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) architecture which (i) automatically discovers latent domains in visual datasets and (ii) exploits this
information to learn robust target classifiers. Our approach
is based on the introduction of two main components, which
can be embedded into any existing CNN architecture: (i) a
side branch that automatically computes the assignment of
a source sample to a latent domain and (ii) novel layers that
exploit domain membership information to appropriately
align the distribution of the CNN internal feature representations to a reference distribution. We test our approach
on publicly-available datasets, showing that it outperforms
state-of-the-art multi-source DA methods by a large margin.

Domain Discovery

Abstract

Target

Figure 1: The idea behind our framework. We propose a
novel deep architecture which, given a set of images, automatically discover multiple latent source domains and use
this information to align the distributions of the internal
CNN feature representations of sources and target domains
for the purpose of domain adaptation. Image better seen at
magnification.
sults [3, 33] and several shallow [10, 15, 17, 22, 30] and
deep learning algorithms have been developed [5, 6, 12, 14,
31, 32, 40]. While deep neural networks tend to produce
more transferable and domain-invariant features, previous
works [8] have shown that the domain shift is only alleviated but not removed.
Most works on DA focus on a single-source and singletarget scenario. However, in many computer vision applications labeled training data is often generated from multiple
distributions, i.e. there are multiple source domains. Examples of multi-source DA problems arise when the source
set corresponds to images taken with different cameras, collected from the web or associated to multiple points of
views. In these cases, a naive application of single-source
DA algorithms would not suffice, leading to poor results.
Therefore, in the past several research efforts have been devoted to develop DA methods operating on multiple sources
13771

