Soccer on Your Tabletop
Konstantinos Rematas1 , Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman1,2 , Brian Curless1 , and Steve Seitz1,3
1

University of Washington, 2 Facebook, 3 Google

Figure 1. From a YouTube video of a soccer game, our system outputs a dynamic 3D reconstruction of the game, that can be viewed
interactively on your tabletop with an Augmented Reality device. The supplementary video demonstrates the capabilities of the method.

Abstract
We present a system that transforms a monocular video
of a soccer game into a moving 3D reconstruction, in which
the players and field can be rendered interactively with a
3D viewer or through an Augmented Reality device. At the
heart of our paper is an approach to estimate the depth
map of each player, using a CNN that is trained on 3D
player data extracted from soccer video games. We compare with state of the art body pose and depth estimation
techniques, and show results on both synthetic ground truth
benchmarks, and real YouTube soccer footage.

1. Introduction
Imagine watching a 3D hologram of a live soccer game
on your living room table; you can walk around with an
Augmented Reality device, watch the players from different
viewpoints, and lean in to see the action up close.
One way to create such an experience is to equip the
soccer field with many cameras, synchronize the cameras,
and then reconstruct the field and players in 3D using multiview geometry techniques. Approaches of that spirit were
previously proposed in the literature [14, 13, 19] and even
commercialized as Replay’s FreeD, and others [1]. The results of multi-view methods are impressive, however the re-

quirement of physically instrumenting the field with many
synchronized cameras limits their generality. What if, instead, we could reconstruct any soccer game just from a
single YouTube video? This is the goal of this paper.
There are numerous challenges in monocular reconstruction of a soccer game. We must estimate the camera pose
relative to the field, detect and track each of the players, reconstruct their body shapes and poses, and render the combined reconstruction.
We present the first end-to-end system (Fig. 2) that accomplishes this goal (short of reconstructing the ball, which
remains future work). In addition to the system, a key
technical contribution of our paper is a novel method for
player body depth map estimation from a single frame. Our
approach is trained on meshes extracted from FIFA video
games. Based on this data, a neural network estimates per
pixel depth values of any new soccer player, comparing favorably to other state-of-the-art body depth and pose estimation techniques.
We present results on 10 YouTube games of different
teams. Our results can be rendered using any 3D viewer, enabling free-viewpoint navigation from the side of the field
recorded by the game camera. We also implemented “holographic” Augmented Reality viewing with HoloLens, projected onto a tabletop. See the supplementary material for
the AR video results and the 3D model of the game.
14738

