PhaseNet for Video Frame Interpolation
Simone Meyer1,2
1

Abdelaziz Djelouah2 Brian McWilliams2 Alexander Sorkine-Hornung2∗
Markus Gross1,2 Christopher Schroers2

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
simone.meyer@inf.ethz.ch

2

Disney Research

aziz.djelouah@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
Most approaches for video frame interpolation require accurate dense correspondences to synthesize an inbetween frame. Therefore, they do not perform well in challenging scenarios with e.g. lighting changes or motion blur.
Recent deep learning approaches that rely on kernels to represent motion can only alleviate these problems to some extent. In those cases, methods that use a per-pixel phasebased motion representation have been shown to work well.
However, they are only applicable for a limited amount of
motion. We propose a new approach, PhaseNet, that is designed to robustly handle challenging scenarios while also
coping with larger motion. Our approach consists of a neural network decoder that directly estimates the phase decomposition of the intermediate frame. We show that this
is superior to the hand-crafted heuristics previously used in
phase-based methods and also compares favorably to recent deep learning based approaches for video frame interpolation on challenging datasets.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation is a classic problem in video
processing and has many applications ranging from frame
rate conversion to slow motion effects. Traditionally this
problem is formulated as finding correspondences between
consecutive frames which are then used to synthesize the
in-between frames through warping. These methods [5,
36, 40] usually suffer from the inherent ambiguities in estimating the correspondences and are particularly sensitive to
occlusions/dis-occlusion and changes in color or lighting.
To overcome the limitations of traditional methods two
main directions have been explored. The first [8, 28] relies on phased-based decomposition of the input images, but
methods in this category are limited in the range of motion
they can handle. The second direction is based on recent ad∗ Alexander Sorkine-Hornung is now at Oculus. He contributed to
this work during his time at Disney Research.

Ours

Niklaus et al. [31] Meyer et al. [28]

Figure 1: Video frame interpolation. Compared to recent kernel based method [31], our approach is able to
handle complex scenarios containing motion blur or light
changes. It also improves over existing phase-based interpolation methods [28] relying on heuristics, which are limited in their motion range. (Image source: [21])
vances in deep learning [31]. These methods have largely
improved over optical flow based methods, but are still not
able to handle challenging scenes containing light changing
and motion blur.
In this work we propose a novel neural network architecture, PhaseNet, which combines the phase-based approach
with a learning framework. PhaseNet mirrors the hierarchical structure of the phase decomposition which it takes as
input. It then predicts the phase and amplitude values of the
in-between frame level by level. The final image is reconstructed from these predictions at different levels. Therefore, PhaseNet is able to handle a larger range of motion
than existing phase-based methods [28] (which use handtuned parameters) while addressing the issues of optical
flow and kernel based methods [31].
PhaseNet processes channels of the input images independently and shares weights across channels and pyramid
levels and as such requires a relatively small number of parameters.
Furthermore, we introduce a phase loss, which is based
on the phase difference between the prediction and the
1498

