Sim2Real Viewpoint Invariant Visual Servoing by Recurrent Control
Fereshteh Sadeghi†§

University of Washington

‡

Reaching query object

Recurrent
Control

Initial observation

Sergey Levine‡§
§

Google Brain
Reaching query object

Unseen
object

Test on Kuka IIWA
Robotic Arm

Initial observation
Query
object

Eric Jang§

University of California, Berkeley
Train with Different viewpoints
in Simulated Arm

†

Alexander Toshev§

Figure 1. Illustration of our learned recurrent visual servoing controller. Training is performed in simulation (left) to reach varied
objects from various viewpoints. The recurrent controller learns to implicitly calibrate the image-space motion of the arm with
respect to the actions issued in the unknown coordinate frame of the robot. The model is then transferred to the real world by
adapting the visual features, and can reach previously unseen objects from novel viewpoints (right).

Abstract

1. Introduction
Humans and animals can quickly recognize the effects of their actions through visual perception: when
we see ourselves in a mirror, we quickly realize that the
motion of our reflected image is reversed as a function of
our muscle movements, and when we observe ourselves
on camera (e.g., a security camera in a grocery store), we
can quickly pick ourselves out from a crowd simply by
looking for the motions that correlate with our actions.
We can even understand the effects of our actions under
complex optical transformations, such as in the case of a
surgeon performing a procedure using a laparoscope. In
short, we can quickly discover our own “end-effector”
(either our own hand, or even a tool) and visually guide
it to perform a desired task.
The ability to quickly acquire visual servoing skills of
this sort under large viewpoint variation would have substantial implications for autonomous robotic systems: if
a robot can learn to quickly adapt to any viewpoint, it
can be dropped without any calibration into novel situations and autonomously discover how to control its
joints to achieve a desired servoing goal. However,
this poses a substantial technical challenge: the problem of discovering how the controllable degrees of freedom affect visual motion can be ambiguous and underspecified from a single frame. Consider the two scenes
shown on the right side of Figure 1. Which way should
the robot move its end-effector in order to reach the unseen query object? In the two settings, the action in the
robot’s (unknown) coordinate frame has almost the opposite effects on the observed image-space motion. Af-

Humans are remarkably proficient at controlling
their limbs and tools from a wide range of viewpoints.
In robotics, this ability is referred to as visual servoing: moving a tool or end-point to a desired location
using primarily visual feedback. In this paper, we propose learning viewpoint invariant visual servoing skills
in a robot manipulation task. We train a deep recurrent controller that can automatically determine which
actions move the end-effector of a robotic arm to a desired object. This problem is fundamentally ambiguous: under severe variation in viewpoint, it may be
impossible to determine the actions in a single feedforward operation. Instead, our visual servoing approach uses its memory of past movements to understand
how the actions affect the robot motion from the current viewpoint, correcting mistakes and gradually moving closer to the target. This ability is in stark contrast to previous visual servoing methods, which assume
known dynamics or require a calibration phase. We
learn our recurrent controller using simulated data, synthetic demonstrations and reinforcement learning. We
then describe how the resulting model can be transferred to a real-world robot by disentangling perception from control and only adapting the visual layers. The adapted model can servo to previously unseen objects from novel viewpoints on a real-world
Kuka IIWA robotic arm. For supplementary videos, see:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oLgM2Bnb7fo

1
4691

