ST-GAN: Spatial Transformer Generative Adversarial Networks
for Image Compositing
Chen-Hsuan Lin1* Ersin Yumer2,3* Oliver Wang2 Eli Shechtman2 Simon Lucey1,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Adobe Research 3 Argo AI
chlin@cmu.edu

meyumer@gmail.com

{owang,elishe}@adobe.com

slucey@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of finding realistic geometric
corrections to a foreground object such that it appears natural when composited into a background image. To achieve
this, we propose a novel Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) architecture that utilizes Spatial Transformer Networks (STNs) as the generator, which we call Spatial Transformer GANs (ST-GANs). ST-GANs seek image realism by
operating in the geometric warp parameter space. In particular, we exploit an iterative STN warping scheme and
propose a sequential training strategy that achieves better
results compared to naive training of a single generator.
One of the key advantages of ST-GAN is its applicability to
high-resolution images indirectly since the predicted warp
parameters are transferable between reference frames. We
demonstrate our approach in two applications: (1) visualizing how indoor furniture (e.g. from product images) might
be perceived in a room, (2) hallucinating how accessories
like glasses would look when matched with real portraits.

1. Introduction
Generative image modeling has progressed remarkably
with the advent of convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
Most approaches constrain the possible appearance variations within an image by learning a low-dimensional embedding as an encoding of the natural image subspace and
making predictions from this at the pixel level. We refer to
these approaches here as direct image generation. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [7], in particular, have
demonstrated to be an especially powerful tool for realistic image generation. They consist of a generator network
(G) that produces images from codes, and a discriminator
network (D) that distinguishes real images from fake ones.
These two networks play a minimax game that results in G
generating realistic looking images and D being unable to
distinguish between the two when equilibrium is reached.
* Work done during CHL’s internship at Adobe Research.

Natural Image
Manifold

…

…
Figure 1: Composite images easily fall outside the natural
image manifold due to appearance and geometric discrepancies. We seek to learn geometric corrections that sequentially warp composite images towards the intersection of the
geometric and natural image manifolds.
Direct image generation, however, has its limitations. As
the space of all images is very high-dimensional and image
generation methods are limited by finite network capacity,
direct image generation methods currently work well only
on restricted domains (e.g. faces) or at low resolutions.
In this work, we leverage Spatial Transformer Networks
(STNs) [11], a special type of CNNs capable of performing geometric transformations on images, to provide a simpler way to generate realistic looking images – by restricting the space of possible outputs to a well-defined lowdimensional geometric transformation of real images. We
propose Spatial Transformer Generative Adversarial Networks (ST-GANs), which learn Spatial Transformer generators within a GAN framework. The adversarial loss enables
us to learn geometric corrections resulting in a warped image that lies at the intersection of the natural image man19455

