Polarimetric Dense Monocular SLAM
Luwei Yang1,∗ Feitong Tan1,∗ Ao Li1 Zhaopeng Cui1,2 Yasutaka Furukawa1 Ping Tan1
1

Simon Fraser University

2

ETH Zurich

{luweiy, feitongt, leeaol, furukawa, pingtan}@sfu.ca, zhaopeng.cui@info.ethz.ch

Abstract
This paper presents a novel polarimetric dense monocular SLAM (PDMS) algorithm based on a polarization camera. The algorithm exploits both photometric and polarimetric light information to produce more accurate and complete geometry. The polarimetric information allows us to
recover the azimuth angle of surface normals from each
video frame to facilitate dense reconstruction, especially at
textureless or specular regions. There are two challenges in
our approach: 1) surface azimuth angles from the polarization camera are very noisy; and 2) we need a near real-time
solution for SLAM. Previous successful methods on polarimetric multi-view stereo are offline and require manually
pre-segmented object masks to suppress the effects of erroneous angle information along boundaries. Our fully automatic approach efficiently iterates azimuth-based depth
propagations, two-view depth consistency check, and depth
optimization to produce a depthmap in real-time, where all
the algorithmic steps are carefully designed to enable a
GPU implementation. To our knowledge, this paper is the
first to propose a photometric and polarimetric method for
dense SLAM. We have qualitatively and quantitatively evaluated our algorithm against a few of competing methods,
demonstrating the superior performance on various indoor
and outdoor scenes.

1. Introduction
Polarization is a natural characteristic of light waves,
which conveys rich geometric cues of the surrounding environment, such as directions and shapes. While human vision has not evolved to exploit polarization, certain species
of birds and insects[37] are known to sense polarization.
Some shrimps [7] even roll their eyeballs (i.e., rotating
around the gazing direction) to maximize the polarization
contrast. A fundamental challenge in Computer Vision is to
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

develop computational algorithms that exploit polarimetric
as well as photometric properties of light transport.
A polarization camera, such as PolarCam [1], has an array of linear polarizer on the top of the CMOS sensor, just
like the RGB Bayer filter [14]. The polarization camera
can capture the scene under four polarization angles with a
single shot, and recover the surface azimuth angle at every
pixel in each video frame. An azimuth angle provides an
iso-depth direction on the image domain, along which depth
values can be propagated to fill-in and improve a depthmap.
The challenge is that these azimuth angle estimations are
ambiguous and noisy, and false depth propagations damage
a depthmap quickly. Furthermore, we need a near real-time
algorithm for SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and Mapping) applications. An existing polarimetric stereo solution
by Cui et al. [5] requires manually prepared segmentation
masks to prevent false propagations and is offline. This paper develops a fully automatic algorithm based on a polarization camera, which exploits both photometric and polarimetric information to produce more accurate and complete
depthmaps in real-time.
To achieve this goal, we design efficient algorithms to
resolve the azimuth angle ambiguities, and avoid propagating false depths at outlier points. Specifically, we use a
rough depthmap to bootstrap the dis-ambiguity process, unlike the expensive graph optimization adopted in [5]. During the azimuth-based depth propagation, we design a twoview propagation and cross-validation approach to avoid
propagating outlier points. Our algorithm efficiently iterates 1) two-view depth propagationsand validation, and 2)
depth optimization to produce more accurate and complete
depthmaps. All the algorithmic steps are carefully designed
to enable GPU implementations.
We have evaluated the proposed system on indoor and
outdoor scenes with a hand-held monocular polarization
video camera. The qualitative and quantitative evaluations
demonstrate our superior performance over the traditional
methods. To our knowledge, this paper is the first to propose
a photometric and polarimetric method for dense SLAM.
13857

