Deep Sparse Coding for Invariant Multimodal Halle Berry Neurons
Edward Kim1,2 , Darryl Hannan1,2 , Garrett Kenyon2
1
Department of Computing Sciences, Villanova University, PA
2
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM
edward.kim@villanova.edu,dhannan1@villanova.edu,gkeynon@lanl.gov

Abstract
Deep feed-forward convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have become ubiquitous in virtually all machine
learning and computer vision challenges; however, advancements in CNNs have arguably reached an engineering
saturation point where incremental novelty results in minor
performance gains. Although there is evidence that object
classification has reached human levels on narrowly defined
tasks, for general applications, the biological visual system
is far superior to that of any computer. Research reveals
there are numerous missing components in feed-forward
deep neural networks that are critical in mammalian vision.
The brain does not work solely in a feed-forward fashion,
but rather all of the neurons are in competition with each
other; neurons are integrating information in a bottom up
and top down fashion and incorporating expectation and
feedback in the modeling process. Furthermore, our visual
cortex is working in tandem with our parietal lobe, integrating sensory information from various modalities.
In our work, we sought to improve upon the standard
feed-forward deep learning model by augmenting them with
biologically inspired concepts of sparsity, top-down feedback, and lateral inhibition. We define our model as a
sparse coding problem using hierarchical layers. We solve
the sparse coding problem with an additional top-down
feedback error driving the dynamics of the neural network.
While building and observing the behavior of our model, we
were fascinated that multimodal, invariant neurons naturally emerged that mimicked, “Halle Berry neurons” found
in the human brain. These neurons trained in our sparse
model learned to respond to high level concepts from multiple modalities, which is not the case with a standard feedforward autoencoder. Furthermore, our sparse representation of multimodal signals demonstrates qualitative and
quantitative superiority to the standard feed-forward joint
embedding in common vision and machine learning tasks.

1. Introduction
In the past several decades, neuroscientists have been
studying the response of the brain to sensory input and theorized that humans have neurons that are colloquially known
as grandmother cells. A grandmother cell is a single neuron that responds to a specific concept or object and activates upon seeing, hearing, or sensibly discriminating that
entity, such as the person’s grandmother. In 2005, neuroscientists Quiroga et al. [29] conducted a study on eight patients that exhibited pharmacologically intractable epilepsy.
These patients had electrodes implanted in their brains, enabling precise recording from multiple isolated neurons in
the medial temporal lobe (MTL). The MTL has many functions including long-term memory, language recognition,
and processing sensory input including auditory and visual
signals. Quiroga et al. sought to answer the question of
whether MTL neurons represent concept-level information
invariant to metric characteristics of images. In other words,
do MTL neurons fire selectively on individuals, landmarks,
or objects? Their results demonstrated that invariant neurons do exist, suggesting a sparse and explicit neural code.
For example, a woman had a single neuron fire when shown
a picture of Jennifer Aniston, but not on other pictures of
people, places, or things. Another patient had a different
neuron fire when shown a picture of Halle Berry, as well as
the text string “Halle Berry”, demonstrating sparse neural
codes and invariance of a neuron to specific modalities.
Despite this research, on the computational side, neural networks have gradually moved away from biological
thematics. This has largely been due to engineering breakthroughs in the past several years that have transformed the
field of computer vision. Deep feed-forward convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have become ubiquitous in virtually all vision challenges, including classification, detection, and segmentation. But further engineering of these
networks is reaching a saturation point where incremental
novelty in the number of layers, activation function, parameter tuning, gradient function, etc., is only producing
incremental accuracy improvements. Although there is evidence that object classification has reached human levels

1111

