Tagging like Humans: Diverse and Distinct Image Annotation
Baoyuan Wu1 , Weidong Chen1 , Peng Sun1 , Wei Liu1 , Bernard Ghanem2 , and Siwei Lyu3
1

Tencent AI Lab

2

KAUST

3

University at Albany, SUNY

wubaoyuan1987@gmail.com, powerchen@tencent.com, pengsun000@gmail.com, wliu@ee.columbia.edu,
bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa, slyu@albany.edu

Abstract
In this work we propose a new automatic image annotation model, dubbed diverse and distinct image annotation (D2 IA). The generative model D2 IA is inspired by the
ensemble of human annotations, which create semantically
relevant, yet distinct and diverse tags. In D2 IA, we generate a relevant and distinct tag subset, in which the tags are
relevant to the image contents and semantically distinct to
each other, using sequential sampling from a determinantal
point process (DPP) model. Multiple such tag subsets that
cover diverse semantic aspects or diverse semantic levels
of the image contents are generated by randomly perturbing the DPP sampling process. We leverage a generative
adversarial network (GAN) model to train D2 IA. Extensive
experiments including quantitative and qualitative comparisons, as well as human subject studies, on two benchmark
datasets demonstrate that the proposed model can produce
more diverse and distinct tags than the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Image annotation is one of the fundamental tasks of computer vision with many applications in image retrieval, caption generation and visual recognition. Given an input image, an image annotator outputs a set of keywords (tags)
that are relevant to the content of the image. Albeit an impressive progress has been made by current image annotation algorithms, to date, most of them [31, 26, 12] focus on
the relevancy of the obtained tags to the image with little
consideration to their inter-dependencies. As a result, algorithmically generated tags for an image are relevant but
at the same time less informative, with redundancy among
the obtained tags, e.g., one state-of-the-art image annotation algorithm ML-MG [26] generates tautology ‘people’
and ‘person’ for the image in Fig. 1(f).
This is different from how human annotators work. We

illustrate this using an annotation task involving three human annotators (identified as A1,A2 and A3). Each annotator was asked to independently annotate the first 1, 000 test
images in the IAPRTC-12 dataset [8] with the requirement
of “describing the main contents of one image using as few
tags as possible”. One example of the annotation results is
presented in Fig. 1. Note that individual human annotators
tend to use semantically distinct tags (see Fig. 1 (b)-(d)),
and the semantic redundancy among tags is lower than that
among the tags generated by the annotation algorithm MLMG [26] (see Fig. 1(f)). Improving the semantic distinctiveness of generated tags has been studied in recent work
[23], which uses a determinant point process (DPP) model
[10] to produce tags with less semantic redundancies. The
annotation result of running this algorithm on the example
image is shown in Fig. 1(g).
However, such results still lack in one aspect when comparing with the annotations from the ensemble of human
annotators (see Fig. 1(e)). The collective annotations from
human annotators also tend to be diverse, consisting of tags
that cover more semantic elements of the image. For instance, different human annotators tend to use tags across
different abstract levels, such as ‘church’ vs. ‘building’, to
describe the image. Furthermore, different human annotators usually focus on different parts or elements of the image. For example, A1 describes the scene as ‘square’, A2
notices the ‘yellow’ color of the building, while A3 finds the
‘camera’ worn on the chest of people.
In this work, we propose a novel image annotation
model, namely diverse and distinct image annotation
(D2 IA), which aims to improve the diversity and distinctiveness of the tags for an image by learning a generative
model of tags from multiple human annotators. The distinctiveness enforces the semantic redundancy among the tags
in the same subset to be small, while the diversity encourages different tag subsets to cover different aspects or different semantic levels of the image contents. Specifically, this
generative model first maps the concatenation of the image

7967

