Distort-and-Recover: Color Enhancement using Deep Reinforcement Learning
Jongchan Park∗1 , Joon-Young Lee2 , Donggeun Yoo1,3 , and In So Kweon3
1

Lunit Inc.

2

Adobe Research

3

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

Abstract
Learning-based color enhancement approaches typically learn to map from input images to retouched images. Most of existing methods require expensive pairs
of input-retouched images or produce results in a noninterpretable way. In this paper, we present a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based method for color enhancement to explicitly model the step-wise nature of human retouching process. We cast a color enhancement process
as a Markov Decision Process where actions are defined
as global color adjustment operations. Then we train our
agent to learn the optimal global enhancement sequence of
the actions. In addition, we present a ‘distort-and-recover’
training scheme which only requires high-quality reference
images for training instead of input and retouched image
pairs. Given high-quality reference images, we distort the
images’ color distribution and form distorted-reference image pairs for training. Through extensive experiments, we
show that our method produces decent enhancement results
and our DRL approach is more suitable for the ‘distortand-recover’ training scheme than previous supervised approaches. Supplementary material and code are available
at https://sites.google.com/view/distort-and-recover/

1. Introduction
With the widespread use of digital imaging devices,
photo retouching is becoming more popular. Professional
photo retouching software such as Adobe Photoshop or
Lightroom provides various retouching operations, but it requires expertise in photo editing and also lots of effort for
achieving satisfying results. Casual software, such as Instagram on mobile platforms, provides several predefined stylization filters which make photo retouching easier for users,
but the filters only perform predefined operations regardless
of the context or mood of a photo and result in poor results
in many cases.
∗ This work was done while the author was at KAIST.

Automatic color enhancement is a non-trivial task because of the highly non-linear and subjective nature of
photo retouching. Consider a human professional, the retouching procedure is a sequence of iterative decision making given the image’s context and color distribution. A
human professional iteratively applies retouching operations until the color distribution fits the individual’s taste.
Therefore, the translation of pixel values to the optimal
states is a complex combination of the pixel’s value and
the global/local color/contextual information. Also, it is a
perceptual process such that there can be varying optimal
states for different individuals [1, 7]. As a result, the translation from an input color distribution to the optimal becomes
highly non-linear and multi-modal.
There are several lines of research for automatic color
enhancement. Exemplar-based methods [4, 8, 7] tackle the
non-linearity and/or multi-modality by transferring exemplar images’ color distribution to the target image. During
the process, exemplar images are given or retrieved from a
database and the target image’s color distribution is translated into the exemplar images’ color distribution. In the
learning-based approaches [1, 19, 20], a mapping function
from the source color distribution to the target color distribution is learned from training data. Recent work [20] handles the high non-linearity of this problem with a deep neural network. The multi-modality problem is not yet explicitly solved by any learning-based method. A general problem of learning-based methods is expensive paired datasets,
such as MIT-Adobe FiveK dataset [1] of input-retouched
image pairs or the dataset [19] of input-action pairs.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for automatic
color enhancement with two distinctive aspects. First, we
present a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) approach for
color enhancement (see Figure 1). We cast the problem into
a Markov Decision Process (MDP) where each step action
is defined as a global color adjustment operation, such as
brightness, contrast, or white-balance changes. Therefore it
explicitly models iterative, step-by-step human retouching
process. We solve such MDP problem with a well-studied
deep reinforcement learning framework, Deep Q-Network

5928

