Extreme 3D Face Reconstruction: Seeing Through Occlusions
Anh Tu´ân Tr`ân1 , Tal Hassner2,3 , Iacopo Masi1 , Eran Paz3 , Yuval Nirkin3 , and Gérard Medioni1
1

Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Systems, USC, CA, USA
2

Information Sciences Institute, USC, CA, USA
3

The Open University of Israel, Israel

Figure 1: Results of our method. Detailed, complete 3D reconstructions shown next to their partially occluded input faces.

Abstract
Existing single view, 3D face reconstruction methods can
produce beautifully detailed 3D results, but typically only
for near frontal, unobstructed viewpoints. We describe a
system designed to provide detailed 3D reconstructions of
faces viewed under extreme conditions, out of plane rotations, and occlusions. Motivated by the concept of bump
mapping, we propose a layered approach which decouples
estimation of a global shape from its mid-level details (e.g.,
wrinkles). We estimate a coarse 3D face shape which acts
as a foundation and then separately layer this foundation
with details represented by a bump map. We show how a
deep convolutional encoder-decoder can be used to estimate such bump maps. We further show how this approach
naturally extends to generate plausible details for occluded
facial regions. We test our approach and its components
extensively, quantitatively demonstrating the invariance of
our estimated facial details. We further provide numerous
qualitative examples showing that our method produces detailed 3D face shapes in viewing conditions where existing
state of the art often break down.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D face shapes from single images is a problem with a history now spanning two decades [53]. During
this time, the related problem of recognizing faces in images
has graduated to the point where modern systems can produce invariant and discriminative face representations for
the most extreme face photos [34]. By comparison, 3D re-

construction methods have remained far behind.
Broadly speaking, existing face reconstruction methods
are designed with either one of two goals. The first goal,
exemplified by early 3D morphable models (3DMM) [1, 4,
35], some later shape from shading (SfS) techniques [26,
29], and several recent deep learning methods [38, 43],
is obtaining highly detailed 3D face shapes. These methods produce discriminative results which are often detailed
enough for subjects to be recognizable from their reconstructions. These results, however, are typically restricted
to relatively easy viewing conditions. In particular, when
faces are partially occluded, these methods often indiscriminately reconstruct the occlusion or fail completely.
Other face reconstruction methods were developed with
invariance to viewing conditions as their goal. Some of
these methods estimate face shapes by localizing facial
landmarks [25, 47, 58]; others take an example based approach [14]. Deep methods were also recently proposed for
this purpose [6, 11, 24, 49, 51]. All of these methods, however, sacrifice details in order to avoid failing on challenging, unconstrained photos. Their reconstructions typically
provide few details [14, 47, 51] or are very generic [58].
Unlike previous work, we describe a method designed
to attain both goals: Detailed 3D face reconstruction and
robustness to viewing conditions, including, in particular,
out of plane head rotations and occlusions (Fig. 1).
Our approach is inspired by the age old computer graphics concept of bump mapping [5] which involves separation of global shape from local details. When reconstructing
faces, this implies estimating a global foundation shape separately from its local, mid-level features which are layered

3935

