Real-Time Monocular Depth Estimation using Synthetic Data
with Domain Adaptation via Image Style Transfer

1

Amir Atapour-Abarghouei1
Toby P. Breckon1,2
2
Department of Computer Science – Department of Engineering
Durham University, UK
{amir.atapour-abarghouei,toby.breckon}@durham.ac.uk

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation using learning-based approaches has become promising in recent years. However,
most monocular depth estimators either need to rely on
large quantities of ground truth depth data, which is extremely expensive and difficult to obtain, or predict disparity as an intermediary step using a secondary supervisory
signal leading to blurring and other artefacts. Training a
depth estimation model using pixel-perfect synthetic data
can resolve most of these issues but introduces the problem
of domain bias. This is the inability to apply a model trained
on synthetic data to real-world scenarios. With advances in
image style transfer and its connections with domain adaptation (Maximum Mean Discrepancy), we take advantage of
style transfer and adversarial training to predict pixel perfect depth from a single real-world color image based on
training over a large corpus of synthetic environment data.
Experimental results indicate the efficacy of our approach
compared to contemporary state-of-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
As 3D imagery has become the staple requirement
within many computer vision applications, accurate and efficient depth estimation is now one of its core foundations.
Conventional depth estimation methods have relied on numerous strategies such as stereo correspondence [67, 28],
structure from motion [14, 9], depth from shading and light
diffusion [73, 82, 1] and alike. However, these approaches
are often rife with issues such as depth inhomogeneity,
missing depth (holes), computationally intensive requirements and more importantly, careful calibration and setup
demanding expert knowledge which often requires special
post-processing [4, 2, 49, 58].
A solution to many of these challenges is monocular
depth estimation. Over the past few years, research into
predicting depth from a single image has significantly escalated [39, 48, 17, 26, 22, 83]. A number of supervised

Figure 1: Our monocular depth estimation (KITTI [55]).
learning approaches have recently emerged that take advantage of off-line training on ground truth depth data to make
monocular depth prediction possible [39, 48, 18, 17, 42, 91].
However, since ground truth depth is extremely difficult and
expensive to acquire in the real world, when it is obtained it
is often sparse and flawed, constraining the practical use of
many of these approaches.
Other monocular approaches, sometimes referred to as
unsupervised, do not require direct ground truth depth, but
instead utilize a secondary supervisory signal during training which indirectly results in producing the desired depth
[26, 22, 83, 12]. Training data for these approaches is abundant and easily obtainable but they suffer from undesirable
artefacts, such as blurring and incoherent content, due to the
nature of their secondary supervision.
However, an often overlooked fact is that the same technology that facilitates training large-scale deep neural networks can also assist in acquiring synthetic data for these
neural networks [64, 69]. Nearly photorealistic graphically
rendered environments primarily used for gaming can be
used to capture homogeneous synthetic depth maps which
are then utilized in training a depth estimating model.
While the use of synthetic data is not novel [41, 61, 19,
69], domain adaptation has always been the greatest challenge in this area. Stated precisely, the problem is that: A
model trained on data from one domain is often incapable
of performing well on data from another domain due to distinctions in the intrinsic nature of these two domains.
Here, we explore the possibility of training a depth estimation model on synthetic data using the new findings re-

2800

