Continuous Relaxation of MAP Inference: A Nonconvex Perspective
D. Khuê Lê-Huu1, 2
1

Nikos Paragios1, 2, 3

CentraleSupélec, Université Paris-Saclay

2

Inria

3

TheraPanacea

{khue.le, nikos.paragios}@centralesupelec.fr

Abstract

For each clique C, let SC =
configurations and define

In this paper, we study a nonconvex continuous relaxation of MAP inference in discrete Markov random fields
(MRFs). We show that for arbitrary MRFs, this relaxation
is tight, and a discrete stationary point of it can be easily reached by a simple block coordinate descent algorithm.
In addition, we study the resolution of this relaxation using popular gradient methods, and further propose a more
effective solution using a multilinear decomposition framework based on the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM). Experiments on many real-world problems
demonstrate that the proposed ADMM significantly outperforms other nonconvex relaxation based methods, and compares favorably with state of the art MRF optimization algorithms in different settings.

1. Introduction
Finding the maximum a posteriori (MAP) configuration
is a fundamental inference problem in undirected probabilistic graphical models, also known as Markov random
fields (MRFs). This problem is described as follows.
Let s ∈ S = S1 ×· · ·×Sn denote an assignment to n discrete random variables S1 , . . . , Sn where each variable Si
takes values in a finite set of states (or labels) Si . Let G be a
graph of n nodes with the set of cliques C. Consider an MRF
representing a joint distribution p(S) := p(S1 , . . . , Sn ) that
factorizes over G, i.e. p(·) takes the form:
p(s) =

1 Y
ψC (sC )
Z

∀s ∈ S,

(1)

C∈C

where sC is the joint configuration of the variables in the
clique P
C, ψ
QC are positive functions called potentials, and
Z =
s
C∈C ψC (sC ) is a normalization factor called
partition function.
The MAP inference problem consists of finding the most
likely assignment to the variables, i.e.:
Y
ψC (sC ).
(2)
s∗ ∈ argmax p(s) = argmax
s∈S

s∈S

C∈C

Q

i∈C Si be the set of its joint

fC (sC ) = − log ψC (sC )

∀sC ∈ SC .

(3)

It is straightforward that the MAP inference problem (2) is
equivalent to minimizing the following function, called the
energy of the MRF:
X
fC (sC ).
(4)
e(s) =
C∈C

MRF optimization has been constantly attracting a significant amount of research over the last decades. Since
this problem is in general NP-hard [22], various approximate methods have been proposed and can be roughly
grouped into two classes: (a) methods that stay in the discrete domain, such as move-making and belief propagation [5, 7, 15, 27], or (b) methods that move into the continuous domain by solving convex relaxations such as quadratic
programming (QP) relaxations [19] (for pairwise MRFs),
semi-definite programming (SDP) relaxations [18], or most
prominently linear programming (LP) relaxations [9, 11,
12, 13, 14, 17, 20, 23].
While convex relaxations allow us to benefit from the
tremendous convex optimization literature, and can be
solved exactly in polynomial time, they often only produce
real-valued solutions that need a further rounding step to be
converted into integer ones, which can reduce significantly
the accuracy if the relaxations are not tight. On the contrary, discrete methods tackle directly the original problem,
but due to its combinatorial nature, this is a very challenging task. We refer to [10] for a recent comparative study of
these methods on a wide variety of problems.
In this paper, we consider a different approach. We
present a nonconvex continuous relaxation to the MAP inference problem for arbitrary (pairwise or higher-order)
MRFs. Based on a block coordinate descent (BCD) rounding scheme that is guaranteed not to increase the energy
over continuous solutions, we show that this nonconvex relaxation is tight and is actually equivalent to the original
discrete problem. It should be noted that the same relaxation was previously discussed in [19] but only for pairwise

5533

