Conditional Generative Adversarial Network for Structured Domain Adaptation
Weixiang Hong
Nanyang Technological University

Zhenzhen Wang
Nanyang Technological University

weixiang.hong@outlook.com

zwang033@e.ntu.edu.sg

Ming Yang
Horizon Robotics, Inc.

Junsong Yuan
State University of New York at Buffalo

ming.yang@horizon-robotics.com

jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract
In recent years, deep neural nets have triumphed over
many computer vision problems, including semantic segmentation, which is a critical task in emerging autonomous
driving and medical image diagnostics applications. In
general, training deep neural nets requires a humongous
amount of labeled data, which is laborious and costly to
collect and annotate. Recent advances in computer graphics shed light on utilizing photo-realistic synthetic data with
computer generated annotations to train neural nets. Nevertheless, the domain mismatch between real images and
synthetic ones is the major challenge against harnessing
the generated data and labels. In this paper, we propose
a principled way to conduct structured domain adaption
for semantic segmentation, i.e., integrating GAN into the
FCN framework to mitigate the gap between source and
target domains. Specifically, we learn a conditional generator to transform features of synthetic images to real-image
like features, and a discriminator to distinguish them. For
each training batch, the conditional generator and the discriminator compete against each other so that the generator
learns to produce real-image like features to fool the discriminator; afterwards, the FCN parameters are updated to
accommodate the changes of GAN. In experiments, without
using labels of real image data, our method significantly
outperforms the baselines as well as state-of-the-art methods by 12% ∼ 20% mean IoU on the Cityscapes dataset.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have dominated many vision tasks
such as image recognition [38], object detection [17] and semantic segmentation [26]. These state-of-the-art results are
generally achieved by learning very deep networks on largescale, high-quality, and thoroughly labeled datasets, such

Syn.
images

Syn.
labels

Real images

CNN Feature Extractor
Conditional
Generator
Feature Maps For
Synthetic Image

Transformed Feature Maps For
Feature Maps
Real Image

DeConvolution

Segmentation Loss

≈

Discriminator

Adversarial Loss

(a) Synthetic images are easy to collect and annotate, yet the semantic segmentation model naively trained on synthetic data may
not generalize well to real images. In this work, we introduce a
conditional GAN model to close the gap between the representations of synthetic images to those of real images, thus improve the
semantic segmentation performance without laborious annotations
on real image data.

(1). Input Image

(2). Without adaptation (3). With adaptation

(4). Groudtruth

(b) Our GAN-based domain adaptation boosts the semantic segmentation performance.

Figure 1: (a) The motivation and overview. (b) An illustrative example.

as the ImageNet [11], COCO [25], Pascal VOC [13] and
Cityscapes [10], etc. Nevertheless, building such datasets
manually is expensive and not scalable. For instance, annotating pixel-level semantic segmentation in autonomous
driving or medical image analysis requires intensive labor
and certain expertise. Therefore, it is very appealing to ex11335

