Optical Flow Guided Feature: A Fast and Robust Motion Representation for
Video Action Recognition
Shuyang Sun1,2 , Zhanghui Kuang2 , Lu Sheng3 , Wanli Ouyang1 , Wei Zhang2
1

The University of Sydney

2

SenseTime Research

{shuyang.sun wanli.ouyang}@sydney.edu.au

3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

{wayne.zhang kuangzhanghui}@sensetime.com

lsheng@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Motion representation plays a vital role in human action
recognition in videos. In this study, we introduce a novel
compact motion representation for video action recognition, named Optical Flow guided Feature (OFF), which enables the network to distill temporal information through
a fast and robust approach. The OFF is derived from the
definition of optical flow and is orthogonal to the optical
flow. The derivation also provides theoretical support for
using the difference between two frames. By directly calculating pixel-wise spatio-temporal gradients of the deep
feature maps, the OFF could be embedded in any existing
CNN based video action recognition framework with only a
slight additional cost. It enables the CNN to extract spatiotemporal information, especially the temporal information
between frames simultaneously. This simple but powerful
idea is validated by experimental results. The network with
OFF fed only by RGB inputs achieves a competitive accuracy of 93.3% on UCF-101, which is comparable with the
result obtained by two streams (RGB and optical flow), but
is 15 times faster in speed. Experimental results also show
that OFF is complementary to other motion modalities such
as optical flow. When the proposed method is plugged into
the state-of-the-art video action recognition framework, it
has 96.0% and 74.2% accuracy on UCF-101 and HMDB51 respectively. The code for this project is available at:
https://github.com/kevin-ssy/Optical-Flow-Guided-Feature

1. Introduction
Video action recognition has received longstanding attentions in the community of computer vision for decades.
It aims at automatically recognizing human action from
video sequences. Since CNNs have achieved great successes in image classification and other related tasks [20,
30, 34, 15, 49, 51, 25], lots of CNN based methods have

-

0

+

Figure 1. The Optical Flow guided Feature (OFF). Left column:
input frames. Middle two columns: standard deep features before
applying OFF onto two frames. Right column: temporal difference in OFF. The colors red and cyan are used respectively for
positive and negative values. The feature difference between two
frames is valid and comprehensive in representing motion information. Best seen in color and zoomed in.

been proposed by considering video action recognition as a
classification task [5, 43, 23, 50, 11, 10, 9, 41, 42, 33, 29].
Compared to the image classification methods, temporal information is the key ingredient of video action recognition.
Optical flow is found to be a useful motion representation in video action recognition, including the Two-Streambased [29, 43] and 3D convolution-based methods [5].
However, extracting dense optical flows is still inefficient. It
costs over 90% of the whole run-time in a two-stream based
pipeline both at training and testing phases. Moreover, 3D
convolutions on RGB input can also capture temporal information, but the RGB-based 3D CNN still does not perform
on par with its two-stream version. Other motion descriptors, e.g., 3DHOG [19], improved Dense Trajectory [40],
and motion vector [50], are either inefficient or not so effective as optical flow.
How to design/use motion representation that is both fast
11390

