GVCNN: Group-View Convolutional Neural Networks for 3D Shape Recognition
Yifan Feng† , Zizhao Zhang‡ , Xibin Zhao‡ , Rongrong Ji† , Yue Gao‡∗
‡
KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University
‡
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
†
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University
evanfeng97@gmail.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, {zz-z14,zxb,gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
3D shape recognition has attracted much attention recently. Its recent advances advocate the usage of deep features and achieve the state-of-the-art performance. However, existing deep features for 3D shape recognition are restricted to a view-to-shape setting, which learns the shape
descriptor from the view-level feature directly. Despite
the exciting progress on view-based 3D shape description,
the intrinsic hierarchical correlation and discriminability
among views have not been well exploited, which is important for 3D shape representation. To tackle this issue,
in this paper, we propose a group-view convolutional neural network (GVCNN) framework for hierarchical correlation modeling towards discriminative 3D shape description.
The proposed GVCNN framework is composed of a hierarchical view-group-shape architecture, i.e., from the view
level, the group level and the shape level, which are organized using a grouping strategy. Concretely, we first use an
expanded CNN to extract a view level descriptor. Then, a
grouping module is introduced to estimate the content discrimination of each view, based on which all views can be
splitted into different groups according to their discriminative level. A group level description can be further generated by pooling from view descriptors. Finally, all group
level descriptors are combined into the shape level descriptor according to their discriminative weights. Experimental
results and comparison with state-of-the-art methods show
that our proposed GVCNN method can achieve a significant
performance gain on both the 3D shape classification and
retrieval tasks.

1. Introduction
With the development of imaging and 3D reconstruction techniques, 3D shape recognition have become a fun∗ Corresponding author.

This work was finished when Yifan Feng visited Tsinghua University.

damental task in computer vision with broad application
prospects. Within the proliferation of deep learning, various
deep networks have been investigated for 3D shape recognition, such as 3D ShapeNets [26], PointNet [7], VoxNet
[14]. Among these methods, view-based method has performed best so far. In view-based method, the input data
are the views taken from different angles, which can be easily captured comparing to other methods, like point cloud
structure and polygon mesh. Using deep learning schemes
for view representation typically refers to exploiting wellestablished models, such as VGG [21], GoogLeNet [23] and
ResNet [9]. Besides, comparing with model-based methods, such as 3D ShapeNets [26], view-based methods can
obtain much more views by rendering the 3D model.
Designing discriminative descriptor is the fundamental
issue towards optimal 3D shape recognition. Although deep
learning methods on 2D images have been well investigated in recent years, it is still at the beginning for describing multi-view based 3D shapes. In recent papers, the
multi-view based methods, such as Multi-View Convolutional Neural Networks (MVCNN and MVCNN-MultiRes)
[22, 18] usually employ a view pooling operation to generate the shape level description from the view descriptors. These methods have made the milestone for 3D shape
recognition and achieve the current state-of-the-art performance. We note that all views are treated equally to generate the shape descriptor in exiting methods. However,
the content relationship and the discriminative information
of the views have left unexplored, which limits the performance of shape descriptors a lot. On one hand, some views
are similar to each other, while the others are diverse. These
similar views should contribute similarly to the shape descriptor. On the other hand, some views are more discriminative for shape recognition. Under such circumstances, it
is important to further investigate the content relationship to
mine the discriminative information from these views.
To tackle this issue, in this paper, we propose a groupview convolutional neural network (GVCNN) framework,
which contains hierarchical view-group-shape architecture

264

