Kernelized Subspace Pooling for Deep Local Descriptors
Xing Wei, Yue Zhang, Yihong Gong, Nanning Zheng
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University

Abstract
Representing local image patches in an invariant and
discriminative manner is an active research topic in computer vision. It has recently been demonstrated that local
feature learning based on deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) can significantly improve the matching performance. Previous works on learning such descriptors have
focused on developing various loss functions, regularizations and data mining strategies to learn discriminative CNN representations. Such methods, however, have little analysis on how to increase geometric invariance of their generated descriptors. In this paper, we propose a descriptor that
has both highly invariant and discriminative power. The
abilities come from a novel pooling method, dubbed Subspace Pooling (SP) which is invariant to a range of geometric deformations. To further increase the discriminative
power of our descriptor, we propose a simple distance kernel integrated to the marginal triplet loss that helps to focus
on hard examples in CNN training. Finally, we show that
by combining SP with the projection distance metric [13],
the generated feature descriptor is equivalent to that of the
Bilinear CNN model [22], but outperforms the latter with
much lower memory and computation consumptions. The
proposed method is simple, easy to understand and achieves
good performance. Experimental results on several patch
matching benchmarks show that our method outperforms
the state-of-the-arts significantly.

1. Introduction
Matching local patches across images has been one of
the most extensively studied topics in computer vision. It is
often used as an essential step in a wide range of vision tasks
such as structure from motion [26], stereo matching [43],
image stitching [7], image retrieval [27] and image classification [21], to name a few. In general, the patch matching
accuracy strongly depends on the quality of the feature descriptors extracted from the local patches. Designing good
feature descriptors is a very challenging problem. On one
hand, the feature descriptor must be able to handle variations between two matching patches caused by viewpoint

and illumination changes, occlusions, differences in camera
settings, etc. On the other hand, it must be highly discriminative for non-matching patches with similar appearances.
In the past decades, a lot of research efforts have been
made in the literature to seek for invariant and discriminative local descriptors. Many early works focused on developing hand-crafted feature descriptors such as SIFT, SURF, HOG, DAISY, ORB, LIOP, etc. [23, 5, 8, 35, 28, 39],
while more recent works adopted machine learning methods to learn high-quality feature descriptors from large image datasets [6, 36, 33, 10, 31, 4]. Together with the great
success of deep CNN in various vision related tasks, it has
recently been demonstrated that patch matching using CNNs can significantly improve the matching performance
accuracies [42, 14, 30, 3, 20, 41, 34, 9]. Machine learning
methods for local patch matching can be mainly classified
into two categories: (1) methods that treat the local patch
matching problem as a binary classification problem, and
output a matching score for each input patch pair; (2) methods that learn a feature extractor, and output a feature representation (descriptor) for each input local patch. An obvious drawback of the first approach is that the computational
cost is expensive as it requires all combinations of patches
to be tested against each other in a brute-force manner. In
contrast, the second approach treats each image patch independently and produces feature descriptors that can be used
in a broad range of vision tasks. Many research studies in
this category have focused on developing new loss functions, regularization terms, and data mining strategies to learn
discriminative feature descriptors. Such methods, however,
have no theoretical guarantee to be invariant to geometric
changes described above.
In this paper, we propose a novel CNN pooling method,
namely Subspace Pooling (SP) to learn highly invariant and
discriminative feature descriptors. The proposed pooling
function is invariant to circular shift, flipping, in-plane rotation, and many kinds of in-plane deformations. More
specifically, we take the output of the last convolution layer
of a given CNN, and use it to form a matrix F where each
row i represents the i’th feature map stacked to a 1D vector, and each column corresponds to a spatial location of the
feature maps. We then compute the Singular Value Decom-

1867

