Weakly Supervised Coupled Networks for Visual Sentiment Analysis
Jufeng Yang† , Dongyu She† , Yu-Kun Lai‡ , Paul L. Rosin‡ , Ming-Hsuan Yang§
†
College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
‡
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
§
School of Engineering, University of California, Merced, USA

Abstract
Automatic assessment of sentiment from visual content
has gained considerable attention with the increasing tendency of expressing opinions on-line. In this paper, we solve
the problem of visual sentiment analysis using the high-level
abstraction in the recognition process. Existing methods based on convolutional neural networks learn sentiment
representations from the holistic image appearance. However, different image regions can have a different influence
on the intended expression. This paper presents a weakly
supervised coupled convolutional network with two branches to leverage the localized information. The first branch
detects a sentiment specific soft map by training a fully convolutional network with the cross spatial pooling strategy,
which only requires image-level labels, thereby significantly reducing the annotation burden. The second branch utilizes both the holistic and localized information by coupling the sentiment map with deep features for robust classification. We integrate the sentiment detection and classification branches into a unified deep framework and optimize the network in an end-to-end manner. Extensive experiments on six benchmark datasets demonstrate that the
proposed method performs favorably against the state-ofthe-art methods for visual sentiment analysis.

1. Introduction
Visual sentiment analysis from images has attracted significant attention with the increasing tendency of expressing opinions through posting images on social media like
Flickr and Twitter. The automatic assessment of image sentiment has many applications, e.g. education, entertainment,
advertisement, etc. Recently, with the advances of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), numerous deep approaches
have been proposed to predict sentiment [20,31]. The effectiveness of machine learning based deep features have been
demonstrated over hand-crafted features (e.g. color, texture,
and composition) [17, 28, 34]) on visual sentiment prediction. However, several issues remain when using CNNs to

Figure 1. Examples from the EmotionROI dataset [21]. The normalized bounding boxes indicate the regions that influence the evoked sentiments annotated by 15 users. The first two examples
are joy images, and the last two examples are sadness and fear images, respectively. As can be seen, the sentiments can be evoked
by specific regions.

address such an abstract task as follows.
First, visual sentiment analysis is more challenging than
conventional recognition tasks due to a higher level of subjectivity in the human recognition process [13]. It is necessary to take more cues into consideration for visual sentiment prediction. Figure 1 shows examples from the EmotionROI dataset [21], which provides the bounding box
annotations that invoke sentiment from 15 users. As can
be seen, humans’ emotional responses to images are determined by local regions [29]. However, most existing
methods employ CNNs to learn feature representations only
from entire images [4, 30]. Second, providing more precise
annotations (e.g. bounding boxes [11]) than image-level labeling for training generally leads to better performance for
recognition tasks. However, there are two limitations for
visual sentiment classification. On the one hand, the increased annotation cost prevents it from widespread use, especially for such a subjective task; on the other hand, different regions contribute differently to the viewer’s evoked
sentiment, while crisp proposal boxes only tend to find the
foreground objects in an image.
To address these problems, we propose a weakly supervised coupled framework (WSCNet) for joint sentiment detection and classification with two branches. The first

7584

