GroupCap: Group-based Image Captioning with Structured Relevance and
Diversity Constraints

1

Fuhai Chen1 , Rongrong Ji1∗, Xiaoshuai Sun2 , Yongjian Wu3 , Jinsong Su4
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Information Science
and Engineering, Xiamen University, 361005, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, 150006, China
3
Tencent YouTu Lab, 4 Xiamen University, 361005, China

cfh3c@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {rrji,jssu}@xmu.edu.cn, xiaoshuaisun@hit.edu.cn, littlekenwu@tencent.com
Ground Truth: A group of school children gathered around a birthday cake.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Automatic description of an image, a.k.a. image captioning, has recently attracted extensive research attention
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Typically, these methods train the image captioning models under a one-line paradigm, without regard∗ Corresponding Author.

more discriminative

more accurate

children

birthday cake

Relevance

Diversity

͙

group

group

Most image captioning models focus on one-line (single image) captioning, where the correlations like relevance
and diversity among group images (e.g., within the same album or event) are simply neglected, resulting in less accurate and diverse captions. Recent works mainly consider
imposing the diversity during the online inference only,
which neglect the correlation among visual structures in offline training. In this paper, we propose a novel group-based
image captioning scheme (termed GroupCap), which jointly
models the structured relevance and diversity among group
images towards an optimal collaborative captioning. In
particular, we first propose a visual tree parser (VP-Tree) to
construct the structured semantic correlations within individual images. Then, the relevance and diversity among images are well modeled by exploiting the correlations among
their tree structures. Finally, such correlations are modeled as constraints and sent into the LSTM-based captioning generator. We adopt an end-to-end formulation to train
the visual tree parser, the structured relevance and diversity
constraints, as well as the LSTM based captioning model
jointly. To facilitate quantitative evaluation, we further release two group captioning datasets derived from the MSCOCO benchmark, serving as the first of their kind. Quantitative results show that the proposed GroupCap model outperforms the state-of-the-art and alternative approaches.

A group of people standing around a pizza.

͙
refine

stronger relevance
children

people
diverse

adults

birthday cake
children
Generated caption: A group of children standing around a birthday cake.

Figure 1. In one-line captioning, existing methods tend to generate less
accurate and less discriminative captions compared to the ground truth (the
top caption is generated by the state-of-the-art [5]). We focus on capturing the relevance and diversity among a group of images to reinforce and
diversify the image captions (the bottom one, which is generated by the
proposed GroupCap).

ing the correlations (i.e., relevance and diversity) among
group images. However, in many real-world applications
like captioning photo albums or events, the images are not
suitable to be captioned alone. In such situations, it would
benefit the generated results by capturing the relevance and
diversity among these group images as shown in Fig.1.
As far as we know, there is no existing work in the literature that addresses the task of group-based image captioning. On the one hand, there is no related work addressing
the issue of modeling relevance. To this end, one should
the model image relevance by maximizing the visual similarity of the inner-group images comparing to that of the
inter-group images. On the other hand, there are two works
[6, 7] that refer to modeling the image diversity, both of
which however only focus on online inference. Sadovnik
et al. [6] proposed a context-aware scheme to capture the
particular items (entities, relations, and etc.) of the target image to diversify its description from the other inner-

1345

