3D Pose Estimation and 3D Model Retrieval for Objects in the Wild
Alexander Grabner1
1
2

Peter M. Roth1

Vincent Lepetit2,1

Institute of Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria

Laboratoire Bordelais de Recherche en Informatique, University of Bordeaux, France
{alexander.grabner,pmroth,lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We propose a scalable, efficient and accurate approach
to retrieve 3D models for objects in the wild. Our contribution is twofold. We first present a 3D pose estimation
approach for object categories which significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art on Pascal3D+. Second, we use
the estimated pose as a prior to retrieve 3D models which
accurately represent the geometry of objects in RGB images. For this purpose, we render depth images from 3D
models under our predicted pose and match learned image descriptors of RGB images against those of rendered
depth images using a CNN-based multi-view metric learning approach. In this way, we are the first to report quantitative results for 3D model retrieval on Pascal3D+, where
our method chooses the same models as human annotators for 50% of the validation images on average. In addition, we show that our method, which was trained purely
on Pascal3D+, retrieves rich and accurate 3D models from
ShapeNet given RGB images of objects in the wild.

Figure 1: Given an RGB image (top), we predict a 3D pose
and a 3D model for objects of different categories (bottom).

1. Introduction
Retrieving 3D models for objects in 2D images, as
shown in Fig. 1, is extremely useful for 3D scene understanding, augmented reality applications and tasks like object grasping or object tracking. Recently, the emergence of
large databases of 3D models such as ShapeNet [3] initiated
substantial interest in this topic and motivated research for
matching 2D images of objects against 3D models. However, there is no straight forward approach to compare 2D
images and 3D models, since they have considerably different representations and characteristics.
One approach to address this problem is to project 3D
models onto 2D images, which is known as rendering [24].
This converts the task to comparing 2D images, which is,
however, still challenging, because the appearance of objects in real images and synthetic renderings can significantly differ. In general, the geometry and texture of available 3D models do not exactly match those of objects in real

images. Therefore, recent approaches [2, 10, 23, 28] use
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [7, 8, 22] to extract
features from images which are partly invariant to these
variations. In particular, these methods compute image descriptors from real RGB images and synthetic RGB images
which are generated by rendering 3D models under multiple
poses. While this allows them to train a single CNN purely
on synthetic data, there are two main disadvantages:
First, there is a significant domain gap between real and
synthetic RGB images: Real images are affected by complex lighting, uncontrolled degradation and natural backgrounds. This makes it is hard to render photo-realistic images from the available 3D models. Therefore, using a single CNN for feature extraction from both domains is limited in performance, and even domain adaption [13] does
not fully account for the different characteristics of real and
synthetic images.

3022

