Interleaved Structured Sparse Convolutional Neural Networks
Guotian Xie1,2,∗ Jingdong Wang3† Ting Zhang3 Jianhuang Lai1,2 Richang Hong4 Guo-Jun Qi5
1
Sun Yat-Sen University 2 Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
3
Microsoft Research 4 Hefei University of Technology 5 University of Central Florida
guotian.xgt@alibaba-inc.com, {jingdw,tinzhan}@microsoft.com
stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn, hongrc.hfut@gmail.com, guojun.qi@ucf.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of designing efficient
convolutional neural network architectures with the interest in eliminating the redundancy in convolution kernels.
In addition to structured sparse kernels, low-rank kernels
and the product of low-rank kernels, the product of structured sparse kernels, which is a framework for interpreting the recently-developed interleaved group convolutions
(IGC) and its variants (e.g., Xception), has been attracting
increasing interests.
Motivated by the observation that the convolutions contained in a group convolution in IGC can be further decomposed in the same manner, we present a modularized building block, IGC-V2: interleaved structured sparse convolutions. It generalizes interleaved group convolutions, which
is composed of two structured sparse kernels, to the product of more structured sparse kernels, further eliminating
the redundancy. We present the complementary condition
and the balance condition to guide the design of structured
sparse kernels, obtaining a balance among three aspects:
model size, computation complexity and classification accuracy. Experimental results demonstrate the advantage on
the balance among these three aspects compared to interleaved group convolutions and Xception, and competitive
performance compared to other state-of-the-art architecture design methods.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks with small model
size, low computation cost, but still high accuracy become
an urgent request, especially in mobile devices. The efforts
include (i) network compression: compress the pretrained
model by decomposing the convolutional kernel matrix or
∗ This work was done when Guotian Xie was an intern at Microsoft Re-

search, Beijing, P.R. China. Personal email: xieguotian1990@gmail.com
† Corresponding author.

removing connections or channels to eliminate redundancy, and (ii) architecture design: design small kernels, sparse
kernels or use the product of less-redundant kernels to approach single kernel and train the networks from scratch.
Our study lies in architecture design using the product of
less-redundant kernels for composing a kernel. There are
two main lines: multiply low-rank kernels (matrices) to approximate a high-rank kernel, e.g., bottleneck modules [6],
and multiply sparse matrices, which has attracted research
efforts recently [43, 11, 1] and is the focus of our work.
We point out that the recently-developed algorithms,
such as interleaved group convolution [43], deep roots [11],
and Xception [1], compose a dense kernel using the product
of two structured-sparse kernels. We observe that one of the
two kernels can be further approximated. For example, the
1 × 1 kernel in Xception and deep roots can be approximated by the product of two block-diagonal sparse matrices.
The suggested secondary group convolution in interleaved
group convolutions contains two branches and each branch
is a 1 × 1 convolution, which similarly can be further approximated. This is able to further reduce the redundancy.
Motivated by this, we design a building block, IGCV2: Interleaved Structured Sparse Convolution, as shown
in Figure 1, which consists of successive group convolutions. This block is mathematically formulated as multiplying
structured-sparse kernels, each of which corresponds to a
group convolution. We introduce the complementary condition and the balance condition, so that the resulting convolution kernel is dense and there is a good balance among three
aspects: model size, computation complexity and classification performance. Experimental results demonstrate the
advantage of the balance among these three aspects compared to interleaved group convolutions and Xception, and
competitive performance compared to other state-of-the-art
architecture design methods.

2. Related Work
Most existing technologies design efficient and effective
convolutional kernels using various forms with redundancy

8847

