Connecting Pixels to Privacy and Utility:
Automatic Redaction of Private Information in Images
Tribhuvanesh Orekondy

Mario Fritz

Bernt Schiele

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saabrücken, Germany
{orekondy,mfritz,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Users want to share
images containing
private information

Abstract
Images convey a broad spectrum of personal information. If such images are shared on social media platforms,
this personal information is leaked which conflicts with the
privacy of depicted persons. Therefore, we aim for automated approaches to redact such private information and
thereby protect privacy of the individual.
By conducting a user study we find that obfuscating the
image regions related to the private information leads to
privacy while retaining utility of the images. Moreover, by
varying the size of the regions different privacy-utility tradeoffs can be achieved. Our findings argue for a “redaction
by segmentation” paradigm.
Hence, we propose the first sizable dataset of private images “in the wild” annotated with pixel and instance level
labels across a broad range of privacy classes. We present
the first model for automatic redaction of diverse private
information. It is effective at achieving various privacyutility trade-offs within 83% of the performance of redactions based on ground-truth annotation.

1. Introduction
More and more visual data is captured and shared on the
Internet. Images and video contain a wide range of private information that may be shared unintentionally such as
e.g. email-address, picture-id or finger-print (see Figure 1).
Consequently, there is a growing interest within the computer vision community [4, 19, 23, 25, 41, 43] to assess the
amount of leaked information, understand implications on
privacy and ultimately control and enforce privacy again.
Yet, we are missing an understanding how image content
relates to private information and how automated redaction
can be approached.
Therefore, we address two important questions in this

Proposed privacy
sensitive regions

Automatic Redactions
remove private information

fingerprint, datetime

fingerprint, datetime

person, face, lic_plate

person, face, lic_plate

Figure 1: Users often share images containing private information, which poses a privacy risk. For example, in the
top row, user might unintentionally leak their fingerprint.
We present methods to aid users automatically redact such
content by proposing privacy sensitive regions in images.
context. First, how can private information be redacted
while maintaining an intelligible image? We investigate
this question in a user study with highly encouraging results: we can redact private information in images while
preserving its utility. Furthermore, varying the amount of
pixels redacted results in different privacy vs. utility tradeoffs. We conclude that redaction by segmentation is a valid
approach to perform visual redactions.
We ask a second question in this paper: What kind
of privacy-utility trade-offs can be achieved by automatic
redaction schemes? Based on our first finding, we approach
this as a pixel labeling task on multiple privacy classes
(which we refer to as privacy attributes). Segmenting privacy attributes in images presents a new challenge of reasoning about regions including multiple modalities. For instance, in Figure 1, identifying the name and datetime requires mapping the relevant pixels to the text domain for
understanding, while identifying the student id requires
18466

