Multi-Level Factorisation Net for Person Re-Identification
Xiaobin Chang1 , Timothy M. Hospedales2 , Tao Xiang1
Queen Mary University of London1 , The University of Edinburgh2
x.chang@qmul.ac.uk t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk t.xiang@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Key to effective person re-identification (Re-ID) is modelling discriminative and view-invariant factors of person
appearance at both high and low semantic levels. Recently
developed deep Re-ID models either learn a holistic single
semantic level feature representation and/or require laborious human annotation of these factors as attributes. We
propose Multi-Level Factorisation Net (MLFN), a novel network architecture that factorises the visual appearance of a
person into latent discriminative factors at multiple semantic levels without manual annotation. MLFN is composed
of multiple stacked blocks. Each block contains multiple
factor modules to model latent factors at a specific level,
and factor selection modules that dynamically select the
factor modules to interpret the content of each input image. The outputs of the factor selection modules also provide a compact latent factor descriptor that is complementary to the conventional deeply learned features. MLFN
achieves state-of-the-art results on three Re-ID datasets, as
well as compelling results on the general object categorisation CIFAR-100 dataset.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to match people
across multiple surveillance cameras with non-overlapping
views. It is challenging because the visual appearance of
a person across different cameras can change drastically
due to many covariates such as illumination, background,
camera view-angle and human pose (see Fig. 1). However,
there exist identity-discriminative but view-invariant visual
appearance characteristics or factors that can be exploited
for person Re-ID. As illustrated in Fig. 1, such factors can
be found at different semantic and abstraction levels, ranging from low-level colour and texture to high-level concepts, such as clothing type and gender. An ideal person
Re-ID model should: (i) automatically learn the space of
multi-level discriminative visual factors that are insensitive
to viewing condition changes, and (ii) recognise and exploit
them when matching testing images (as per human expert

Gender: female

Gender: female

Carrying: handbag

Carrying:handbag

Clothing: skirt

Clothing: skirt

Texture: floral

Texture: floral

Colour: black; white; red

Colour: black; white; red

Gender: male

Gender: male

Carrying: backpack; bottle

Carrying: backpack

Clothing: T-shirt; shorts

Clothing: T-shirt; shorts

Texture: stripe

Texture: stripe

Colour: blue; gray

Colour: blue; gray

Figure 1. A person’s appearance can be described by appearance
factors of multiple semantic levels. Modelling the view-invariant
discriminative factors is important for matching people across
views. Each row shows a person captured by two camera views.

operating procedure [33]).
Most recent person Re-ID approaches [42, 38, 24, 32, 27,
25] employ deep neural networks (DNNs) to learn viewinvariant discriminative features. For matching, the features are typically extracted from the very top feature layer
of a trained model. A problem thus arises: A DNN comprises multiple feature extraction layers stacked one on top
of each other; and it is widely acknowledged [20, 39, 14]
that, when progressing from the bottom to the top layers,
the visual concepts captured by the feature maps tend to be
more abstract and of higher semantic level. However, for
Re-ID purposes, discriminative factors of multiple semantic levels should be ideally preserved in the learned features.
Therefore existing Re-ID models using standard architectures have limited efficacy. These network architectures,
though working very well for the object categorisation task
such as ImageNet classification due to its focus on highlevel semantic features, are not well-suited for the instancelevel recognition task of Re-ID.
A number of recent deep Re-ID models started to model
discriminative factors of multiple levels. Some focused
on learning semantic visual features with additional supervision in the form of attributes [32, 35, 26, 15, 31, 41].
The idea is to explicitly define these factors as semantic

2109

