Occluded Pedestrian Detection Through Guided Attention in CNNs
Shanshan Zhang1 , Jian Yang2 , Bernt Schiele3
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
2
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
shanshan.zhang@njust.edu.cn, csjyang@njust.edu.cn, schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Pedestrian detection has progressed significantly in the
last years. However, occluded people are notoriously hard
to detect, as their appearance varies substantially depending on a wide range of occlusion patterns. In this paper,
we aim to propose a simple and compact method based on
the FasterRCNN architecture for occluded pedestrian detection.
We start with interpreting CNN channel features of a
pedestrian detector, and we find that different channels activate responses for different body parts respectively. These
findings motivate us to employ an attention mechanism
across channels to represent various occlusion patterns in
one single model, as each occlusion pattern can be formulated as some specific combination of body parts. Therefore, an attention network with self or external guidances
is proposed as an add-on to the baseline FasterRCNN detector. When evaluating on the heavy occlusion subset, we
achieve a significant improvement of 8pp to the baseline
FasterRCNN detector on CityPersons and on Caltech we
outperform the state-of-the-art method by 4pp.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection has been attracting intensive interests in both academia and industry. During the last decade,
great progress has been achieved [3, 31], especially by properly adapting CNNs for general object detection to this
canonical task [12, 30, 32]. Although the state-of-the-art
performance is plausible across different datasets, we observe that it drops significantly as occlusion grows. In
real world applications, occlusion happens very often but
is challenging to handle. To encourage more work for
occlusion handling, the CityPersons dataset has been proposed [32], which consists of a large number of occlusion
cases with various patterns.
Some efforts have been made to handle occlusion, but

Figure 1. Visualization of detection results (at FPPI=0.1) from
our FasterRCNN+ATT-part detector (upper row) and the baseline
FasterRCNN detector (lower row). Our attention based detector
achieves higher recall for occluded pedestrians. The sample images are selected from the CityPersons [32] validation set; we
show ground truth annotations in green and detection results in
red. All figures are best viewed in color.

most of them train ensemble models for most frequent occlusion patterns [7, 19, 21, 26]. The major drawback of
those methods is that it is very time-consuming at both
training and testing times. Some other works propose to
model different occlusion patterns in a joint framework
[33, 22], but they still rely on an integration of a set of occlusion/part detection scores. The above methods are not
able to cover all occlusion patterns, and the independent integration procedure inhibits error propagation to the occlusion/part detection module.
In order to deal with a wide range of frequent and less
frequent occlusion patterns in one coherent model, we propose different attention mechanisms, which guide the detector to pay more attention to the visible body parts. These
attention mechanisms are motivated by the fact that different channels of CNN-based detectors, in our case a FasterRCNN pedestrian detector, are selective and show strong
responses for different body parts. These explicit representations of body parts motivate us to propose channel-wise
16995

