Pixels, voxels, and views: A study of shape representations
for single view 3D object shape prediction
Daeyun Shin1

Charless C. Fowlkes1

Derek Hoiem2

1

2

University of California, Irvine
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

{daeyuns, fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu
dhoiem@illinois.edu
http://www.ics.uci.edu/˜daeyuns/pixels-voxels-views

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to compare surface-based and
volumetric 3D object shape representations, as well as
viewer-centered and object-centered reference frames for
single-view 3D shape prediction. We propose a new algorithm for predicting depth maps from multiple viewpoints,
with a single depth or RGB image as input. By modifying
the network and the way models are evaluated, we can directly compare the merits of voxels vs. surfaces and viewercentered vs. object-centered for familiar vs. unfamiliar
objects, as predicted from RGB or depth images. Among
our findings, we show that surface-based methods outperform voxel representations for objects from novel classes
and produce higher resolution outputs. We also find that using viewer-centered coordinates is advantageous for novel
objects, while object-centered representations are better for
more familiar objects. Interestingly, the coordinate frame
significantly affects the shape representation learned, with
object-centered placing more importance on implicitly recognizing the object category and viewer-centered producing shape representations with less dependence on category
recognition.

1. Introduction
Shape is arguably the most important property of objects,
providing cues for affordance, function, category, and interaction. This paper examines the problem of predicting the
3D object shape from a single image (Fig. 1). The availability of large 3D object model datasets [1] and flexible deep
network learning methods has made this an increasingly active area of research. Recent methods predict complete 3D
shape using voxel [7, 3] or octree [19] volumetric representations, multiple depth map surfaces [18], point cloud [5],
or a set of cuboid part primitives [25]. However, there is
not yet a systematic evaluation of important design choices
such as the choice of shape representation and coordinate
frame.

Figure 1. We investigate the problem of predicting the 3D shape of
an object from a single depth or RGB image (illustrated above). In
particular, we examine the impacts of coordinate frames (viewercentered vs. object-centered), shape representation (volumetric vs.
multi-surface), and familiarity (known instance, novel instance,
novel category).

In this paper, we investigate two key issues, illustrated
in Fig. 2. First, is it better to represent shape volumetrically or as multiple 2.5D surfaces observed from varying
viewpoints? The earliest (albeit still recent) pattern recognition approaches to shape prediction use volumetric representations (e.g. [13, 7]), but more recent works have proposed surface-based representations [18]. Qi et al. [12]
finds an advantage for surface-based representations for 3D
object classification, since surfaces can encode high resolution shapes with fewer parameters. Rendered surfaces have
fewer pixels than there are voxels in a high resolution mesh.
However, generating a complete shape from 2.5D surfaces
creates an additional challenge, since the surfaces need to
be aligned and fused into a single 3D object surface.
Second, what is the impact of object-centered vs. viewcentered coordinate frames for shape prediction? Nearly
all recent 3D shape generation methods use object-centered
coordinates, where the object’s shape is represented in a
canonical view. For example, shown either a front view
or side view of a car, the goal is to generate the same
front-facing 3D model of the car. Object-centered coordinates simplify the prediction problem, but suffer from several practical drawbacks: the viewer-relative pose is not re-

3061

