Event-based Vision meets Deep Learning on
Steering Prediction for Self-driving Cars
Ana I. Maqueda1 , Antonio Loquercio2 , Guillermo Gallego2 ,
Narciso Garcı́a1 , and Davide Scaramuzza2 .
1 Grupo de Tratamiento de Imágenes, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
2 Dept. of Informatics and Neuroinformatics, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Standard camera

Abstract
Event cameras are bio-inspired vision sensors that naturally capture the dynamics of a scene, filtering out redundant information. This paper presents a deep neural
network approach that unlocks the potential of event cameras on a challenging motion-estimation task: prediction
of a vehicle’s steering angle. To make the best out of this
sensor–algorithm combination, we adapt state-of-the-art
convolutional architectures to the output of event sensors
and extensively evaluate the performance of our approach
on a publicly available large scale event-camera dataset
(≈1000 km). We present qualitative and quantitative explanations of why event cameras allow robust steering prediction even in cases where traditional cameras fail, e.g. challenging illumination conditions and fast motion. Finally, we
demonstrate the advantages of leveraging transfer learning
from traditional to event-based vision, and show that our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms based on
standard cameras.

Multimedia Material
A video accompanying this paper can be found at:
https://youtu.be/_r_bsjkJTHA

1. Introduction
Event cameras, such as the Dynamic Vision Sensor
(DVS) [1], are bio-inspired sensors that, in contrast to traditional cameras, do not acquire full images at a fixed framerate but rather have independent pixels that output only
intensity changes (called “events”) asynchronously at the
time they occur. Hence, the output of an event camera
is not a sequence of images but a stream of asynchronous
events. Event cameras have multiple advantages over traditional cameras: very high temporal resolution (microseconds), very high dynamic range (HDR) (140 dB) and low
power and bandwidth requirements. Moreover, since events

Event camera

Figure 1: Steering angle regression performance on
grayscale frames (first column) and on event camera data
(second column). The first row shows a sunny day where visual features can be extracted from grayscale frames. However the camera saturation and the lack of temporal information makes the network predict a wrong steering angle.
The second row shows a night scene, from which the network hardly predicts the correct steering angle when using
grayscale frames. Our method accurately predicts a steering
angle by combining event data and deep learning in both
scenarios.
are generated by moving edges in the scene, event cameras
are natural motion detectors and automatically filter out any
temporally-redundant information. Due to their principle of
operation and unconventional output, event cameras represent a paradigm shift in computer vision, and so, new algorithms are needed to exploit their capabilities. Indeed,
event cameras present many advantages in all tasks related
to motion estimation [2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
Recently, deep learning (DL) algorithms were shown to
perform well on many applications in the field of motion

5419

