Attend and Interact: Higher-Order Object Interactions for Video Understanding
Chih-Yao Ma∗1 , Asim Kadav2 , Iain Melvin2 , Zsolt Kira3 , Ghassan AlRegib1 , and Hans Peter Graf2
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 NEC Laboratories America, 3 Georgia Tech Research Institute

Video frame

Abstract
Human actions often involve complex interactions across
several inter-related objects in the scene. However, existing approaches to fine-grained video understanding or visual relationship detection often rely on single object representation or pairwise object relationships. Furthermore,
learning interactions across multiple objects in hundreds of
frames for video is computationally infeasible and performance may suffer since a large combinatorial space has to
be modeled. In this paper, we propose to efficiently learn
higher-order interactions between arbitrary subgroups of
objects for fine-grained video understanding. We demonstrate that modeling object interactions significantly improves accuracy for both action recognition and video
captioning, while saving more than 3-times the computation over traditional pairwise relationships. The proposed
method is validated on two large-scale datasets: Kinetics
and ActivityNet Captions. Our SINet and SINet-Caption
achieve state-of-the-art performances on both datasets even
though the videos are sampled at a maximum of 1 FPS. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work modeling object interactions on open domain large-scale video datasets,
and we additionally model higher-order object interactions
which improves the performance with low computational
costs.

1. Introduction
Video understanding tasks such as activity recognition
and caption generation are crucial for various applications
in surveillance, video retrieval, human behavior understanding, etc. Recently, datasets for video understanding such as
Charades [42], Kinetics [21], and ActivityNet Captions [22]
contain diverse real-world examples and represent complex human and object interactions that can be difficult
to model with state-of-the-art video understanding methods [42]. Consider the example in Figure 1. To accurately
∗ Work performed as a NEC Labs intern

Interactions between ROIs

Attended interactions

Action prediction: cooking on campfire , cooking egg , …

Figure 1. Higher-order object interactions are progressively detected based on selected inter-relationships. ROIs with the same
color (weighted r, g, b) indicating there exist inter-object relationships, e.g. eggs in the same bowl, hand breaks egg, and bowl
on top of campfire (interaction within the same color). Groups
of inter-relationships then jointly model higher-order object interaction of the scene (interaction between different colors). Right:
ROIs are highlighted with their attention weights for higher-order
interactions. The model further reasons about the interactions
through time and predicts cooking on campfire and cooking egg.
Images are generated from SINet (best viewed in color).

predict cooking on campfire and cooking egg among other
similar action classes requires understanding of fine-grained
object relationships and interactions. For example, a hand
breaks an egg, eggs are in a bowl, the bowl is on top of
the campfire, campfire is a fire built with wood at a camp,
etc. Although recent state-of-the-art approaches for action
recognition have demonstrated significant improvements
over datasets such as UCF101 [45], HMDB51 [23], Sports1M [20], THUMOS [18], ActivityNet [5], and YouTube8M [1], they often focus on representing the overall visual
scene (coarse-grained) as sequence of inputs that are combined with temporal pooling, e.g. CRF, LSTM, 1D Convolution, attention, and NetVLAD [4, 29, 30, 41], or use
3D Convolution for the whole video sequence [6, 37, 46].
These approaches ignore the fine-grained details of the
scene and do not infer interactions between various objects
in the video. On the other hand, in video captioning tasks,
although prior approaches use spatial or temporal attention
to selectively attend to fine-grained visual content in both
space and time, they too do not model object interactions.
16790

