Adversarially Occluded Samples for Person Re-identification
Houjing Huang 1,2 Dangwei Li 1,2 Zhang Zhang 1,2 Xiaotang Chen 1,2 Kaiqi Huang 1,2,3
1
CRIPAC & NLPR, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{houjing.huang, dangwei.li, zzhang, xtchen, kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Market1501

Abstract
Person re-identification (ReID) is the task of retrieving
particular persons across different cameras. Despite its
great progress in recent years, it is still confronted with
challenges like pose variation, occlusion, and similar appearance among different persons. The large gap between
training and testing performance with existing models implies the insufficiency of generalization. Considering this
fact, we propose to augment the variation of training data
by introducing Adversarially Occluded Samples. These special samples are both a) meaningful in that they resemble real-scene occlusions, and b) effective in that they are
tough for the original model and thus provide the momentum to jump out of local optimum. We mine these samples
based on a trained ReID model and with the help of network visualization techniques. Extensive experiments show
that the proposed samples help the model discover new discriminative clues on the body and generalize much better at
test time. Our strategy makes significant improvement over
strong baselines on three large-scale ReID datasets, Market1501, CUHK03 and DukeMTMC-reID.

1. Introduction
Image based person re-identification is a fundamental
task in video surveillance that aims to retrieve a particular person from a great number of person images that have
been detected under various cameras. It was originally proposed in multi-camera tracking but gradually grows into an
independent research task due to its complexity as well as
wider application in real world [53].
Though it has been researched for years, the meaningful task is still confronted with many challenges. The main
obstacles reside in low resolution of images, similar clothes
among different persons, background clutter, various view
points and body poses, etc. What’s more, the test persons
are never seen during training. In this respect, it can not be
overstated that person re-identification is exactly one kind
of zero-shot learning [27].

Before

After

CUHK03

Before

After

DukeMTMC-reID

Before

After

Figure 1: Activation maps (from layer Conv4 of ResNet50 [15]) averaged over the whole test sets, before and after
applying our method. Warmer color denotes higher value.
Results on three large-scale datasets Market1501 [52],
CUHK03 [20] and DukeMTMC-reID [29] are displayed.
The original model mainly focuses on upper regions of the
body, our method guides it to also pay attention to other
parts e.g. pants, shoes and head, for better generalization.

The recent advance of deep neural networks [18, 33,
37, 15] provides a promising way for learning invariance
from data and building robust models. Accordingly, there
have been some efforts on extracting discriminative features [19, 51, 45, 36], learning a better similarity metric [8, 5], or combining them in an end-to-end model [54].
These works improve the performance of person ReID to
some extent but the gap between training and testing performance still remains. One typical phenomenon is that during
training the model easily satisfies the training constraint, decreasing the loss function to a relatively low level, and then
stays convergent. Whereas the performance on test set is
still far from perfect.
Increasing variation in training data is an effective way
of improving generalization, especially for deep learning
paradigm that benefits from huge data volume [18]. However, unlike other tasks such as object recognition, it’s rather
expensive to gather an adequately large dataset for ReID
due to the cross-camera data collection procedure. Alternatively, data augmentation is an important technique to make
full use of the current dataset without extra cost. Common
methods [18] in this direction include randomly cropping a

5098

