Video Representation Learning Using Discriminative Pooling
Jue Wang1,3 Anoop Cherian2,3,4 Fatih Porikli2,3 Stephen Gould2,3
1
Data61/CSIRO, 2 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
3
The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia, 4 MERL Cambridge, MA
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Popular deep models for action recognition in videos
generate independent predictions for short clips, which are
then pooled heuristically to assign an action label to the full
video segment. As not all frames may characterize the underlying action—indeed, many are common across multiple
actions—pooling schemes that impose equal importance on
all frames might be unfavorable. In an attempt to tackle this
problem, we propose discriminative pooling, based on the
notion that among the deep features generated on all short
clips, there is at least one that characterizes the action. To
this end, we learn a (nonlinear) hyperplane that separates
this unknown, yet discriminative, feature from the rest. Applying multiple instance learning in a large-margin setup,
we use the parameters of this separating hyperplane as a
descriptor for the full video segment. Since these parameters are directly related to the support vectors in a maxmargin framework, they serve as robust representations for
pooling of the features. We formulate a joint objective and
an efficient solver that learns these hyperplanes per video
and the corresponding action classifiers over the hyperplanes. Our pooling scheme is end-to-end trainable within
a deep framework. We report results from experiments on
three benchmark datasets spanning a variety of challenges
and demonstrate state-of-the-art performance across these
tasks.

1. Introduction
We are witnessing an astronomical increase of video data
on the web. This data deluge has brought out the problem of
effective video representation – specifically, their semantic
content – to the forefront of computer vision research. The
resurgence of convolutional neural networks (CNN) has enabled significant progress to be made on several problems in
computer vision (most notably on object detection and image tagging) and is now pushing forward the state-of-theart in action recognition and video understanding. However, current solutions are still far from being practically

Figure 1. A visualization of discriminative pooling applied to RGB
frames in a sequence. (i) a sample frame, (ii) average pooling all
frames, (iii) dynamic image by rank pooling [2], and (iv) our SVM
pooling. Our representation captures more details of the actions as
it learns to discriminate parts of the foreground against a background set. In this case, we used the average-pooled frames as the
background.

useful, arguably due to the volumetric nature of this data
modality and the complex nature of real-world human actions [10, 11, 12, 13, 18, 41, 42, 54].
Using effective architectures, CNNs are often found to
extract features from images that perform well on recognition tasks. Leveraging this know-how, deep learning solutions for video action recognition have so far been straightforward extensions of image-based models. However, video
data can be of arbitrary length and scaling up image-based
CNN architectures to yet another dimension of complexity is not an easy task as the number of parameters in such
models will be significantly higher. This demands more advanced computational infrastructures and greater quantities
of clean training data [5]. Instead, the trend has been on
converting the video data to short temporal segments consisting of one to a few frames, on which the existing imagebased CNN models are trained. For example, in the popular two-stream model [13, 41, 42, 53, 55], the CNNs are
11149

