Learning to Generate Time-Lapse Videos Using Multi-Stage
Dynamic Generative Adversarial Networks
Wei Xiong†‡∗ Wenhan Luo†
†
Tencent AI Lab
‡

Lin Ma†
Wei Liu†
Jiebo Luo‡†
‡
University of Rochester

{wxiong5,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu † {whluo.china,forest.linma}@gmail.com † wliu@ee.columbia.edu

Abstract
Taking a photo outside, can we predict the immediate
future, e.g., how would the cloud move in the sky? We
address this problem by presenting a generative adversarial network (GAN) based two-stage approach to generating realistic time-lapse videos of high resolution. Given the
first frame, our model learns to generate long-term future
frames. The first stage generates videos of realistic contents for each frame. The second stage refines the generated
video from the first stage by enforcing it to be closer to real
videos with regard to motion dynamics. To further encourage vivid motion in the final generated video, Gram matrix
is employed to model the motion more precisely. We build
a large scale time-lapse dataset, and test our approach on
this new dataset. Using our model, we are able to generate
realistic videos of up to 128 × 128 resolution for 32 frames.
Quantitative and qualitative experiment results demonstrate
the superiority of our model over the state-of-the-art models.

Figure 1. From top to bottom: example frames of generated videos
by VGAN [28], RNN-GAN [37], the first stage of our model, and
the second stage of our model, respectively. The contents generated by our model (the third and fourth rows) are visually more
realistic. The left column is the input starting frame.

Humans can often estimate fairly well what will happen
in the immediate future given the current scene. However,
for vision systems, predicting the future states is still a challenging task. The problem of future prediction or video synthesis has drawn more and more attention in recent years
since it is critical for various kinds of applications, such
as action recognition [22], video understanding [31], and
video captioning [35]. The goal of video prediction in this
paper is to generate realistic, long-term, and high-quality future frames given one starting frame. Achieving such a goal
is difficult, as it is challenging to model the multi-modality
and uncertainty in generating both the content and motion
in future frames.
In terms of content generation, the main problem is to

define what to learn. Generating future on the basis of only
one static image encounters inherent uncertainty of the future, which has been illustrated in [29]. Since there can be
multiple possibilities for reasonable future scenes following
the first frame, the objective function is difficult to define.
Generating future frames by simply learning to reconstruct
the real video can lead to unrealistic results [28, 16]. Several models including [27] and [28] are proposed to address
this problem based on generative adversarial networks [5].
For example, 3D convolution is incorporated in an adversarial network to model the transformation from an image
to a video in [28]. Their model produces plausible futures
given the first frame. However, the generated video tends to
be blurry and lose content details, which degrades the reality of generated videos. A possible cause is that the vanilla
encoder-decoder structure in the generator fails to preserve
all the indispensable details of the content.

∗ This work was primarily done while Wei Xiong was a Research Intern
with Tencent AI Lab.

Regarding motion transformation, the main challenge is
to drive the given frame to transform realistically over time.

1. Introduction

2364

