Zero-Shot Sketch-Image Hashing
Yuming Shen∗ 1 , Li Liu∗2 , Fumin Shen 3 , and Ling Shao 2,1
1

School of Computing Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
3
Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
yuming.shen@uea.ac.uk, liuli1213@gmail.com, fumin.shen@gmail.com, ling.shao@ieee.org

Classes

A

Abstract
Training

Recent studies show that large-scale sketch-based image
retrieval (SBIR) can be efficiently tackled by cross-modal binary representation learning methods, where Hamming distance matching significantly speeds up the process of similarity search. Providing training and test data subjected to
a fixed set of pre-defined categories, the cutting-edge SBIR
and cross-modal hashing works obtain acceptable retrieval
performance. However, most of the existing methods fail
when the categories of query sketches have never been seen
during training.
In this paper, the above problem is briefed as a novel
but realistic zero-shot SBIR hashing task. We elaborate the
challenges of this special task and accordingly propose a
zero-shot sketch-image hashing (ZSIH) model. An end-toend three-network architecture is built, two of which are
treated as the binary encoders. The third network mitigates
the sketch-image heterogeneity and enhances the semantic
relations among data by utilizing the Kronecker fusion layer
and graph convolution, respectively. As an important part
of ZSIH, we formulate a generative hashing scheme in reconstructing semantic knowledge representations for zeroshot retrieval. To the best of our knowledge, ZSIH is the first
zero-shot hashing work suitable for SBIR and cross-modal
search. Comprehensive experiments are conducted on two
extended datasets, i.e., Sketchy and TU-Berlin with a novel
zero-shot train-test split. The proposed model remarkably
outperforms related works.

1. Introduction
Matching real images with hand-free sketches has recently aroused extensive research interest in computer vision, multimedia and machine learning, forming the term
of sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR). Differing the con∗ Yuming Shen and Li Liu contributed equally to this work.

Images

Sketches
Feature Mapping

SBIR

B
Conventional
SBIR Testing

Zero-Shot SBIR Testing with Hashing
(Proposed)

A

C
??
Not
Used in
Training

D

SBIR

SBIR

B

Figure 1. In conventional SBIR and cross-modal hashing (bottom
right), the categories of training data include the ones of test data,
marked as ‘A’ and ‘B’. For our zero-shot task (bottom left), training data are still subjected to class ‘A’ and ‘B’, but test sketches and
images are coming from other categories, i.e., ‘plane’ and ‘cat’ in
this case. Note that data labels are not used as test inputs and the
test data categories shall be unknown to the learning system.

ventional text-image cross-modal retrieval, SBIR delivers a
more applicable scenario where the targeted candidate images are conceptually unintelligible but visualizable to user.
Several works have been proposed handling the SBIR task
by learning real-valued representations [16, 17, 23, 24, 49,
50, 52, 57, 59, 69, 70]. As an extension of conventional data
hashing techniques [51, 20, 39, 54, 53], cross-modal hashing [4, 13, 72, 36, 33, 26, 5, 6] show great potential in retrieving heterogeneous data with high efficiency due to the
computationally cheap Hamming space matching, which is
recently adopted to large-scale SBIR in [38] with impressive performance. Entering the era of big data, it is always
feasible and appreciated to seek binary representation learning methods for fast SBIR.
However, the aforementioned works suffer from obvious drawbacks. Given a fixed set of categories of training and test data, these methods successfully manage to
achieve sound SBIR performance, which is believed to be
a relatively easy task as the visual knowledge from all concepts has been explored during parameter learning, while

3598

