Features for Multi-Target Multi-Camera Tracking and Re-Identification
Ergys Ristani Carlo Tomasi
Duke University
Durham, NC, USA
{ristani, tomasi}@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Multi-Target Multi-Camera Tracking (MTMCT) tracks
many people through video taken from several cameras.
Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) retrieves from a gallery
images of people similar to a person query image. We
learn good features for both MTMCT and Re-ID with a convolutional neural network. Our contributions include an
adaptive weighted triplet loss for training and a new technique for hard-identity mining. Our method outperforms
the state of the art both on the DukeMTMC benchmarks for
tracking, and on the Market-1501 and DukeMTMC-ReID
benchmarks for Re-ID. We examine the correlation between
good Re-ID and good MTMCT scores, and perform ablation studies to elucidate the contributions of the main components of our system. Code is available1 .

1. Introduction
Multi-Target Multi-Camera Tracking (MTMCT) aims to
determine the position of every person at all times from
video streams taken by multiple cameras. The resulting
multi-camera trajectories enable applications including visual surveillance, suspicious activity and anomaly detection, sport player tracking, and crowd behavior analysis. In
recent years, the number of cameras has increased dramatically in airports, train stations, and shopping centers, so it
has become necessary to automate MTMC tracking.
MTMCT is a notoriously difficult problem: Cameras are
often placed far apart to reduce costs, and their fields of
view do not always overlap. This results in extended periods of occlusion and large changes of viewpoint and illumination across different fields of view. In addition, the
number of people is typically not known in advance, and the
amount of data to process is enormous.
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is closely related to
MTMCT: Given a snapshot of a person (the query), a ReThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grants No. IIS-1420894 and CCF-1513816.
1 http://vision.cs.duke.edu/DukeMTMC/

Figure 1. Two example multi-camera results from our tracker on
the DukeMTMC dataset.

ID system retrieves from a database a list of other snapshots
of people, usually taken from different cameras and at different times, and ranks them by decreasing similarity to the
query. The intent is that any snapshots in the database that
are co-identical with (that is, depict the same person as) the
person in the query are ranked highly.
MTMCT and Re-ID differ subtly but fundamentally, because Re-ID ranks distances to a query while MTMCT classifies a pair of images as being co-identical or not, and their
performance is consequently measured by different metrics: ranking performance for Re-ID, classification error
rates for MTMCT. This difference would seem to suggest
that appearance features used for the two problems must
be learned with different loss functions. Ideally, the Re-ID
loss ought to ensure that for any query a the largest distance
between a and a feature that is co-identical to it is smaller
than the smallest distance between a and a feature that is
not co-identical to it. This would guarantee correct feature
ranking for any given query. In contrast, the MTMCT loss
ought to ensure that the largest distance between any two
co-identical features is smaller that the smallest distance between any two non co-identical features, to guarantee a margin between within-identity and between-identity distances.
With these criteria, zero MTMCT loss would imply zero
Re-ID loss, but not vice versa. However, training with a loss
16036

