Unsupervised Correlation Analysis
Yedid Hoshen
Facebook AI Research

Lior Wolf
Facebook AI Research and Tel Aviv University

yedid@fb.com

wolf@fb.com

Abstract
Linking between two data sources is a basic building
block in numerous computer vision problems. In this paper, we set to answer a fundamental cognitive question: are
prior correspondences necessary for linking between different domains?
One of the most popular methods for linking between domains is Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA). All current CCA algorithms require correspondences between the
views. We introduce a new method Unsupervised Correlation Analysis (UCA), which requires no prior correspondences between the two domains. The correlation maximization term in CCA is replaced by a combination of a reconstruction term (similar to autoencoders), full cycle loss,
orthogonality and multiple domain confusion terms. Due to
lack of supervision, the optimization leads to multiple alternative solutions with similar scores and we therefore introduce a consensus-based mechanism that is often able to
recover the desired solution. Remarkably, this suffices in order to link remote domains such as text and images. We also
present results on well accepted CCA benchmarks, showing
that performance far exceeds other unsupervised baselines,
and approaches supervised performance in some cases.

1. Introduction
Computer vision seeks an understanding of the scene behind the image, mapping an image to a non-image representation. Linking visual data X with an external data source
Y is, therefore, the defining task of computer vision. When
applying machine learning tools to solve such tasks, we often consider the non-vision source Y to be univariate. A
more general scenario is the one in which Y is also multidimensional. Examples of such view to view linking include
matching a video to a concurrent audio, matching an image
with its textual description, matching images from two fixed
views, etc.
The classical method of tying two different domains is
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), which links matching vectors by maximizing the correlation between the

two views. The algorithm has been generalized in many
ways: regularization was added [35], kernels were introduced [2, 36, 4], versions for more than two sources were
developed [46], etc. Recently, with the advent of deep
learning methods, deep versions were created and showed
promise [3, 52, 10, 41].
All of these methods are fully supervised and the loss
terms are based on having access to matching representations in the two domains. Recently, a large body of work
quickly emerged, which maps between two domains in an
unsupervised way, i.e., without observing matching samples. The success of such methods is extraordinary, since
there is no evidence in the existing machine learning or cognitive science literature suggesting that this would be possible.
The success, however, is limited to two visual domains [27, 57, 55, 5], or, much less commonly (and employing mostly semi-supervised learning) to two languages [53]
and very recently [12, 31]. This leads to the hypothesis that
the methods merely perform sophisticated style transfer, as
discussed in [57], are unable to perform geometrical transformations (see discussion in [27]), focus on simple transformations [14], or compute a transformation that can be
well approximated by a fixed permutation of the pixels, as
demonstrated in [5].
In this work, we demonstrate the capability of matching
between completely different domains in an unsupervised
way. As far as we know, this is the first time that such a
method is presented. By doing so we, therefore, both (i)
significantly extend what is known to be possible in unsupervised learning and, (ii) provide a new practical method
for many computer vision applications.
Similarly to the CCA literature, we assume the data in
the two domains is already encoded, e.g., by a preexisting deep CNN for images, or a thought-vector technique
for text. In order to link between the domains, our method
employs multiple sub-networks of two types: to transform
between domains, we employ shallow projection matrices;
to link between the two data sources, we employ deeper domain confusion networks [15].
Even the computation of CCA, as is typically done with
13319

