Scalable Dense Non-rigid Structure-from-Motion: A Grassmannian Perspective
Suryansh Kumar1 Anoop Cherian1,2,4 Yuchao Dai1,3 Hongdong Li1,2
1
Australian National University, 2 ACRV, 3 NPU China, 4 MERL Cambridge, MA
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Input Sequence

Abstract
This paper addresses the task of dense non-rigid
structure-from-motion (NRSfM) using multiple images.
State-of-the-art methods to this problem are often hurdled
by scalability, expensive computations, and noisy measurements. Further, recent methods to NRSfM usually either
assume a small number of sparse feature points or ignore
local non-linearities of shape deformations, and thus cannot reliably model complex non-rigid deformations. To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a new approach
for dense NRSfM by modeling the problem on a Grassmann
manifold. Specifically, we assume the complex non-rigid
deformations lie on a union of local linear subspaces both
spatially and temporally. This naturally allows for a compact representation of the complex non-rigid deformation
over frames. We provide experimental results on several
synthetic and real benchmark datasets. The procured results clearly demonstrate that our method, apart from being
scalable and more accurate than state-of-the-art methods,
is also more robust to noise and generalizes to highly nonlinear deformations.

1. Introduction
Non-rigid structure-from-motion (NRSfM) is a classical
problem in computer vision, where the task is to recover
the 3D shape of a deforming object from multiple images.
Despite the fact that NRSfM for arbitrary deformation still
remains an open problem, it can be solved efficiently under
some mild prior assumptions about the deformation and the
shape configuration [14, 28, 23, 41, 4, 24, 25, 27, 26].
Even though the existing solutions to sparse NRSfM have
demonstrated outstanding results, they do not scale to dense
feature points and their resilience to noise remains unsatisfactory. Moreover, the state-of-the-art algorithms [18, 11]
to solve dense NRSfM are computationally expensive and
rely on the assumption of global low-rank shape which,
unfortunately, fails to cater to the inherent local structure
of the deforming shape over time. Consequently, to represent dense non-rigid structure under such formulations

Reconstruction (View1)

Reconstruction (View 2)

Figure 1: Our algorithm takes dense long-term 2D trajectories of
a non-rigid deforming object as input, and provides a dense detailed 3D reconstruction of it. The reconstructed surface captures
the complex non-linear motion which can be helpful for real world
applications such as 3D virtual and augmented reality. Example
frames are taken from publicly available real datasets: real face
sequence[18] and kinect paper sequence[37] respectively.

seem rather flimsy and implausible.
For many real-world applications, such as facial expression reconstruction, limitations such as scalability, timing,
robustness, reliable modeling, etc., are of crucial concern.
Despite these limitations, no template-free approach exists
that can reliably deal with these concerns. In this paper, we
propose a template-free dense NRSfM algorithm that overcomes these difficulties. As a first step to overcome these
difficulties, we reduce the overall high-dimensional nonlinear space spanned by representing the deforming shape
as a union of several local low-dimensional linear subspaces. Our approach is based on a simple idea/assumption
i.e., any complex deforming surface can be approximated
by a locally linear subspace structure [10]. We use this
simple intuition in a spatio-temporal framework to solve
dense NRSfM. This choice naturally leads to a few legitimate queries:
a) Why spatio-temporal framework for solving dense
NRSfM? Spatio-temporal framework by Kumar et al. [23]
has exhibited the state-of-the-art results on the recent
NRSfM challenge [5, 21]. A recent method [3] which fol-

254

