Erase or Fill? Deep Joint Recurrent Rain Removal
and Reconstruction in Videos
Jiaying Liu, Wenhan Yang∗, Shuai Yang, Zongming Guo,
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of video rain removal by constructing deep recurrent convolutional networks. We visit the rain removal case by considering rain
occlusion regions, i.e. the light transmittance of rain streaks is low. Different from additive rain streaks, in such rain
occlusion regions, the details of background images are
completely lost. Therefore, we propose a hybrid rain model to depict both rain streaks and occlusions. With the
wealth of temporal redundancy, we build a Joint Recurrent
Rain Removal and Reconstruction Network (J4R-Net) that
seamlessly integrates rain degradation classification, spatial texture appearances based rain removal and temporal
coherence based background details reconstruction. The
rain degradation classification provides a binary map that
reveals whether a location is degraded by linear additive
streaks or occlusions. With this side information, the gate
of the recurrent unit learns to make a trade-off between
rain streak removal and background details reconstruction.
Extensive experiments on a series of synthetic and real
videos with rain streaks verify the superiority of the proposed method over previous state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Bad weather conditions cause a series of visibility degradations and alter the content and color of images. Such signal distortion and detail loss lead to the failure of many outdoor computer vision applications, which generally rely on
clean video frames as their input. Rain streaks, as one of
the most common degradations in rain frames, make severe
intensity fluctuations in small regions, and thus obstruct and
blur the scene.
In the past decades, many researchers have been dedicated to rain image/video restoration. The rain removal
from a single image [18, 14, 27, 23] solves this problem by
∗ Indicates corresponding author. This work was supported by National

Natural Science Foundation of China under contract No. 61772043. We
also gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the
GPU for this research. Email: yangwenhan@pku.edu.cn

Figure 1. Demonstration for visual results of different methods on
a practical rain video. Compared with JORDER [32] and TCLRM [20], our method successfully removes most rain streaks and
enhances visibility significantly.

signal separation between rain streaks and background images (non-rain images), based on their texture appearances.
Frequency domain representation [18], sparse representation [23], Gaussian mixture model [21] and deep networks [32, 8] are adopted as basic models to differentiate rain
streaks and background images. Furthermore, video-based
methods [1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12, 33] solve the problem based
on both spatial and temporal redundancies. Some works [11, 9, 12] built on physical models, such as directional and chromatic properties of rains. Others [5, 4, 20, 17]
further utilized temporal dynamics, including continuity of
background motions, randomly appearing of streaks among
frames, and explicit motion modeling, to facilitate video
rain removal.
These methods achieve good effects in some cases.

3233

