MiCT: Mixed 3D/2D Convolutional Tube for Human Action Recognition
Yizhou Zhou∗1
Xiaoyan Sun2
Zheng-Jun Zha1
Wenjun Zeng2
2
1
Microsoft Research Asia
University of Science and Technology of China
zyz0205@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

{xysun,wezeng}@microsoft.com

MiCT

Abstract
Human actions in videos are three-dimensional (3D) signals. Recent attempts use 3D convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) to explore spatio-temporal information for human
action recognition. Though promising, 3D CNNs have not
achieved high performanceon on this task with respect to
their well-established two-dimensional (2D) counterparts
for visual recognition in still images. We argue that the high
training complexity of spatio-temporal fusion and the huge
memory cost of 3D convolution hinder current 3D CNNs,
which stack 3D convolutions layer by layer, by outputting
deeper feature maps that are crucial for high-level tasks. We
thus propose a Mixed Convolutional Tube (MiCT) that integrates 2D CNNs with the 3D convolution module to generate deeper and more informative feature maps, while reducing training complexity in each round of spatio-temporal fusion. A new end-to-end trainable deep 3D network, MiCTNet, is also proposed based on the MiCT to better explore
spatio-temporal information in human actions. Evaluations
on three well-known benchmark datasets (UCF101, Sport1M and HMDB-51) show that the proposed MiCT-Net significantly outperforms the original 3D CNNs. Compared
with state-of-the-art approaches for action recognition on
UCF101 and HMDB51, our MiCT-Net yields the best performance.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is a fundamental yet challenging task with considerable efforts having been investigated for decades. Motivated by the notable-success of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for visual recognition in still images, many recent works take advantage of
deep models to train end-to-end networks for recognizing
actions in videos [25, 9, 18, 35, 40, 20, 30], which significantly outperform hand-crafted representation learning
methods [33, 23, 32, 17].
∗ This work was performed while Yizhou Zhou was an intern with
Microsoft Research Asia

Input 3D signal

2D
Conv.
3D
Conv.

2D
Conv.

Output feature maps

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed MiCT that integrates 2D
CNNs with the 3D convolution for the spatio-temporal feature
learning.

Human actions in video sequences are three dimensional
(3D) spatio-temporal signals. Jointly modeling spatiotemporal information via a 3D CNN in an end-to-end deep
network provides a natural and efficient approach for action
recognition. In spite of the large progress made by incorporating 3D CNN deep networks [30, 31, 11], the performance
of action recognition in videos is still far from satisfactory
compared with what has been achieved by 2D CNNs for
visual recognition in images. Furthermore, state-of-the-art
results for action recognition are obtained by a two-streamlike framework leveraging 2D CNNs pre-trained on huge
image datasets [35, 7], though this approach does not provide systematic justification for its design choice [10].
Reconsidering current 3D CNN networks for action
recognition, we notice that most of these methods share
the same architecture that stacks 3D convolutions layer by
layer, as proposed in C3D [30]. Since the spatial and temporal signals get coupled with each other through each 3D
convolution, it becomes much more difficult to optimize the
network with dozens of such 3D convolution layers because
of the exponential growth of the solution space with respect
to the case of 2D CNNs. Besides, the memory cost of 3D
convolution is too high to be afforded in practice when constructing a deep 3D CNN, which makes the features of the
current 3D CNNs usually not deep enough. For example, an
11-layer 3D CNN requires nearly 1.5 times as much memory as a 152-layer Residual Network. Based on the above
observations, we believe it is very beneficial for a 3D CNN
to limit the number of 3D convolution layers while increasing the depth of the feature maps. There may seem to be

449

