Human-centric Indoor Scene Synthesis Using Stochastic Grammar
Siyuan Qi1
1

Yixin Zhu1

Siyuan Huang1

Chenfanfu Jiang2

Song-Chun Zhu1

UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning and Autonomy
2
UPenn Computer Graphics Group

Abstract
We present a human-centric method to sample and synthesize 3D room layouts and 2D images thereof, to obtain
large-scale 2D/3D image data with the perfect per-pixel
ground truth. An attributed spatial And-Or graph (S-AOG)
is proposed to represent indoor scenes. The S-AOG is a
probabilistic grammar model, in which the terminal nodes
are object entities including room, furniture, and supported
objects. Human contexts as contextual relations are encoded by Markov Random Fields (MRF) on the terminal
nodes. We learn the distributions from an indoor scene
dataset and sample new layouts using Monte Carlo Markov
Chain. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed method
can robustly sample a large variety of realistic room layouts based on three criteria: (i) visual realism comparing to
a state-of-the-art room arrangement method, (ii) accuracy
of the affordance maps with respect to ground-truth, and
(ii) the functionality and naturalness of synthesized rooms
evaluated by human subjects.

1. Introduction
Traditional methods of 2D/3D image data collection and
ground-truth labeling have evident limitations. i) Highquality ground truths are hard to obtain, as depth and surface normal obtained from sensors are always noisy. ii) It
is impossible to label certain ground truth information, e.g.,
3D objects sizes in 2D images. iii) Manual labeling of massive ground-truth is tedious and error-prone even if possible.
To provide training data for modern machine learning algorithms, an approach to generate large-scale, high-quality
data with the perfect per-pixel ground truth is in need.
In this paper, we propose an algorithm to automatically
generate a large-scale 3D indoor scene dataset, from which
we can render 2D images with pixel-wise ground-truth of
the surface normal, depth, and segmentation, etc. The proposed algorithm is useful for tasks including but not limited to: i) learning and inference for various computer vision tasks; ii) 3D content generation for 3D modeling and
games; iii) 3D reconstruction and robot mappings prob-

Figure 1: An example of synthesized indoor scene (bedroom) with affordance heatmap. The joint sampling of a
scene is achieved by alternative sampling of humans and
objects according to the joint probability distribution.
lems; iv) benchmarking of both low-level and high-level
task-planning problems in robotics.
Synthesizing indoor scenes is a non-trivial task. It is often difficult to properly model either the relations between
furniture of a functional group, or the relations between the
supported objects and the supporting furniture. Specifically,
we argue there are four major difficulties. (i) In a functional
group such as a dining set, the number of pieces may vary.
(ii) Even if we only consider pair-wise relations, there is
already a quadratic number of object-object relations. (iii)
What makes it worse is that most object-object relations are
not obviously meaningful. For example, it is unnecessary
to model the relation between a pen and a monitor, even
though they are both placed on a desk. (iv) Due to the previous difficulties, an excessive number of constraints are generated. Many of the constraints contain loops, making the
final layout hard to sample and optimize.
To address these challenges, we propose a human-centric
approach to model indoor scene layout. It integrates human
activities and functional grouping/supporting relations as illustrated in Figure 1. This method not only captures the human context but also simplifies the scene structure. Specifically, we use a probabilistic grammar model for images and
scenes [49] – an attributed spatial And-Or graph (S-AOG),
15899

