Density-aware Single Image De-raining using a Multi-stream Dense Network
He Zhang
Vishal M. Patel
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854
{he.zhang92,vishal.m.patel}@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Single image rain streak removal is an extremely challenging problem due to the presence of non-uniform
rain densities in images. We present a novel densityaware multi-stream densely connected convolutional neural
network-based algorithm, called DID-MDN, for joint rain
density estimation and de-raining. The proposed method
enables the network itself to automatically determine the
rain-density information and then efficiently remove the
corresponding rain-streaks guided by the estimated raindensity label. To better characterize rain-streaks with
different scales and shapes, a multi-stream densely connected de-raining network is proposed which efficiently
leverages features from different scales. Furthermore, a
new dataset containing images with rain-density labels is
created and used to train the proposed density-aware network. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real datasets
demonstrate that the proposed method achieves significant improvements over the recent state-of-the-art methods. In addition, an ablation study is performed to demonstrate the improvements obtained by different modules in
the proposed method. The code can be downloaded at
https://github.com/hezhangsprinter/DID-MDN

1. Introduction
In many applications such as drone-based video surveillance and self driving cars, one has to process images and
videos containing undesirable artifacts such as rain, snow,
and fog [8, 7] or other distortion such as blur and light
[25]. Furthermore, the performance of many computer vision systems often degrades when they are presented with
images containing some of these artifacts. Hence, it is important to develop algorithms that can automatically remove
these artifacts. In this paper, we address the problem of
rain streak removal from a single image. Various methods
have been proposed in the literature to address this problem
[19, 7, 39, 21, 3, 16, 11, 2, 41, 36, 6].
One of the main limitations of the existing single im-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 1: Image de-raining results. (a) Input rainy image. (b)
Result from Fu et al. [7]. (c) DID-MDN. (d) Input rainy image.
(e) Result from Li et al. [36]. (f) DID-MDN. Note that [7] tends to
over de-rain the image while [36] tends to under de-rain the image.

age de-raining methods is that they are designed to deal
with certain types of rainy images and they do not effectively consider various shapes, scales and density of rain
drops into their algorithms. State-of-the-art de-raining algorithms such as [36, 7] often tend to over de-rain or under
de-rain the image if the rain condition present in the test image is not properly considered during training. For example,
when a rainy image shown in Fig. 1(a) is de-rained using the
method of Fu et al. [7], it tends to remove some important
parts in the de-rained image such as the right arm of the
person, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Similarly, when [36] is used
to de-rain the image shown in Fig. 1(d), it tends to under
de-rain the image and leaves some rain streaks in the output
de-rained image. Hence, more adaptive and efficient methods, that can deal with different rain density levels present
in the image, are needed.
One possible solution to this problem is to build a very
large training dataset with sufficient rain conditions containing various rain-density levels with different orientations
and scales. This has been achieved by Fu et al. [7] and
1695

