Cross-Domain Self-supervised Multi-task Feature Learning
using Synthetic Imagery
Zhongzheng Ren and Yong Jae Lee
University of California, Davis
Synthetic Image

Abstract
In human learning, it is common to use multiple sources
of information jointly. However, most existing feature learning approaches learn from only a single task. In this paper,
we propose a novel multi-task deep network to learn generalizable high-level visual representations. Since multitask learning requires annotations for multiple properties
of the same training instance, we look to synthetic images
to train our network. To overcome the domain difference
between real and synthetic data, we employ an unsupervised feature space domain adaptation method based on
adversarial learning. Given an input synthetic RGB image, our network simultaneously predicts its surface normal, depth, and instance contour, while also minimizing the
feature space domain differences between real and synthetic
data. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that
our network learns more transferable representations compared to single-task baselines. Our learned representation
produces state-of-the-art transfer learning results on PASCAL VOC 2007 classification and 2012 detection.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has brought tremendous
success across various visual recognition tasks [42, 23, 71].
A key reason for this phenomenon is that deep networks
trained on ImageNet [12] learn transferable representations
that are useful for other related tasks. However, building
large-scale, annotated datasets like ImageNet [12] is extremely costly both in time and money. Furthermore, while
benchmark datasets (e.g., MNIST [38], Caltech-101 [19],
Pascal VOC [18], ImageNet [12], MS COCO [40]) enable
breakthrough progress, it is only a matter of time before
models begin to overfit and the next bigger and more complex dataset needs to be constructed. The field of computer
vision is in need of a more scalable solution for learning
general-purpose visual representations.
Self-supervised learning is a promising direction, of
which there are currently three main types. The first uses visual cues within an image as supervision such as recovering

Depth

Surface Normal

Instance Contour

Figure 1. Main idea. A graphics engine can be used to easily render realistic synthetic images together with their various physical
property maps. Using these images, we train a self-supervised visual representation learning algorithm in a multi-task setting that
also adapts its features to real-world images.

the input from itself [67, 26], color from grayscale [73, 74],
equivariance of local patchs [49], or predicting the relative position of spatially-neighboring patches [48, 13]. The
second uses external sensory information such as motor
signals [2, 30] or sound [50, 3] to learn image transformations or categories. The third uses motion cues from
videos [68, 31, 46, 51]. Although existing methods have
demonstrated exciting results, these approaches often require delicate and cleverly-designed tasks in order to force
the model to learn semantic features. Moreover, most existing methods learn only a single task. While the model could
learn to perform really well at that task, it may in the process lose its focus on the actual intended task; i.e., to learn
high-level semantic features. Recent self-supervised methods that do learn from multiple tasks either require a complex model to account for the potentially large differences
in input data type (e.g., grayscale vs. color) and tasks (e.g.,
relative position vs. motion prediction) [14] or is designed
specifically for tabletop robotic tasks and thus has difficulty
generalizing to more complex real-world imagery [54].
In human learning, it is common to use multiple sources
of information jointly. Babies explore a new object by looking at it, touching it, and even tasting it; humans learn a
new language by listening, speaking, and writing in it. We

762

