Pose Transferrable Person Re-Identification
Jinxian Liu1∗ Bingbing Ni1∗† Yichao Yan1∗ Peng Zhou1 Shuo Cheng1 Jianguo Hu2
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmission,
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
Minivision
{liujinxian, nibingbing, yanyichao, zhoupengcv}@sjtu.edu.cn
acccheng94@gmail.com

hujianguo@minivision.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification (ReID) is an important task in
the field of intelligent security. A key challenge is how
to capture human pose variations, while existing benchmarks (i.e., Market1501, DukeMTMC-reID, CUHK03, etc.)
do NOT provide sufficient pose coverage to train a robust
ReID system. To address this issue, we propose a posetransferrable person ReID framework which utilizes posetransferred sample augmentations (i.e., with ID supervision) to enhance ReID model training. On one hand, novel
training samples with rich pose variations are generated via
transferring pose instances from MARS dataset, and they
are added into the target dataset to facilitate robust training. On the other hand, in addition to the conventional discriminator of GAN (i.e., to distinguish between REAL/FAKE
samples), we propose a novel guider sub-network which encourages the generated sample (i.e., with novel pose) towards better satisfying the ReID loss (i.e., cross-entropy
ReID loss, triplet ReID loss). In the meantime, an alternative optimization procedure is proposed to train the
proposed Generator-Guider-Discriminator network. Experimental results on Market-1501, DukeMTMC-reID and
CUHK03 show that our method achieves great performance
improvement, and outperforms most state-of-the-art methods without elaborate designing the ReID model.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match pedestrians across no-overlapping video cameras. It is a challenging task due to large variations in person pose, appearance,
illumination, occlusion, etc. In recent years, this task has
attracted a lot of attention for its great application potential
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. The motivation of proposed framework. Novel training
samples with rich pose variations are generated via transferring
pose instances from MARS dataset by the proposed pose-transfer
module (i.e., Generator-Guider-Discriminator) with ID information, which are utilized to enhance ReID model learning.

in smart video surveillance.
Pose variation is one of the key factors that prevent
us from learning a robust ReID model. Existing benchmarks (e.g., Market1501 [46], DukeMTMC-reID [51],
CUHK03 [18]) only contain a limited number of pose
changes, and therefore the learned ReID model is very easily over-fitted to certain poses. Many works have been
proposed to address the discriminative and robust training
issue for ReID. A large group of works focus on feature
learning [19, 44, 42, 17] for more discriminative representation, and many other methods focus on metric learning
[34, 19, 4, 2, 6].
Recently, deep convolutional networks (DCNN) based
methods have been extensively studied, including learning
deep feature [17, 42] and metric [2, 54] to cope with the
“large-number-of-class and few-sample” problem in ReID

4099

