Look, Imagine and Match:
Improving Textual-Visual Cross-Modal Retrieval with Generative Models
Jiuxiang Gu1 , Jianfei Cai2 , Shafiq Joty2 , Li Niu3 , Gang Wang4
ROSE Lab, Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Rice University, USA 4 Alibaba AI Labs, Hangzhou, China

1

{jgu004, asjfcai, srjoty}@ntu.edu.sg, {ustcnewly, gangwang6}@gmail.com

Abstract
Textual-visual cross-modal retrieval has been a hot research topic in both computer vision and natural language
processing communities. Learning appropriate representations for multi-modal data is crucial for the cross-modal
retrieval performance. Unlike existing image-text retrieval
approaches that embed image-text pairs as single feature
vectors in a common representational space, we propose to
incorporate generative processes into the cross-modal feature embedding, through which we are able to learn not only
the global abstract features but also the local grounded features. Extensive experiments show that our framework can
well match images and sentences with complex content, and
achieve the state-of-the-art cross-modal retrieval results on
MSCOCO dataset.

1. Introduction
As we are entering the era of big data, data from different modalities such as text, image, and video are growing at
an unprecedented rate. Such multi-modal data exhibit heterogeneous properties, making it difficult for users to search
information of interest effectively and efficiently. This paper focuses on the problem in multi-modal information retrieval, which is to retrieve the images (resp. texts) that are
relevant to a given textual (resp. image) query. The fundamental challenge in cross-modal retrieval lies in the heterogeneity of different modalities of data. Thus, the learning
of a common representation shared by data with different
modalities plays the key role in cross-modal retrieval.
In recent years, a great deal of research has been devoted
to bridge the heterogeneity gap between different modalities [14, 11, 15, 7, 36, 6, 5]. For textural-visual cross-modal
embedding, the common way is to first encode individual
modalities into their respective features, and then map them
into a common semantic space, which is often optimized via

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of our proposed crossmodal feature embedding with generative models. The
cross-modal retrievals (Image-to-Text and Text-to-Image)
are shown in different color. The two blue boxes are crossmodal data, and the generated data are shown in two dashed
yellow clouds.
a ranking loss that encourages the similarity of the mapped
features of ground-truth image-text pairs to be greater than
that of any other negative pair. Once the common representation is obtained, the relevance / similarity between the
two modalities can be easily measured by computing the
distance (e.g. l2 ) between their representations in the common space.
Although the feature representations in the learned common representation space have been successfully used to
describe high-level semantic concepts of multi-modal data,
they are not sufficient to retrieve images with detailed local
similarity (e.g., spatial layout) or sentences with word-level
similarity. In contrast, as humans, we can relate a textual
(resp. image) query to relevant images (resp. texts) more
accurately, if we pay more attention to the finer details of
the images (resp. texts). In other words, if we can ground
the representation of one modality to the objects in the other

7181

