Unsupervised Learning of Monocular Depth Estimation and Visual Odometry
with Deep Feature Reconstruction
Huangying Zhan1,2 , Ravi Garg1,2 , Chamara Saroj Weerasekera1,2 , Kejie Li1,2 , Harsh Agarwal3 , Ian Reid1,2
1
The University of Adelaide
2
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
3
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU)
{huangying.zhan, ravi.garg, chamara.weerasekera, kejie.li, ian.reid}@adelaide.edu.au
harsh.agarwal.eee14@iitbhu.ac.in

Abstract
Despite learning based methods showing promising results in single view depth estimation and visual odometry,
most existing approaches treat the tasks in a supervised
manner. Recent approaches to single view depth estimation explore the possibility of learning without full supervision via minimizing photometric error. In this paper, we
explore the use of stereo sequences for learning depth and
visual odometry. The use of stereo sequences enables the
use of both spatial (between left-right pairs) and temporal
(forward backward) photometric warp error, and constrains
the scene depth and camera motion to be in a common, realworld scale. At test time our framework is able to estimate
single view depth and two-view odometry from a monocular sequence. We also show how we can improve on a standard photometric warp loss by considering a warp of deep
features. We show through extensive experiments that: (i)
jointly training for single view depth and visual odometry
improves depth prediction because of the additional constraint imposed on depths and achieves competitive results
for visual odometry; (ii) deep feature-based warping loss
improves upon simple photometric warp loss for both single view depth estimation and visual odometry. Our method
outperforms existing learning based methods on the KITTI
driving dataset in both tasks. The source code is available at https://github.com/Huangying-Zhan/
Depth-VO-Feat.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D structure of a scene from a single image is a fundamental question in machine perception. The related problem of inferring ego-motion from a
sequence of images is likewise a fundamental problem in
robotics, known as visual odometry estimation. These two

Figure 1. Training instance example. The known camera motion
between stereo cameras TL→R constrains the Depth CNN and
Odometry CNN to predict depth and relative camera pose with
actual scale.

problems are crucial in robotic vision research since accurate estimation of depth and odometry based on images has
many important applications, most notably for autonomous
vehicles.
While both problems have been the subject of research
in robotic vision since the origins of the discipline, with
numerous geometric solutions proposed, in recent times
a number of works have cast depth estimation and visual
odometry as supervised learning problems [1][5][21][22].
These methods attempt to predict depth or odometry using models that have been trained from a large dataset with
ground truth data. However, these annotations are expensive to obtain, e.g. expensive laser or depth camera to collect depths. In a recent work Garg et al.[6] recognised
that these tasks are amenable to an unsupervised framework
where the authors propose to use photometric warp error as
a self-supervised signal to train a convolutional neural network (ConvNet / CNN) for the single view depth estimation. Following [6] methods like [9][19][41] use the photometric error based supervision to learn depth estimators

340

