Generative Adversarial Perturbations
Omid Poursaeed1,2
Isay Katsman1
Bicheng Gao3,1
Serge Belongie1,2
1
2
3
Cornell University
Cornell Tech
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{op63,isk22,bg455,sjb344}@cornell.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose novel generative models for
creating adversarial examples, slightly perturbed images
resembling natural images but maliciously crafted to fool
pre-trained models. We present trainable deep neural networks for transforming images to adversarial perturbations. Our proposed models can produce image-agnostic
and image-dependent perturbations for targeted and nontargeted attacks. We also demonstrate that similar architectures can achieve impressive results in fooling both classification and semantic segmentation models, obviating the
need for hand-crafting attack methods for each task. Using extensive experiments on challenging high-resolution
datasets such as ImageNet and Cityscapes, we show that
our perturbations achieve high fooling rates with small perturbation norms. Moreover, our attacks are considerably
faster than current iterative methods at inference time.

iterative approaches proposed in the literature, we consider
trainable networks for learning the universal perturbation.
From another viewpoint, adversarial attacks can be categorized as targeted and non-targeted. In targeted adversarial attacks, we seek adversarial images that can change
the prediction of a model to a specific target label. In nontargeted attacks we want to generate adversarial examples
for which the model’s prediction is any label other than
the ground-truth label. Considering all the possible combinations, we can have four types of adversarial examples:
targeted universal, non-targeted universal, targeted imagedependent and non-targeted image-dependent. We elaborate on each of them in the following sections.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We present a unifying framework for creating universal and image-dependent perturbations for both classification and semantic segmentation tasks, considering targeted and non-targeted attacks with L∞ and L2
norms as the metric.

1. Introduction
In spite of their impressive performance on challenging
tasks in computer vision such as image classification [25,
49, 51, 52, 20]and semantic segmentation [30, 5, 9, 59, 60],
deep neural networks are shown to be highly vulnerable to
adversarial examples, i.e. carefully crafted samples looking similar to natural images but designed to mislead a pretrained model. This phenomenon was first studied in [53],
and may hinder the applications of deep networks on visual
tasks, or pose security concerns.
Two types of adversarial perturbations can be considered: Universal and Image-dependent. Image-dependent
perturbations can vary for different images in the dataset. To
generate these perturbations, we require a function which
takes a natural image, and outputs an adversarial image.
We approximate this function with a deep neural network.
Universal perturbations are fixed perturbations which when
added to natural images can significantly degrade the accuracy of the pre-trianed network. In this case, we seek a perturbation U with small magnitude such that for most natural
images x, x + U can fool the pre-trained model. Unlike the

• We improve the state-of-the-art performance in universal perturbations by leveraging generative models in
lieu of current iterative methods.
• We are the first to present effective targeted universal
perturbations. This is the most challenging task as we
are constrained to have a single perturbation pattern
and the prediction should match a specific target.
• Our attacks are considerably faster than iterative and
optimization-based methods at inference time. We can
generate perturbations in the order of milliseconds.

2. Related Work
2.1. Universal Perturbations
First introduced in [35], universal perturbations are fixed
perturbations which after being added to natural images can
mislead a pre-trained model for most of the images. The
algorithm in [35] iterates over samples in a target set, and
gradually builds the universal perturbation by aggregating
image-dependent perturbations and normalizing the result.
14422

