Weakly Supervised Facial Action Unit Recognition through Adversarial Training
Guozhu Peng, Shangfei Wang∗
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
gzpeng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, sfwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Current works on facial action unit (AU) recognition
typically require fully AU-annotated facial images for supervised AU classifier training. AU annotation is a timeconsuming, expensive, and error-prone process. While AUs
are hard to annotate, facial expression is relatively easy
to label. Furthermore, there exist strong probabilistic dependencies between expressions and AUs as well as dependencies among AUs. Such dependencies are referred to as
domain knowledge. In this paper, we propose a novel AU
recognition method that learns AU classifiers from domain
knowledge and expression-annotated facial images through
adversarial training. Specifically, we first generate pseudo
AU labels according to the probabilistic dependencies between expressions and AUs as well as correlations among
AUs summarized from domain knowledge. Then we propose
a weakly supervised AU recognition method via an adversarial process, in which we simultaneously train two models: a recognition model R, which learns AU classifiers,
and a discrimination model D, which estimates the probability that AU labels generated from domain knowledge
rather than the recognized AU labels from R. The training procedure for R maximizes the probability of D making
a mistake. By leveraging the adversarial mechanism, the
distribution of recognized AUs is closed to AU prior distribution from domain knowledge. Furthermore, the proposed
weakly supervised AU recognition can be extended to semisupervised learning scenarios with partially AU-annotated
images. Experimental results on three benchmark databases demonstrate that the proposed method successfully leverages the summarized domain knowledge to weakly supervised AU classifier learning through an adversarial process,
and thus achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Facial behavior is one of the most important channels for
emotional communication between humans. Automatic expression analysis has attracted increasing attention in recent
∗ This is the corresponding author.

years due to its wide potential in human-robot interaction.
Both expression categories and facial action units are adopted to describe facial behavior. For expression categories,
Ekman’s six universal expression categories (i.e., anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise) are frequently
used. In addition to the six basic expressions, people express many other complex expressions, such as hatred and
awe. Some expressions even can not be described verbally.
Until now, there have been no established complete expression categories. Unlike expression categories, which only describe several limited facial behaviors, the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [6] describes facial behavior as
combinations of facial action units (AUs), which are related
to the contraction of a set of facial muscles. Using FACS, nearly any facial behavior can be deconstructed into the
specific AUs and their temporal segments.
Most AU recognition includes supervised learning, in
which the fully AU-annotated training images are required.Due to subtle facial appearance changes and significant subject-dependent variations, automatic AU recognition is rather challenging. Many fully AU-annotated facial
images would be helpful for automatic AU recognition, but
collecting this data is time-consuming and error prone, if
not impossible. Since AUs are local, subtle, and difficult
to recognize, ground truth AU labels should be provided
by qualified FACS experts. Compared to AUs, expression
categories are easier to annotate, because expression categories describe global facial behavior, and people recognize global changes more quickly and accurately than local
variations. Furthermore, expression categories and facial
action units are closely related, since both are used to describe facial behavior. For instance, Du et al. [4] found that
99% of the time, people show happiness by raising their
cheeks and stretching their mouths. The Emotional Facial
Action Coding System (EMFACS) [7] lists emotion-related
AU combinations. Prkachin et al. [19] found that pain intensity can be inferred from the combination of several AUs
(i.e., AU4, AU6, AU7, AU9, AU10 and AU43). In addition
to expression-dependent AU relations, there are expressionindependent AU relations, such as the co-existence between
AU1 and AU2, due to the constraints of facial muscles.
12188

