PoseTrack: A Benchmark for Human Pose Estimation and Tracking
Mykhaylo Andriluka4,∗∗ Umar Iqbal2 Eldar Insafutdinov1 Leonid Pishchulin1
Anton Milan3,∗ Juergen Gall2 Bernt Schiele1
1

2

MPI for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
Computer Vision Group, University of Bonn, Germany
3
Amazon Research
4
Google Research

Figure 1: Sample video from our benchmark. We select sequences that represent crowded scenes with multiple articulated
people engaging in various dynamic activities and provide dense annotations of person tracks, body joints and ignore regions.

Abstract
Existing systems for video-based pose estimation and
tracking struggle to perform well on realistic videos with
multiple people and often fail to output body-pose trajectories consistent over time. To address this shortcoming
this paper introduces PoseTrack which is a new large-scale
benchmark for video-based human pose estimation and articulated tracking. Our new benchmark encompasses three
tasks focusing on i) single-frame multi-person pose estimation, ii) multi-person pose estimation in videos, and iii)
multi-person articulated tracking. To establish the benchmark, we collect, annotate and release a new dataset that
features videos with multiple people labeled with person
tracks and articulated pose. A public centralized evaluation server is provided to allow the research community
to evaluate on a held-out test set. Furthermore, we conduct an extensive experimental study on recent approaches
to articulated pose tracking and provide analysis of the
strengths and weaknesses of the state of the art. We envision
that the proposed benchmark will stimulate productive research both by providing a large and representative training
dataset as well as providing a platform to objectively evaluate and compare the proposed methods. The benchmark is
freely accessible at https://posetrack.net/.

∗ This work was done prior to joining Amazon.
∗∗ This work was done prior to joining Google.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has recently made significant
progress on the tasks of single person pose estimation in
individual frames [46, 45, 44, 4, 49, 15, 18, 31, 2, 36] and
videos [34, 6, 21, 12] as well as multi-person pose estimation in monocular images [35, 18, 20, 3, 32]. This progress
has been facilitated by the use of deep learning-based architectures [41, 14] and by the availability of large-scale
benchmark datasets such as “MPII Human Pose” [1] and
“MS COCO” [28]. Importantly, these benchmark datasets
not only have provided extensive training sets required for
training of deep learning based approaches, but also established detailed metrics for direct and fair performance comparison across numerous competing approaches.
Despite significant progress of single frame based multiperson pose estimation, the problem of articulated multiperson body joint tracking in monocular video remains
largely unaddressed. Although there exist training sets for
special scenarios, such as sports [51, 23] and upright frontal
people [6], these benchmarks focus on single isolated individuals and are still limited in their scope and variability
of represented activities and body motions. In this work,
we aim to fill this gap by establishing a new large-scale,
high-quality benchmark for video-based multi-person pose
estimation and articulated tracking.
Our benchmark is organized around three related tasks
focusing on single-frame multi-person pose estimation,
multi-person pose estimation in video, and multi-person articulated tracking. While the main focus of the dataset is
15167

