Im2Struct: Recovering 3D Shape Structure from a Single RGB Image
Chengjie Niu
Jun Li
Kai Xu*
National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
We propose to recover 3D shape structures from single
RGB images, where structure refers to shape parts represented by cuboids and part relations encompassing connectivity and symmetry. Given a single 2D image with an object depicted, our goal is automatically recover a cuboid
structure of the object parts as well as their mutual relations. We develop a convolutional-recursive auto-encoder
comprised of structure parsing of a 2D image followed by
structure recovering of a cuboid hierarchy. The encoder
is achieved by a multi-scale convolutional network trained
with the task of shape contour estimation, thereby learning to discern object structures in various forms and scales.
The decoder fuses the features of the structure parsing network and the original image, and recursively decodes a hierarchy of cuboids. Since the decoder network is learned
to recover part relations including connectivity and symmetry explicitly, the plausibility and generality of part structure recovery can be ensured. The two networks are jointly
trained using the training data of contour-mask and cuboidstructure pairs. Such pairs are generated by rendering
stock 3D CAD models coming with part segmentation. Our
method achieves unprecedentedly faithful and detailed recovery of diverse 3D part structures from single-view 2D
images. We demonstrate two applications of our method including structure-guided completion of 3D volumes reconstructed from single-view images and structure-aware interactive editing of 2D images.

1. Introduction
The last few years have witnessed a continued interest in
single-view image-based 3D modeling [2, 4, 5]. The performance of this task has been dramatically boosted, due to the
tremendous success of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN) on image-based learning tasks [10]. The existing
deep models, however, have so far been mainly targeting
the output of volumetric representation of 3D shapes [2].
Such models are essentially learned to map an input 2D image to a 3D image (voxel occupancy of a 3D shape in a 3D
* Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

Figure 1: 3D shape structures (2nd column) recovered from
photos of household objects (1st column). Top row: The
inferred 3D shape structure can be used to complete and
refine the volumetric shape estimated from the image using
existing methods [22]. Bottom row: The structure is used
to assist structure-aware image editing, where our cuboid
structure is used as an editing proxy [25].

volume). Some compelling results have been demonstrated.
While enjoying the high capacity of deep models in
learning the image-to-image mapping, the 3D volumes reconstructed by these methods lose an important information of 3D shapes – shape topology or part structure. Once
a 3D shape is converted into a volumetric representation,
it would be hard to recover its topology and structure, especially when there exist topological defects in the reconstructed volume. Shape structure, encompassing part composition and part relations, has been found highly important
to semantic 3D shape understanding and editing [15]. Inferring a part segmentation for a 3D shape (surface or volumetric model) is known to be difficult [8]. Even if a segmentation is given, it is still challenging to reason about part
relations such as connection, symmetry, parallelism, etc.
We advocate learning a deep neural network that directly
recovers 3D shape structure of an object, from a single RGB
image. The extracted structure can be used for enhancing
the volumetric reconstruction obtained by existing methods,
facilitating structure-aware editing of the reconstructed 3D
shapes, and even enabling high-level editing of the input
images (see Fig. 1). However, directly mapping an image

4521

