Interactive Image Segmentation with Latent Diversity
Zhuwen Li

Qifeng Chen
Intel Labs

Abstract
Interactive image segmentation is characterized by multimodality. When the user clicks on a door, do they intend to
select the door or the whole house? We present an end-toend learning approach to interactive image segmentation
that tackles this ambiguity. Our architecture couples two
convolutional networks. The first is trained to synthesize a
diverse set of plausible segmentations that conform to the
user’s input. The second is trained to select among these.
By selecting a single solution, our approach retains compatibility with existing interactive segmentation interfaces.
By synthesizing multiple diverse solutions before selecting
one, the architecture is given the representational power to
explore the multimodal solution space. We show that the
proposed approach outperforms existing methods for interactive image segmentation, including prior work that applied convolutional networks to this problem, while being
much faster.

1. Introduction
Interactive image segmentation is an essential building
block of advanced image editing applications. Research
on interactive segmentation dates back decades, with early
work focusing on boundary tracing techniques [18, 32].
Modern approaches aim to classify image regions as foreground or background, treating user input as ground-truth
labels. The classification view rose to prominence with the
graph cut formulation of Boykov and Jolly [4]. Subsequent
work introduced iterative fitting of foreground and background distributions [37], alternative distance metrics for
label propagation [12, 2, 9, 13, 35], and more powerful random field models for pixel-level labeling [22, 8].
From a machine learning perspective, interactive image
segmentation can be viewed as a few-shot active learning
problem. From this standpoint, the system uses a classifier with some form of prior knowledge of objects and their
appearance in images. The classifier is then given groundtruth labels (‘foreground’, ‘background’) for a very small
number of pixels in a new image. This information must
be used to classify all the other pixels in the image. This

Vladlen Koltun

perspective highlights two interrelated challenges: (1) how
to acquire, represent, and apply prior knowledge about object appearance, and (2) how to minimize the amount of
ground-truth data (in the form of foreground/background
clicks) that the user must provide at test time.
Until recently, prior knowledge about object appearance
was encoded primarily in hand-crafted features and distance
metrics [4, 37, 12, 2, 9, 13, 35, 5, 24, 8]. At present, convolutional networks are the starting point for representing
prior knowledge about object appearance [26, 25, 30]. Indeed, recent work has shown that convolutional networks
can be applied to interactive segmentation and do yield significant gains over prior approaches [41]. Our work builds
on these findings and goes further by introducing different
architectures and loss functions. Our driving motivation is
to make progress on the second challenge: minimizing the
number of labeled samples (clicks) that the user must provide to achieve a desired level of accuracy.
We focus on a structural issue that becomes apparent
when the number of samples provided by the user is small.
The elusive “holy grail” of interactive image segmentation
is one-shot selection: the user simply points to an object or a
collection of objects by clicking a single pixel, and the system segments the desired region. Considering this scenario
clarifies that the problem is ill-posed and characterized by
multimodality. When the user clicks on a person’s jacket,
is the intention to select the jacket, the whole person, or the
group that this person is part of? This multimodality is at
the center of our work.
In this paper, we present an architecture that tackles the
multimodality problem head-on. The first ingredient is a
single fully-convolutional network that is trained to synthesize a diverse set of solutions. This network takes a representation of the image and the user’s input and produces
a set of possible segmentations. The training loss encourages diversity in the synthesized solutions, with the goal
that each plausible segmentation is represented by at least
one of the proposals. This gives the network the representational power it needs to deal with the multimodality of
the solution space. However, this is not sufficient because
the system must still produce a single segmentation in order to be compatible with existing image editing interfaces.
1577

