Long-Term On-Board Prediction of People in Traffic Scenes under Uncertainty
Apratim Bhattacharyya, Mario Fritz, Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
{abhattac, mfritz, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Probability
Last Observation: t
Prediction: t + 5
Prediction: t + 10
Prediction: t + 15
Figure 1: Our predictive distribution upto t + 15 frames. The heat map encodes the probability of a certain pixel belonging to
the person. The variance of the distribution encodes the uncertainty. Row 1: Low uncertainty. Row 2: High uncertainty.

Abstract
Progress towards advanced systems for assisted and autonomous driving is leveraging recent advances in recognition and segmentation methods. Yet, we are still facing
challenges in bringing reliable driving to inner cities, as
those are composed of highly dynamic scenes observed from
a moving platform at considerable speeds. Anticipation becomes a key element in order to react timely and prevent
accidents. In this paper we argue that it is necessary to
predict at least 1 second and we thus propose a new model
that jointly predicts ego motion and people trajectories over
such large time horizons. We pay particular attention to
modeling the uncertainty of our estimates arising from the
non-deterministic nature of natural traffic scenes. Our experimental results show that it is indeed possible to predict
people trajectories at the desired time horizons and that our
uncertainty estimates are informative of the prediction error.
We also show that both sequence modeling of trajectories as
well as our novel method of long term odometry prediction
are essential for best performance.

1. Introduction
While methods for automatic scene understanding have
progressed rapidly over the past years, it is just one key
ingredient for assisted and autonomous driving. Human
capabilities go beyond inference of scene structure and en-

compass a broader type of scene understanding that also
lends itself to anticipating the future.
Anticipation is key in preventing collisions by predicting
future movements of dynamic agents e.g. people and cars in
inner cities. It is also the key to operating at practical safety
distances. Without anticipation, domain knowledge and experience, drivers would have to maintain an equally large
safety distance to all objects, which is clearly impractical in
dense and cluttered inner city traffic. Additionally, anticipation enables decision making, e.g. passing cars and pedestrians while respecting the safety of all participants. Even
at conservative and careful driving speeds of 25miles/hour
(∼ 40km/hour) in residential areas, the distance traveled
in 1 second corresponds roughly to the breaking distance.
Anticipation of traffic scenes on a time horizons of at least 1
second would therefore enable safe driving at such speeds.
We propose the first approach to predict people (pedestrians including cyclists) trajectories from on-board cameras
over such long-time horizons with uncertainty estimates.
Due to the particular importance for safety, we are focusing
on the people class. While pedestrian trajectory prediction
has been approached in prior work, we propose the first approach for on-board prediction. As predictions are made
with respect to the moving vehicle, we formulate a novel
two stream model for long-term person bounding box prediction and vehicle ego motion (odometry). In contrast to prior
work, we model both aleatoric (observation) uncertainty and
epistemic (model) uncertainty [4] in order to arrive at an
estimate of the overall uncertainty.

4194

