Adversarial Complementary Learning for Weakly Supervised Object
Localization

1

Xiaolin Zhang1 Yunchao Wei2 ∗ Jiashi Feng3 Yi Yang1 Thomas Huang2
CAI, University of Technology Sydney 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
National University of Singapore
{Xiaolin.Zhang-3@student, Yi.Yang@}uts.edu.au

elefjia@nus.edu.sg

{yunchao,t-huang1}@illinois.edu

Weakly Supervised Object Localization (WSOL) refers
to learning object locations in a given image using the
image-level labels. Currently, WSOL has drawn increasing attention since it does not require expensive bounding
box annotations for training and thus can save much labour
compared to fully-supervised counterparts [32, 13, 12].

GAP

Classifier A

GAP

Classifier B

fuse

erase

濖濡濡瀆

1. Introduction

濖濡濡瀆

In this work, we propose Adversarial Complementary
Learning (ACoL) to automatically localize integral objects
of semantic interest with weak supervision. We first mathematically prove that class localization maps can be obtained by directly selecting the class-specific feature maps
of the last convolutional layer, which paves a simple way
to identify object regions. We then present a simple network architecture including two parallel-classifiers for object localization. Specifically, we leverage one classification branch to dynamically localize some discriminative object regions during the forward pass. Although it is usually
responsive to sparse parts of the target objects, this classifier can drive the counterpart classifier to discover new
and complementary object regions by erasing its discovered
regions from the feature maps. With such an adversarial
learning, the two parallel-classifiers are forced to leverage
complementary object regions for classification and can finally generate integral object localization together. The
merits of ACoL are mainly two-fold: 1) it can be trained
in an end-to-end manner; 2) dynamically erasing enables
the counterpart classifier to discover complementary object
regions more effectively. We demonstrate the superiority of
our ACoL approach in a variety of experiments. In particular, the Top-1 localization error rate on the ILSVRC dataset
is 45.14%, which is the new state-of-the-art.

濖濡濡瀆

Abstract

Figure 1: An illustration of the proposed ACoL method.
We prove object localization maps can be conveniently obtained during feed-forward pass. Based on this, we design
the parallel adversarial classiﬁer architecture, where complementary regions (the head and hind legs vs. forelegs) are
discovered by two classiﬁers (A and B) via adversarial erasing feature maps. GAP refers to global average pooling.
It is a very challenging task to learn deep models for locating objects of interest using only image-level supervision. Some pioneer works [48, 45] have been proposed to
generate class-speciﬁc localization maps according to pretrained convolutional classiﬁcation networks. For example, Zhou et al. [48] modiﬁed classiﬁcation networks (e.g.,
AlexNet [21] and VGG-16 [34]) via replacing a few highlevel layers by a global average pooling layer [23] and a
fully connected layer, which can aggregate the features of
the last convolutional layer to generate discriminative class
activation maps (CAM) for the localization purpose. However, we observe that some critical issues exist in such solutions, mainly including: 1) over-relying on category-wise
discriminative features for image classiﬁcation; 2) failing to
localize integral regions of the target objects densely within
an image. The two issues are mainly due to the classiﬁcation networks are inclined to identify patterns from the most
discriminative parts for recognition, which inevitably leads
to the second issue. For instance, given an image containing
a cat, the network can recognize it by identifying the head
regardless of the remaining parts such as body and legs.
To tackle such issues, Wei et al. [39] proposed an ad-

∗ Corresponding Author

1325

