Boosting Self-Supervised Learning via Knowledge Transfer
Mehdi Noroozi1 Ananth Vinjimoor2 Paolo Favaro1 Hamed Pirsiavash2
University of Bern1 University of Maryland, Baltimore County2
{noroozi,favaro}@inf.unibe.ch

{kan8,hpirsiav@umbc.edu}

Abstract
In self-supervised learning, one trains a model to solve a
so-called pretext task on a dataset without the need for human annotation. The main objective, however, is to transfer
this model to a target domain and task. Currently, the most
effective transfer strategy is fine-tuning, which restricts one
to use the same model or parts thereof for both pretext and
target tasks. In this paper, we present a novel framework
for self-supervised learning that overcomes limitations in
designing and comparing different tasks, models, and data
domains. In particular, our framework decouples the structure of the self-supervised model from the final task-specific
fine-tuned model. This allows us to: 1) quantitatively assess previously incompatible models including handcrafted
features; 2) show that deeper neural network models can
learn better representations from the same pretext task; 3)
transfer knowledge learned with a deep model to a shallower one and thus boost its learning. We use this framework to design a novel self-supervised task, which achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the common benchmarks in
PASCAL VOC 2007, ILSVRC12 and Places by a significant
margin. Our learned features shrink the mAP gap between
models trained via self-supervised learning and supervised
learning from 5.9% to 2.6% in object detection on PASCAL
VOC 2007.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has gained considerable
popularity since it has been introduced in computer vision
[7, 39, 23, 20]. Much of the popularity stems from the fact
that SSL methods learn features without using manual annotation by introducing a so-called pretext task. Feature
representations learned through SSL in computer vision are
often transferred to a target data domain and a target task,
such as object classification, detection and semantic segmentation in PASCAL VOC. These learned features implicitly define a metric on the data, i.e., which data samples are
similar and which ones are dissimilar. Thus, the main objective of a pretext task is to learn a metric that makes images

Figure 1: Most current self-supervised learning approaches
use the same architecture both in pre-training and finetuning. We develop a knowledge transfer method to decouple these two architectures. This allows us to use a deeper
model in pre-training.

of the same object category similar and images of different categories dissimilar. A natural question is then: How
do we design such a task? Some SSL approaches define
pretext tasks through explicit desirable invariances of the
metric [32, 33, 10, 23] or such that they implicitly require a
good object representation [7, 21, 39].
Even if we had a clear strategy to relate pretext tasks
to a target task, comparing and understanding which one is
better presents challenges. Most of the recent approaches
transfer their learned features to a common supervised target task. This step, however, is complicated by the need to
use the same model (e.g., AlexNet [17]) to solve both tasks.
This clearly poses a major limitation on the design choices.
For example, some pretext tasks may exploit several data
domains (e.g., sound, text, videos), or may exploit different datasets sizes and formats, or might require very deep
neural networks to be solved.
There is thus the need to build better representations by
exploring and comparing difficult, but learnable [29], pre19359

