Deep Back-Projection Networks For Super-Resolution
Muhammad Haris1 , Greg Shakhnarovich2 , and Norimichi Ukita1
1
Toyota Technological Institute, Japan 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, United States
{mharis, ukita}@toyota-ti.ac.jp, greg@ttic.edu

Abstract
The feed-forward architectures of recently proposed
deep super-resolution networks learn representations of
low-resolution inputs, and the non-linear mapping from
those to high-resolution output. However, this approach
does not fully address the mutual dependencies of low- and
high-resolution images. We propose Deep Back-Projection
Networks (DBPN), that exploit iterative up- and downsampling layers, providing an error feedback mechanism
for projection errors at each stage. We construct mutuallyconnected up- and down-sampling stages each of which
represents different types of image degradation and highresolution components. We show that extending this idea
to allow concatenation of features across up- and downsampling stages (Dense DBPN) allows us to reconstruct
further improve super-resolution, yielding superior results
and in particular establishing new state of the art results
for large scaling factors such as 8× across multiple data
sets.

1. Introduction
Significant progress in deep learning for vision [15, 13,
5, 39, 26, 33, 17] has recently been propagating to the field
of super-resolution (SR) [19, 29, 6, 12, 20, 21, 24, 42].
Single image SR is an ill-posed inverse problem where
the aim is to recover a high-resolution (HR) image from
a low-resolution (LR) image. A currently typical approach is to construct an HR image by learning non-linear
LR-to-HR mapping, implemented as a deep neural network [6, 7, 37, 24, 21, 22, 42]. These networks compute
a sequence of feature maps from the LR image, culminating with one or more upsampling layers to increase resolution and finally construct the HR image. In contrast to
this purely feed-forward approach, human visual system is
believed to use a feedback connection to simply guide the
task for the relevant results [9, 23, 25]. Perhaps hampered
by lack of such feedback, the current SR networks with only
feed-forward connections have difficulty in representing the
LR to HR relation, especially for large scaling factors.

Figure 1. Super-resolution result on 8× enlargement. PSNR: LapSRN [24] (15.25 dB), EDSR [30] (15.33 dB), and Ours (16.63 dB)

On the other hand, feedback connections were used effectively by one of the early SR algorithms, the iterative
back-projection [18]. It iteratively computes the reconstruction error then fuses it back to tune the HR image intensity.
Although it has been proven to improve the image quality,
the result still suffers from ringing effect and chessboard effect [4]. Moreover, this method is sensitive to choices of
parameters such as the number of iterations and the blur operator, leading to variability in results.
Inspired by [18], we construct an end-to-end trainable
architecture based on the idea of iterative up- and downsampling: Deep Back-Projection Networks (DBPN). Our
networks successfully perform large scaling factors, as
shown in Fig. 1. Our work provides the following contributions:
(1) Error feedback. We propose an iterative errorcorrecting feedback mechanism for SR, which calculates
both up- and down-projection errors to guide the reconstruction for obtaining better results. Here, the projection errors
are used to characterize or constraint the features in early
layers. Detailed explanation can be seen in Section 3.
(2) Mutually connected up- and down-sampling stages.
Feed-forward architectures, which is considered as a oneway mapping, only map rich representations of the input to
11664

