Mean-Variance Loss for Deep Age Estimation from a Face
Hongyu Pan1,2 , Hu Han∗,1 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , and Xilin Chen1,2
1 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3 CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
hongyu.pan@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {hanhu,sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Age estimation from facial images has broad application
scenarios, such as video surveillance, social networking,
and human-computer interaction. Studies on age estimation
from face images can be dated back to 1994 [28], in which
different facial regions and skin wrinkles were used to estimate age group. A widely used feature representation by the
early age estimation approaches is the biologically inspired
features (BIF) [14], which reported much better accuracy
than the traditional descriptors, such as LBP [34], Ga∗ H. Han is the corresponding author.

= 15.5,

age: 18

(µ = 15.5, σ = 4.4)

0

= 4.4

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Age

Estimated age distribution

= 18,

Probabolity

Estimated age distribution

Probabolity

Age estimation has wide applications in video surveillance, social networking, and human-computer interaction. Many of the published approaches simply treat age
estimation as an exact age regression problem, and thus do
not leverage a distribution’s robustness in representing labels with ambiguity such as ages. In this paper, we propose
a new loss function, called mean-variance loss, for robust
age estimation via distribution learning. Specifically, the
mean-variance loss consists of a mean loss, which penalizes
difference between the mean of the estimated age distribution and the ground-truth age, and a variance loss, which
penalizes the variance of the estimated age distribution to
ensure a concentrated distribution. The proposed meanvariance loss and softmax loss are jointly embedded into
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for age estimation.
Experimental results on the FG-NET, MORPH Album II,
CLAP2016, and AADB databases show that the proposed
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art age estimation
methods by a large margin, and generalizes well to image
aesthetics assessment.1

before mean-variance loss after
= 3.0

(µ = 18.0, σ = 3.0)

0

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Age

Figure 1. An example of age distribution learning using the proposed mean-variance loss. Our mean-variance loss aims to learn
an age distribution which has not only a mean value close to the
ground-truth age (red dotted line), but also a concentrated shape.

bor [8], and SIFT [32]. In recent years, CNNs have shown
great success on various computer vision tasks, such as face
recognition [44, 36], object detection [37, 31], and scene
segmentation [19]. Age estimation using CNNs has also
obtained increasing attentions [23, 5], particularly with the
promotion of the ChaLearn looking at people challenge1 .
Existing approaches for age estimation can be grouped
into three categories: classification based methods, regression based methods, and ranking based methods. Classification based methods are often used to estimate the age group
of the subject in a face image [29, 48], which treat different
ages or age groups as independent classes; therefore, the
costs of classifying a young subject as middle-aged subject
and old subject are the same. Apparently, such a modeling
method is not optimum for the age estimation task.
Regression based methods are widely used to estimate
the exact age of the subject in a face image [13, 7, 45].
Many of the existing regression based methods use a Euclidean loss (L2 loss), which penalizes the differences between the estimated ages and the ground-truth ages. However, this type of loss defined based on a single image does
not explicitly make use of the ordinal relationship among
face images with individual ages.
In recent years, a few ranking based methods were pro-

1 We

plan to put the code into public domain: http://www.
escience.cn/people/hhan/publication.html

1 http://chalearnlap.cvc.uab.es

15285

