Path Aggregation Network for Instance Segmentation
Shu Liu†

Lu Qi†
†

Haifang Qin§

Jianping Shi‡

Jiaya Jia†,[

The Chinese University of Hong Kong § Peking University
‡
SenseTime Research [ YouTu Lab, Tencent

{sliu, luqi, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

qhfpku@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The way that information propagates in neural networks
is of great importance. In this paper, we propose Path Aggregation Network (PANet) aiming at boosting information
flow in proposal-based instance segmentation framework.
Specifically, we enhance the entire feature hierarchy with
accurate localization signals in lower layers by bottom-up
path augmentation, which shortens the information path between lower layers and topmost feature. We present adaptive feature pooling, which links feature grid and all feature
levels to make useful information in each level propagate
directly to following proposal subnetworks. A complementary branch capturing different views for each proposal is
created to further improve mask prediction.
These improvements are simple to implement, with subtle
extra computational overhead. Yet they are useful and make
our PANet reach the 1st place in the COCO 2017 Challenge Instance Segmentation task and the 2nd place in Object Detection task without large-batch training. PANet is
also state-of-the-art on MVD and Cityscapes.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is one of the most important and
challenging tasks. It aims to predict class labels and pixelwise instance masks to localize a varying number of instances presented in each image. This task widely benefits
autonomous vehicles, robotics, video surveillance, to name
a few.
With the help of deep convolutional neural networks,
several frameworks for instance segmentation, e.g., [21, 33,
3, 38], were proposed where performance grows rapidly
[12]. Mask R-CNN [21] is a simple and effective system
for instance segmentation. Based on Fast/Faster R-CNN
[16, 51], a fully convolutional network (FCN) is used for
mask prediction, along with box regression and classification. To achieve high performance, feature pyramid network (FPN) [35] is utilized to extract in-network feature
hierarchy, where a top-down path with lateral connections

shijianping@sensetime.com

is augmented to propagate semantically strong features.
Several newly released datasets [37, 7, 45] facilitate design of new algorithms. COCO [37] consists of 200k images. Several instances with complex spatial layout are captured in each image. Differently, Cityscapes [7] and MVD
[45] provide street scenes with a large number of traffic
participants in each image. Blur, heavy occlusion and extremely small instances appear in these datasets.
There have been several principles proposed for designing networks in image classification that are also effective for object recognition. For example, shortening information path and easing information propagation by clean
residual connection [23, 24] and dense connection [26] are
useful. Increasing the flexibility and diversity of information paths by creating parallel paths following the splittransform-merge strategy [61, 6] is also beneficial.
Our Findings Our research indicates that information
propagation in state-of-the-art Mask R-CNN can be further
improved. Specifically, features in low levels are helpful for
large instance identification. But there is a long path from
low-level structure to topmost features, increasing difficulty
to access accurate localization information. Further, each
proposal is predicted based on feature grids pooled from one
feature level, which is assigned heuristically. This process
can be updated since information discarded in other levels
may be helpful for final prediction. Finally, mask prediction
is made on a single view, losing the chance to gather more
diverse information.
Our Contributions Inspired by these principles and observations, we propose PANet, illustrated in Figure 1, for
instance segmentation.
First, to shorten information path and enhance feature pyramid with accurate localization signals existing in
low-levels, bottom-up path augmentation is created. In
fact, features in low-layers were utilized in the systems of
[44, 42, 13, 46, 35, 5, 31, 14]. But propagating low-level
features to enhance entire feature hierarchy for instance
recognition was not explored.
18759

