Embodied Question Answering
‹

Abhishek Das1 , Samyak Datta1 , Georgia Gkioxari2 , Stefan Lee1 , Devi Parikh2,1 , Dhruv Batra2,1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Facebook AI Research
1

{abhshkdz, samyak, steflee}@gatech.edu

2

{gkioxari, parikh, dbatra}@fb.com

embodiedqa.org

Abstract
We present a new AI task – Embodied Question Answering
(EmbodiedQA) – where an agent is spawned at a random
location in a 3D environment and asked a question (‘What
color is the car?’). In order to answer, the agent must first intelligently navigate to explore the environment, gather necessary visual information through first-person (egocentric)
vision, and then answer the question (‘orange’).
EmbodiedQA requires a range of AI skills – language understanding, visual recognition, active perception, goaldriven navigation, commonsense reasoning, long-term
memory, and grounding language into actions. In this work,
we develop a dataset of questions and answers in House3D
environments [1], evaluation metrics, and a hierarchical
model trained with imitation and reinforcement learning.

Figure 1: Embodied Question Answering – EmbodiedQA– tasks
agents with navigating rich 3D environments in order to answer
questions. These agents must jointly learn language understanding, visual reasoning, and goal-driven navigation to succeed.

with a dataset of questions in virtual environments, evaluation metrics, and a deep reinforcement learning (RL) model.
Concretely, the EmbodiedQA task is illustrated in Fig. 1 –
an agent is spawned at a random location in an environment
(a house or building) and asked a question (e.g. ‘What color
is the car?’). The agent perceives its environment through
first-person egocentric vision and can perform a few atomic
actions (move-forward, turn, strafe, etc.). The goal of the
agent is to intelligently navigate the environment and gather
visual information necessary for answering the question.
EmbodiedQA is a challenging task that subsumes several
fundamental problems as sub-tasks. Clearly, the agent must
understand language (what is the question asking?) and
vision (what does a ‘car’ look like?), but it must also learn:

1. Introduction
The embodiment hypothesis is the idea that intelligence
emerges in the interaction of an agent with an environment and as a result of sensorimotor activity.
Smith and Gasser [2]

Our long-term goal is to build intelligent agents that can
perceive their environment (through vision, audition, or
other sensors), communicate (i.e., hold a natural language
dialog grounded in the environment), and act (e.g. aid humans by executing API calls or commands in a virtual or
embodied environment). In addition to being a fundamental scientific goal in artificial intelligence (AI), even a small
advance towards such intelligent systems can fundamentally
change our lives – from assistive dialog agents for the visually impaired, to natural-language interaction with selfdriving cars, in-home robots, and personal assistants.
As a step towards goal-driven agents that can perceive, communicate, and execute actions, we present a new AI task
– Embodied Question Answering (EmbodiedQA) – along

Active Perception: The agent may be spawned anywhere
in the environment and may not immediately ‘see’ the pixels containing the answer to the visual question (i.e. the
car may not be visible). Thus, the agent must move to succeed – controlling the pixels that it perceives. The agent
must learn to map its visual input to the correct actions
based on its perception of the world, the underlying physical constraints, and its understanding of the question.

‹ Work partially done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.

1

