SobolevFusion: 3D Reconstruction of Scenes Undergoing Free Non-rigid Motion
Miroslava Slavcheva 1,2
1

Maximilian Baust 1*

Technische Universität München

2

Slobodan Ilic 1,2

Siemens Corporate Technology

Abstract
We present a system that builds 3D models of non-rigidly
moving surfaces from scratch in real time using a single
RGB-D stream. Our solution is based on the variational
level set method, thus it copes with arbitrary geometry, including topological changes. It warps a given truncated
signed distance field (TSDF) to a target TSDF via gradient
flow. Unlike previous approaches that define the gradient
using an L2 inner product, our method relies on gradient
flow in Sobolev space. Its favourable regularity properties
allow for a more straightforward energy formulation that is
faster to compute and that achieves higher geometric detail,
mitigating the over-smoothing effects introduced by other
regularization schemes. In addition, the coarse-to-fine evolution behaviour of the flow is able to handle larger motions, making few frames sufficient for a high-fidelity reconstruction. Last but not least, our pipeline determines voxel
correspondences between partial shapes by matching signatures in a low-dimensional embedding of their Laplacian
eigenfunctions, and is thus able to reliably colour the output
model. A variety of quantitative and qualitative evaluations
demonstrate the advantages of our technique.

1. Introduction
The abundance of affordable RGB-D cameras in recent
years triggered the creation of a variety of excellent realtime methods for 3D mapping and tracking from a single
stream [22, 23, 29, 31, 32, 33, 49]. Nowadays depth sensors
are being integrated into new generations of mobile phones,
whose limited computational resources call for new solutions. One major challenge is the reduced frame rate, which
can be as low as 5 frames per second on a Tango tablet [17].
While static reconstruction methods have been successfully
ported to mobile devices [21], when it comes to dynamic
scenes, algorithms will have to cope with larger frame-toframe motions, which is one of the goals of this paper.
DynamicFusion [31] is the breakthrough work that first
performed real-time 3D reconstruction of a non-rigid scene
∗ M. Baust is now with Konica Minolta Laboratory Europe (KMLE).

Input

Live frames

Canonical model

Figure 1. SobolevFusion example. Our method reconstructs
scenes containing multiple non-rigidly interacting agents, captured
with a single RGB-D sensor.

using a single depth camera. Several follow-ups improved
its tracking via additional constraints, such as colour features [18], albedo [15] or human skeleton [52]. While
showing ever-improving visual quality, all of these methods
only demonstrate examples of relatively contrived movements. Even state-of-the-art multi-view systems [9] utilize
extremely high frame-rate cameras of up to 200 fps [12] to
ensure that frame-to-frame motion is minimal.
KillingFusion [40] is the only single-stream approach
that has shown capture of more free movements to date.
It warps an input TSDF towards the current canonical reconstruction via a variational formulation that estimates a
flow field. However, the underlying gradient flow is based
on an L2 inner product, which is known to be susceptible to local minima [45]. In order to counteract this issue
and stabilize the level set evolution, KillingFusion employs
a combination of regularizers, which are difficult to balance and thus result in over-smoothing and loss of highfrequency details. Here we propose to define the gradient
flow in the Sobolev space H 1 [30, 45]. It acts as a preconditioner that favours consistent motion and features a
desirable coarse-to-fine evolution of the TSDF. This reduces

2646

