Jerk-Aware Video Acceleration Magnification
Shoichiro Takeda
Kazuki Okami
Dan Mikami
Megumi Isogai
Hideaki Kimata
NTT Media Intelligence Laboratories
1-1 Hikarinooka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, Japan
{shoichiro.takeda.us, kazuki.okami.ac, dan.mikami.vp, megumi.isogai.ks, hideaki.kimata.yu}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Figure 1: Sports use-case: visualizing the impact spread in the iron shaft. The yellow arrow depicts the golf swing along a trajectory. The
top row shows 2 frames overlaid to indicate the swing phase and the impact phase of the ball. The bottom row shows the spatiotemporal
slices along a single diagonal red line in the top of row of (a), and the green and cyan circles in them respectively indicate the swing phase
and impact phase. (a) Original video. (b) Phase-based motion magnification [25]. (c) Video acceleration magnification [28]. (d) Our
proposed jerk-aware video acceleration magnification. Our method only magnifies subtle deformation of the iron shaft without artifacts
caused by quick swinging motions in other methods. See the supplementary material for the video results.

Abstract
Video magnification reveals subtle changes invisible to
the naked eye, but such tiny yet meaningful changes are
often hidden under large motions: small deformation of
the muscles in doing sports, or tiny vibrations of strings in
ukulele playing. For magnifying subtle changes under large
motions, video acceleration magnification method has recently been proposed. This method magnifies subtle acceleration changes and ignores slow large motions. However,
quick large motions severely distort this method. In this paper, we present a novel use of jerk to make the acceleration
method robust to quick large motions. Jerk has been used
to assess smoothness of time series data in the neuroscience
and mechanical engineering fields. On the basis of our observation that subtle changes are smoother than quick large
motions at temporal scale, we used jerk-based smoothness
to design a jerk-aware filter that passes subtle changes only
under quick large motions. By applying our filter to the acceleration method, we obtain impressive magnification results better than those obtained with state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The human visual system sometimes misses essential
properties of dynamic objects because the clues lie within

a very small world. For example, muscles and skin are
slightly deformed in doing sports, drones sway to stabilize
themselves in quick flight, and tiny vibrations of strings in
instruments play wonderful sounds. However, these meaningful and attractive subtle changes are too small to see with
the naked eye, and are often hidden under large motions.
In recent years, video magnification algorithms have
been developed as a way to magnify and visualize such subtle motion changes, or color changes in video [27, 25, 26].
These methods adopt efficient displacement analysis called
the Eulerian approach. This approach measures subtle image changes at a fixed position without object tracking. Eulerian video magnification achieves good results for magnifying the sway of a bridge, the breathing of an infant,
and facial color changes due to blood circulation. However,
as the Eulerian approach cannot distinguish between subtle
changes and large ones, they perform only when objects and
camera remain still.
To overcome this limitation, layer-based Eulerian video
magnification techniques have been developed by Elgharib
et al. [5] and Kooij et al. [13]. These techniques separate
a target region of the above Eulerian magnification methods from background motions by manual segmentation [5]
or depth layers [13]. They can magnify subtle changes in
the presence of large motions, but they require burdensome

1769

