Learning to Estimate 3D Human Pose and Shape from a Single Color Image
Georgios Pavlakos1 , Luyang Zhu2 , Xiaowei Zhou3 , Kostas Daniilidis1
1
University of Pennsylvania 2 Peking University 3 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of estimating the full
body 3D human pose and shape from a single color image. This is a task where iterative optimization-based solutions have typically prevailed, while Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) have suffered because of the lack of training data and their low resolution 3D predictions. Our work
aims to bridge this gap and proposes an efficient and effective direct prediction method based on ConvNets. Central
part to our approach is the incorporation of a parametric
statistical body shape model (SMPL) within our end-to-end
framework. This allows us to get very detailed 3D mesh
results, while requiring estimation only of a small number
of parameters, making it friendly for direct network prediction. Interestingly, we demonstrate that these parameters can be predicted reliably only from 2D keypoints and
masks. These are typical outputs of generic 2D human analysis ConvNets, allowing us to relax the massive requirement
that images with 3D shape ground truth are available for
training. Simultaneously, by maintaining differentiability,
at training time we generate the 3D mesh from the estimated
parameters and optimize explicitly for the surface using a
3D per-vertex loss. Finally, a differentiable renderer is employed to project the 3D mesh to the image, which enables
further refinement of the network, by optimizing for the consistency of the projection with 2D annotations (i.e., 2D keypoints or masks). The proposed approach outperforms previous baselines on this task and offers an attractive solution
for direct prediction of 3D shape from a single color image.

1. Introduction
Estimating the full body 3D pose and shape of humans
from images has been a challenging goal of computer vision
going all the way back to the work of Hogg [15]. The inherent ambiguity of the problem has forced the researchers to
use monocular image sequences for inference [54, 3], employ multiple camera views [36, 16], or even explore alternative sensors, like Kinect [53] or IMUs [52]. In these settings, the body shape reconstruction results are remarkable.
However, estimating 3D pose and shape from single color

images remains the ultimate goal for 3D human analysis.
Considering the particularly challenging nature of such
a problem, the literature remains undeniably sparse. Most
approaches rely on iterative optimization, attempting to estimate a full body 3D shape that is consistent with 2D image
observations, like silhouettes, edges, shading, or 2D keypoints [41, 14]. Despite the significant runtime required
to solve the complicated optimization problem, the common failures because of local minima, and the error-prone
reliance on ambiguous 2D cues, optimization-based solutions remain the leading paradigm for this problem [22, 7].
Even the emergence of deep learning has not changed significantly the landscape. ConvNets did not seem as a viable candidate for this problem because they require a huge
amount of training data and they are infamous for their low
resolution 3D predictions [37, 44]. The goal of our work is
to demonstrate that ConvNets can indeed offer an attractive
solution for this problem, by proposing an efficient and effective direct prediction approach, which is competitive and
even outperforms iterative optimization methods.
To make this feasible, a critical design choice for our approach is the incorporation of a parametric statistical body
shape model (SMPL [25]) within our end-to-end framework, presented in Figure 1. The advantage of such a representation is that we can generate high quality 3D meshes
in the form of 6890 vertices while estimating only a small
number of parameters, i.e., 72 for pose and 10 for shape.
This low-dimensional parameterization makes the model
friendly for direct network prediction. In fact, this prediction is feasible and accurate by using only 2D keypoints and
silhouettes as input. This allows us to relax the limiting assumption that natural images with 3D shape ground truth
are available for training. In contrast, we can leverage the
available 2D image annotations (e.g., [19, 4]) to train for
image-to-2D inference, while using instances of the parametric model to train for 2D-to-3D shape inference. Simultaneously, another major advantage of employing this parametric model is that its structure allows us to generate the
estimated 3D mesh at training time and optimize directly for
the surface, by using a 3D per-vertex loss. This loss has better correlation with the vertex-to-vertex 3D error that is typically used for evaluation and improves training compared to
1459

