Style Aggregated Network for Facial Landmark Detection
Xuanyi Dong1 , Yan Yan1 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Yi Yang1∗
1
University of Technology Sydney, 2 The University of Sydney
{xuanyi.dong,yan.yan-3}@student.uts.edu.au;
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au; yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Recent advances in facial landmark detection achieve
success by learning discriminative features from rich deformation of face shapes and poses. Besides the variance
of faces themselves, the intrinsic variance of image styles,
e.g., grayscale vs. color images, light vs. dark, intense vs.
dull, and so on, has constantly been overlooked. This issue becomes inevitable as increasing web images are collected from various sources for training neural networks.
In this work, we propose a style-aggregated approach to
deal with the large intrinsic variance of image styles for
facial landmark detection. Our method transforms original face images to style-aggregated images by a generative adversarial module. The proposed scheme uses the
style-aggregated image to maintain face images that are
more robust to environmental changes. Then the original face images accompanying with style-aggregated ones
play a duet to train a landmark detector which is complementary to each other. In this way, for each face, our
method takes two images as input, i.e., one in its original style and the other in the aggregated style. In experiments, we observe that the large variance of image styles
would degenerate the performance of facial landmark detectors. Moreover, we show the robustness of our method
to the large variance of image styles by comparing to a
variant of our approach, in which the generative adversarial module is removed, and no style-aggregated images
are used. Our approach is demonstrated to perform well
when compared with state-of-the-art algorithms on benchmark datasets AFLW and 300-W. Code is publicly available
on GitHub: https://github.com/D-X-Y/SAN

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection aims to detect the location of
predefined facial landmarks, such as the corners of the eyes,
eyebrows, the tip of the nose. It has drawn much attention
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. A face image in three different styles and the locations
of the facial landmarks predicted by a facial landmark detector on
them. The image styles, e.g., grayscale vs. color images, light vs.
dark, intense vs. dull, can be quite distinct owing to various collection sources. The contents of the above three images are identical.
The only difference is the image style. We apply a well-trained facial landmark detector to localize the facial landmarks. The zoomin parts show the deviation among the predicted locations of the
same facial landmarks on different styled images.

recently as it is a prerequisite in many computer vision applications. For example, facial landmark detection can be
applied to a large variety of tasks, including face recognition [74, 30], head pose estimation [58], facial reenactment [53] and 3D face reconstruction [28], to name a few.
Recent advances in facial landmark detection mainly focus on learning discriminative features from abundant deformation of face shapes and poses, different expressions,
partial occlusions, and others [58, 73, 59, 20]. A very typical framework is to construct features to depict the facial
appearance and shape information by the convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) or hand-crafted features, and then
learn a model, i.e., a regressor, to map the features to the
landmark locations [64, 10, 7, 42, 72, 67, 40]. Most of them
apply a cascade strategy to concatenate prediction modules
and update the predicted locations of landmarks progressively [67, 10, 73].

379

