Sliced Wasserstein Distance for Learning Gaussian Mixture Models
Soheil Kolouri
HRL Laboratories, LLC

Gustavo K. Rohde
University of Virginia

Heiko Hoffmann
HRL Laboratories, LLC

skolouri@hrl.com

gustavo@virginia.edu

hhoffmann@hrl.com

Abstract
Gaussian mixture models (GMM) are powerful parametric tools with many applications in machine learning and
computer vision. Expectation maximization (EM) is the
most popular algorithm for estimating the GMM parameters.
However, EM guarantees only convergence to a stationary
point of the log-likelihood function, which could be arbitrarily worse than the optimal solution. Inspired by the
relationship between the negative log-likelihood function
and the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, we propose an
alternative formulation for estimating the GMM parameters
using the sliced Wasserstein distance, which gives rise to
a new algorithm. Specifically, we propose minimizing the
sliced-Wasserstein distance between the mixture model and
the data distribution with respect to the GMM parameters.
In contrast to the KL-divergence, the energy landscape for
the sliced-Wasserstein distance is more well-behaved and
therefore more suitable for a stochastic gradient descent
scheme to obtain the optimal GMM parameters. We show
that our formulation results in parameter estimates that are
more robust to random initializations and demonstrate that
it can estimate high-dimensional data distributions more
faithfully than the EM algorithm.

1. Introduction
Finite Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs), also called
Mixture of Gaussians (MoG), are powerful, parametric, and
probabilistic tools that are widely used as flexible models for
multivariate density estimation in various applications concerning machine learning, computer vision, and signal/image
analysis. GMMs have been utilized for: image representation [5, 16] to generate feature signatures, point set registration [23], adaptive contrast enhancement [9], inverse
problems including super-resolution and deblurring [18, 54],
time series classification [8], texture segmentation [42], and
robotic visuomotor transformations [22] among many others.
As a special case of general latent variable models, finite GMM parameters could serve as a concise embedding
[39], which provide a compressed representation of the data.

Moreover, GMMs could be used to approximate any density
defined on Rd with a large enough number of mixture components. To fit a finite GMM to the observed data, one is
required to answer the following questions: 1) how to estimate the number of mixture components needed to represent
the data, and 2) how to estimate the parameters of the mixture components. Several techniques have been introduced
to provide an answer for the first question [36]. The focus of
this paper in on the latter question.
The existing methods to estimate the GMM parameters
are based on minimizing the negative log-likelihood (NLL)
of the data with respect to the parameters [50]. The Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm [14] is the prominent
way of minimizing the NLL (though, see, e.g., as an alternative [37, 21]). While EM remains the most popular method
for estimating GMMs, it only guarantees convergence to
a stationary point of the likelihood function. On the other
hand, various studies have shown that the likelihood function has bad local maxima that can have arbitrarily worse
log-likelihood values compared to any of the global maxima
[21, 24, 2]. More importantly, Jin et al. [23] proved that with
random initialization, the EM algorithm will converge to a
bad critical point with high probability. This issue makes the
EM algorithm sensitive to the choice of initial parameters.
In the limit (i.e. having infinite i.i.d samples), minimizing
the NLL function is equivalent to minimizing the KullbackLeibler divergence between the data distribution and the
GMM, with respect to the GMM parameters. Here, we propose, alternatively, to minimize the p-Wasserstein distance,
and more specifically the sliced p-Wasserstein distance [27],
between the data distribution and the GMM. The Wasserstein
distance and its variations have attracted a lot of attention
from the Machine Learning (ML) and signal processing communities lately [27, 3, 15]. It has been shown that optimizing
with respect to the Wasserstein loss has various practical benefits over the KL-divergence loss [43, 15, 38, 3, 19]. Importantly, unlike the KL-divergence and its related dissimilarity
measures (e.g. Jensen-Shannon divergence), the Wasserstein distance can provide a meaningful notion of closeness
(i.e. distance) for distributions supported on non-overlapping
low dimensional manifolds. This motivates our proposed
13427

