Grounding Referring Expressions in Images by Variational Context
Hanwang Zhang1∗
1

Yulei Niu2†

Shih-Fu Chang3

Nanyang Technological University, 2 Renmin University of China, 3 Columbia University,
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg; niu@ruc.edu.cn; shih.fu.chang@columbia.edu

Abstract

Grounding natural language in visual data is a hallmark
of AI, since it establishes a communication channel between humans, machines, and the physical world, underpinning a variety of multimodal AI tasks such as robotic
navigation [38], visual Q&A [1, 16, 49], and visual chatbot [6]. Thanks to the rapid development in deep learningbased CV and NLP, we have witnessed promising results
not only in grounding nouns (e.g., object detection [30]),
∗ Hanwang was a research scientist at Columbia University.
† Yulei was a visiting student at Columbia University.

Context Estimation via
Candidate Referent
Context-Cue
Language Embedding

0.1

0.1

Output

1. Introduction

largest elephant standing
behind baby elephant.

Input

We focus on grounding (i.e., localizing or linking) referring expressions in images, e.g., “largest elephant standing behind baby elephant”. This is a general yet challenging vision-language task since it does not only require
the localization of objects, but also the multimodal comprehension of context — visual attributes (e.g., “largest”,
“baby”) and relationships (e.g., “behind”) that help to distinguish the referent from other objects, especially those
of the same category. Due to the exponential complexity involved in modeling the context associated with multiple image regions, existing work oversimplifies this task
to pairwise region modeling by multiple instance learning.
In this paper, we propose a variational Bayesian method,
called Variational Context, to solve the problem of complex context modeling in referring expression grounding.
Our model exploits the reciprocal relation between the referent and context, i.e., either of them influences estimation of the posterior distribution of the other, and thereby
the search space of context can be greatly reduced. We
also extend the model to unsupervised setting where no
annotation for the referent is available. Extensive experiments on various benchmarks show consistent improvement over state-of-the-art methods in both supervised and
unsupervised settings. The code is available at https:
//github.com/yuleiniu/vc/.

largest elephant standing
behind baby elephant.

0.2

0.6

Score = p - KL(q || pz) ≤ p( x | L )

q( z | x, L )

Referent Grounding
via Estimated Context

Estimated Context
Regularization

0.1

Referent-Cue
Language Embedding

Generic-Cue
Language Embedding

p( x | z, L )

pz( z | L )

0.8

+

+

0.1

= z

Figure 1. The proposed Variational Context model. Given an input
referring expression and an image with region proposals, we localize the referent as output. We develop a grounding score function,
with the variational lower-bound composed by three cue-specific
multimodal modules, indicated by the description in the dashed
color boxes.

but also short phrases (e.g., noun phrases [28] and relations [47, 36]). However, the more general task: grounding
referring expressions [25], is still far from resolved due to
the challenges in understanding of both language and scene
compositions [10]. As illustrated in Figure 1, given an input referring expression “largest elephant standing behind
baby elephant” and an image with region proposals, a model
that can only localize “elephant” is not satisfactory as there
are multiple elephants. Therefore, the key for referring expression grounding is to comprehend and model the context. Here, we refer to context as the visual objects (e.g.,
“elephant”), attributes (e.g., “largest” and “baby”), and relationships (e.g., “behind”) mentioned in the expression that
help to distinguish the referent from other objects.
One straightforward way of modeling the relations between the referent and context is to: 1) use external syntactic parsers to parse the expression into entities, modifiers, and relations [34], and then 2) apply visual relation detectors to localize them [47]. However, this twostage approach is not practical due to the limited generalization ability of the detectors applied in the highly unrestricted language and scene compositions. To this end, re-

4158

