Net2Vec: Quantifying and Explaining how Concepts are Encoded by Filters in
Deep Neural Networks
Ruth Fong
University of Oxford

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford

ruthfong@robots.ox.ac.uk

vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In an effort to understand the meaning of the intermediate representations captured by deep networks, recent papers have tried to associate specific semantic concepts to
individual neural network filter responses, where interesting correlations are often found, largely by focusing on extremal filter responses. In this paper, we show that this approach can favor easy-to-interpret cases that are not necessarily representative of the average behavior of a representation.
A more realistic but harder-to-study hypothesis is that semantic representations are distributed, and thus filters must
be studied in conjunction. In order to investigate this idea
while enabling systematic visualization and quantification
of multiple filter responses, we introduce the Net2Vec framework, in which semantic concepts are mapped to vectorial
embeddings based on corresponding filter responses. By
studying such embeddings, we are able to show that 1., in
most cases, multiple filters are required to code for a concept, that 2., often filters are not concept specific and help
encode multiple concepts, and that 3., compared to single
filter activations, filter embeddings are able to better characterize the meaning of a representation and its relationship
to other concepts.

Figure 1. The diversity of BRODEN [4] images that most activate certain AlexNet conv5 filters motivates us to investigate to
what extent a single filter encodes a concept fully, without needing other units, and exclusively, without encoding other concepts.
An image’s corner number n denotes that it is the n-th most maximally activating image for the given filter. Masks were generated
by our slightly modified NetDissect [4] approach (section 3.1.1)
and are upsampled first before thresholding for smoothness.

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks keep setting new records in
almost all problems in computer vision, our understanding
of these black-box models remains very limited. Without
developing such an understanding, it is difficult to characterize and work around the limitations of deep networks,
and improvements may only come from intuition and trialand-error.
For deep learning to mature, a much better theoretical
and empirical understanding of deep networks is thus required. There are several questions that need answering,
such as how a deep network is able to solve a problem such

as classifying an image, or how it can generalize so well despite having access to limited training data in relation to its
own capacity [23]. In this paper, we ask in particular what a
convolutional neural network has learned to do once training is complete. A neural network can be seen as a sequence
of functions, each mapping an input image to some intermediate representation. While the final output of a network is
usually easy to interpret (as it provides, hopefully, a solution to the task that the network was trained to solve), the
meaning of the intermediate layers is far less clear. Understanding the information carried by these representations is

8730

