Deep Adversarial Subspace Clustering
Pan Zhou∗
∗

pzhou@u.nus.edu

Yunqing Hou∗

Jiashi Feng∗

National University of Singapore, Singapore
elehouy@nus.edu.sg

elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Most existing subspace clustering methods hinge on selfexpression of handcrafted representations and are unaware
of potential clustering errors. Thus they perform unsatisfactorily on real data with complex underlying subspaces.
To solve this issue, we propose a novel deep adversarial
subspace clustering (DASC) model, which learns more favorable sample representations by deep learning for subspace clustering, and more importantly introduces adversarial learning to supervise sample representation learning
and subspace clustering. Specifically, DASC consists of a
subspace clustering generator and a quality-verifying discriminator, which learn against each other. The generator
produces subspace estimation and sample clustering. The
discriminator evaluates current clustering performance by
inspecting whether the re-sampled data from estimated subspaces have consistent subspace properties, and supervises
the generator to progressively improve subspace clustering.
Experimental results on the handwritten recognition, face
and object clustering tasks demonstrate the advantages of
DASC over shallow and few deep subspace clustering models. Moreover, to our best knowledge, this is the first successful application of GAN-alike model for unsupervised
subspace clustering, which also paves the way for deep
learning to solve other unsupervised learning problems.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we aim to develop new deep learning solutions to the unsupervised subspace clustering problem.
Compared with conventional “shallow” subspace clustering methods [5, 14, 34, 35] which are conﬁned to linear
subspaces, deep subspace clustering is obviously advantageous. It can provide more powerful sample representation through deep learning and effectively cluster samples
from non-linear subspaces [9], which may greatly extend
subspace clustering to more complicated real data.
Recently, a deep auto-encoder based subspace clustering model was proposed [9] aiming to learn better sample
representations. However, like those conventional “shal-

DASC

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of our idea. Given the current clustering with error in (a), the discriminator in DASC can recognize its poor quality by differentiating the fake sample “”
generated from current clustering (i.e. the estimated subspace S by generator) and the original “△” and “” samples, as they have inconsistent subspace properties. With
such evaluation information as supervision, the generator in
DASC progressively improves sample representation learning and outputs correct clustering results in (b).
low” methods [5, 14, 34, 35], it still hinges on the selfexpression as supervision, which may not perform well
on samples with unfriendly distributions (e.g. the intrinsic subspaces are not independent or have signiﬁcant intersection). Moreover, existing subspace clustering methods [5, 9, 14, 34, 35, 38, 39] do not consider potential error in
obtained clusters, leading to noisy learned representations
and consequently degraded clustering performance.
In this work, targeting at the above drawbacks of existing
methods, we develop a novel unsupervised deep subspace
clustering model following a GAN framework [7] due to
its recent success in unsupervised data generation, which is
termed Deep Adversarial Subspace Clustering (DASC). It
consists of a subspace (and cluster) generator and a discriminator that learns to supervise the generator by evaluating
clustering quality in an unsupervised manner. If the clustering produced by the generator is correct, the samples within
the same cluster would all lie in the same intrinsic subspace,
meaning their arbitrary linear combinations would also stay
in the same subspace and have identical subspace properties, as stated in the well known linear subspace property. In
this case, the discriminator cannot detect the difference between the re-sampled data from the intrinsic subspace and
original samples in this cluster. Otherwise, given inaccurate clusters, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), the spanned subspace

1596

