Optimizing Filter Size in Convolutional Neural Networks for Facial Action Unit
Recognition
Shizhong Han1 , Zibo Meng1 , Zhiyuan Li1 , James O’Reilly1 , Jie Cai1 , Xiaofeng Wang2 , Yan Tong1
1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, 2 Department of Electrical Engineering
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC
{han38,mengz,zhiyuanl,oreillyj,jcai}@email.sc.edu, {wangxi,tongy}@cec.sc.edu

1. Introduction
Facial behavior is a natural and powerful means for
human communications. Facial Action Coding System
(FACS) developed by Ekman and Friesen [6] describes facial behavior with a set of facial action units (AUs), each
of which is anatomically related to the contraction of a set
of facial muscles. An automatic AU recognition system has
various applications in human-computer interaction (HCI)
such as interactive games, advertisement impact analysis,
and synthesizing human expression. However, it is still a
challenging problem to recognize facial AUs from spontaneous facial displays, especially with large variations in
facial appearance caused by free head movements, occlu-

AU12

Recognizing facial action units (AUs) during spontaneous facial displays is a challenging problem. Most recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have shown
promise for facial AU recognition, where predefined and
fixed convolution filter sizes are employed. In order to
achieve the best performance, the optimal filter size is often empirically found by conducting extensive experimental
validation. Such a training process suffers from expensive
training cost, especially as the network becomes deeper.
This paper proposes a novel Optimized Filter Size CNN
(OFS-CNN), where the filter sizes and weights of all convolutional layers are learned simultaneously from the training
data along with learning convolution filters. Specifically,
the filter size is defined as a continuous variable, which is
optimized by minimizing the training loss. Experimental results on two AU-coded spontaneous databases have shown
that the proposed OFS-CNN is capable of estimating optimal filter size for varying image resolution and outperforms
traditional CNNs with the best filter size obtained by exhaustive search. The OFS-CNN also beats the CNN using
multiple filter sizes and more importantly, is much more efficient during testing with the proposed forward-backward
propagation algorithm.

sions, and illumination changes.
Extensive efforts have been focused on extracting features that are capable of capturing facial appearance and/or
geometrical changes caused by AUs. While most of the earlier approaches employed handcrafted and general-purpose
features; deep learning, especially CNN based methods, has
shown great promise in recognizing facial expressions or
AUs [7, 24, 19, 15, 9, 12, 34, 17, 30, 21].
In CNNs, the size of the convolution filters determines the size of
receptive field where information is
extracted. CNN-based methods employ predefined and fixed filter sizes
in each convolutional layer, which is
called the traditional CNN hereafter.
However, the fixed filter sizes are not
necessarily optimal for all applications/tasks as well as for different Figure 1: Visualization
image resolutions. Specifically, dif- of the activation maps for
ferent AUs cause facial appearance AU 12 and AU17 generchanges over various regions at dif- ated by an occlusion test
with a 9 × 9 sliding winferent scales and therefore, may pre- dow [32].
fer different filter sizes. For example, AU12 (lip corner
puller) is often activated in a smile, which lifts and may also
deepen the infraorbital triangle, consistent with the bright
triangular region in the activation map as shown in Fig. 1.
Hence, AU12 needs a larger receptive field. In contrast,
AU17 (chin raiser) causes wrinkles on the chin boss and
has a smaller receptive field.
Given a predefined input image size, the best filter size
is often selected experimentally or by visualization [32] for
each convolutional layer. For example, Kim et al. [17],
who achieved the best expression recognition performance
of EmotiW2015 challenge [5], experimentally selected the
best filter sizes for the three convolutional layers. However, with CNNs becoming deeper and deeper [23, 11], it
is impractical to search for the best filter size by exhaustive
search, due to the highly expensive training cost.
In this work, we propose a novel and feasible solution
AU17

Abstract

5070

