4D Human Body Correspondences from Panoramic Depth Maps

Zhong Li∗1

Minye Wu∗2

Wangyiteng Zhou2

Jingyi Yu1,2

1

2

University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA. lizhong@udel.edu
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China. {wumy,yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
wytzhou@gmail.com

Abstract
The availability of affordable 3D full body reconstruction systems has given rise to free-viewpoint video (FVV)
of human shapes. Most existing solutions produce temporally uncorrelated point clouds or meshes with unknown
point/vertex correspondences. Individually compressing
each frame is ineffective and still yields to ultra-large data
sizes. We present an end-to-end deep learning scheme to
establish dense shape correspondences and subsequently
compress the data. Our approach uses sparse set of
”panoramic” depth maps or PDMs, each emulating an
inward-viewing concentric mosaics (CM) [45]. We then develop a learning-based technique to learn pixel-wise feature descriptors on PDMs. The results are fed into an
autoencoder-based network for compression. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate our solution is robust and effective on both public and our newly captured datasets.

1. Introduction
There is an emerging trend on producing free-viewpoint
video (FVV) of dynamic 3D human models [12], to provide viewers an unprecedented immersive viewing experience. The technology is largely enabled by the availability of affordable 3D acquisition systems and reliable reconstruction algorithms. The earlier attempt of Kanade et
al [21] mounted 51 cameras on a 5 meter diameter dome to
”virtualize” reality. More recent solutions can be viewed as
it variations but using higher resolution, higher speed industrial cameras and easy-to-use synchronization schemes. For
example, the CMU Panoptic studio [20] uses 480 cameras
and can recover interactions between multiple human subjects. Active solutions such Microsoft Holoportation [34]
further employ structured light to reduce the number of
cameras.
∗ These authors contribute to the work equally.

Figure 1: Our human body correspondence technique first
renders Panoramic Depth Maps (PDMs) of the input mesh
sequences and then conduct learning-based correspondence
matching on the PDMs.

Despite heterogeneity in the digitization processes, a
common challenge in FVV is the size of the reconstructed
4D data: each frame corresponds to a dense 3d mesh and a
high resolution texture map and a short clip can easily lead
to gigabytes of data if not compressed. For example, a sample clip of 10 seconds released by 8i [17] is 2 gigabytes. The
large data size prohibits real-time transfer to or even storage
on user-end devices. Although existing video compression
standards can compress the texture maps and potentially the
mesh, they ignore geometric consistencies and yields to low
compression rate and quality.
The key to geometry-consistent compression is reliably
establishing correspondences between geometric shapes.
On 4D human body (geometry + time), the task is particularly challenging as such scans exhibit high noise, large
non-rigid deformations, and topology changes. Existing approaches assume small deformations so that sparse shape
descriptors [40] can be adopted. In reality, sparse shape
descriptors fail on noisy data. Alternative dense shape correspondence schemes can reliably handle noise but require
zero-genus surfaces, i.e., they are inapplicable to topology

2877

