Practical Block-wise Neural Network Architecture Generation
Zhao Zhong1,3∗, Junjie Yan2 , Wei Wu2 , Jing Shao2 , Cheng-Lin Liu1,3,4
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
SenseTime Research Institute 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
CAS Center for Excellence of Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
Email: {zhao.zhong, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {yanjunjie, wuwei, shaojing}@sensetime.com
Abstract
Convolutional neural networks have gained a remarkable success in computer vision. However, most usable network architectures are hand-crafted and usually require expertise and elaborate design. In this paper, we provide a
block-wise network generation pipeline called BlockQNN
which automatically builds high-performance networks using the Q-Learning paradigm with epsilon-greedy exploration strategy. The optimal network block is constructed by
the learning agent which is trained sequentially to choose
component layers. We stack the block to construct the whole
auto-generated network. To accelerate the generation process, we also propose a distributed asynchronous framework and an early stop strategy. The block-wise generation brings unique advantages: (1) it performs competitive
results in comparison to the hand-crafted state-of-the-art
networks on image classification, additionally, the best network generated by BlockQNN achieves 3.54% top-1 error
rate on CIFAR-10 which beats all existing auto-generate
networks. (2) in the meanwhile, it offers tremendous reduction of the search space in designing networks which
only spends 3 days with 32 GPUs, and (3) moreover, it has
strong generalizability that the network built on CIFAR also
performs well on a larger-scale ImageNet dataset.

1. Introduction
During the last decades, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have shown remarkable potentials almost in every field in the computer vision society [17]. For example, thanks to the network evolution from AlexNet [16],
VGG [25], Inception [30] to ResNet [10], the top-5 performance on ImageNet challenge steadily increases from
83.6% to 96.43%. However, as the performance gain
usually requires an increasing network capacity, a highperformance network architecture generally possesses a
∗ The work was done when the first author interns at SenseTime.

tremendous number of possible configurations about the
number of layers, hyperparameters in each layer and type
of each layer. It is hence infeasible for manually exhaustive search, and the design of successful hand-crafted networks heavily rely on expert knowledge and experience.
Therefore, constructing the network in a smart and automatic manner remains an open problem.
Although some recent works have attempted computeraided or automated network design [2, 37], there are several challenges still unsolved: (1) Modern neural networks
always consist of hundreds of convolutional layers, each
of which has numerous options in type and hyperparameters. It makes a huge search space and heavy computational
costs for network generation. (2) One typically designed
network is usually limited on a specific dataset or task, and
thus is hard to transfer to other tasks or generalize to another
dataset with different input data sizes. In this paper, we provide a solution to the aforementioned challenges by a novel
fast Q-learning framework, called BlockQNN, to automatically design the network architecture, as shown in Fig. 1.
Particularly, to make the network generation efficient
and generalizable, we introduce the block-wise network
generation, i.e., we construct the network architecture as a
flexible stack of personalized blocks rather tedious per-layer
network piling. Indeed, most modern CNN architectures
such as Inception [30, 14, 31] and ResNet Series [10, 11]
are assembled as the stack of basic block structures. For
example, the inception and residual blocks shown in Fig. 1
are repeatedly concatenated to construct the entire network.
With such kind of block-wise network architecture, the
generated network owns a powerful generalization to other
task domains or different datasets.
In comparison to previous methods like NAS [37] and
MetaQNN [2], as depicted in Fig. 1, we present a more
readily and elegant model generation method that specifically designed for block-wise generation. Motivated by
the unsupervised reinforcement learning paradigm, we employ the well-known Q-learning [33] with experience replay [19] and epsilon-greedy strategy [21] to effectively and

2423

