Learning to Localize Sound Source in Visual Scenes
Arda Senocak1

Tae-Hyun Oh2 Junsik Kim1 Ming-Hsuan Yang3 In So Kweon1
Dept. EE, KAIST, South Korea1
MIT CSAIL, MA, USA2
Dept. EECS, University of California, Merced, CA, USA3

Abstract
Visual events are usually accompanied by sounds in our
daily lives. We pose the question: Can the machine learn
the correspondence between visual scene and the sound,
and localize the sound source only by observing sound and
visual scene pairs like human? In this paper, we propose a
novel unsupervised algorithm to address the problem of localizing the sound source in visual scenes. A two-stream
network structure which handles each modality, with attention mechanism is developed for sound source localization. Moreover, although our network is formulated within
the unsupervised learning framework, it can be extended
to a unified architecture with a simple modification for the
supervised and semi-supervised learning settings as well.
Meanwhile, a new sound source dataset is developed for
performance evaluation. Our empirical evaluation shows
that the unsupervised method eventually go through false
conclusion in some cases. We also show that even with a
few supervision, i.e., semi-supervised setup, false conclusion is able to be corrected effectively.

1. Introduction
Visual events are typically coherent with sounds and they
are integrated. When we see that a car is moving, we hear
the engine sound at the same time. Sound carries rich information regarding the spatial and temporal cues of the source
within a visual scene. As shown in the bottom example of
Figure 1, the engine sound suggests where the source may
be in the physical world [11]. This implies that sound is
not only complementary to the visual information, but also
correlated to visual events.
Humans observe tremendous number of combined
*Acknowledgment: We thank to Wei-Sheng Lai for helpful discussions, and to the annotators. A. Senocak, J. Kim and I.S. Kweon were supported by Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (2017-0-01780).
The part of this work was done when T.-H. Oh was in KAIST, and he was
partly funded by HBKU QCRI at MIT. M.-H. Yang is supported in part by
NSF CAREER (No. 1149783).

Figure 1. Where do these sounds come from? We show an example of interactive sound source localization by the proposed algorithm. In this paper, we demonstrate how to learn to localize the
sources (objects) from the sound signals.

visual-audio examples and learn the correlation between
them throughout their whole life [11] unconsciously. Because of the correlation between the sound and the visual
events, humans can understand the object or the event that
causes sound and can localize the sound source even without separate education. Naturally, videos and their corresponding sounds also come together in a synchronized way.
Given a plenty of video and sound clip pairs, can a machine
model learn to associate the sound with visual scene to reveal the sound source location without any supervision in a
way similar to human perception to localize sound sources
in visual scenes?
In this work, we analyze whether we can model the spatial correspondence between visual and audio information
by leveraging the correlation between the modalities based
on simply watching and listening to videos in unsupervised
way, i.e., learning based sound source localization. We design our model by using two-stream network architecture
(sound and visual networks) where each network facilitates
each modality and localization module which incorporates
the attention mechanism as illustrated in Figure 2.
The learning task for sound source localization from listening is challenging, especially from unlabeled data. Unconstrained videos are likely to contain unrelated audio to
the visual contents or audio source that is off the screen,
e.g., narration, commenting, etc. Another challenge arises

4358

