Hashing as Tie-Aware Learning to Rank
Kun He
Fatih Cakir Sarah Adel Bargal Stan Sclaroff
Department of Computer Science, Boston University
{hekun, fcakir, sbargal, sclaroff}@cs.bu.edu

Database

Abstract
d=0

Hashing, or learning binary embeddings of data, is frequently used in nearest neighbor retrieval. In this paper, we
develop learning to rank formulations for hashing, aimed at
directly optimizing ranking-based evaluation metrics such as
Average Precision (AP) and Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG). We first observe that the integer-valued
Hamming distance often leads to tied rankings, and propose to use tie-aware versions of AP and NDCG to evaluate
hashing for retrieval. Then, to optimize tie-aware ranking
metrics, we derive their continuous relaxations, and perform
gradient-based optimization with deep neural networks. Our
results establish the new state-of-the-art for image retrieval
by Hamming ranking in common benchmarks.

In this paper, we consider the problem of hashing, which
is concerned with learning binary embeddings of data in order to enable fast approximate nearest neighbor retrieval. We
take a task-driven approach, and seek to optimize learning
objectives that closely match test-time performance measures. Nearest neighbor retrieval performance is frequently
measured using ranking-based evaluation metrics, such as
Average Precision (AP) and Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG) [26], but the optimization of such metrics
has been deemed difficult in the hashing literature [30]. We
propose a novel learning to rank formulation to tackle these
difficult optimization problems, and our main contribution
is a gradient-based method that directly optimizes ranking
metrics for hashing. Coupled with deep neural networks,
this method achieves state-of-the-art results.
Our formulation is inspired by a simple observation.
When performing retrieval with binary vector encodings
and the integer-valued Hamming distance, the resulting ranking usually contains ties, and different tie-breaking strategies
can lead to different results (Fig. 1). In fact, ties are a common problem in ranking, and much attention has been paid
to it, including in Kendall’s classical work on rank correlation [15], and in the modern information retrieval litera-

d=2
AP = 0.92

Query

AP = 0.59
AP = 0.81

…

1. Introduction

d=1

Tie-Aware

DNN

Optimization

AP = 1

Figure 1: When applying hashing for nearest neighbor retrieval, the integer-valued Hamming distance produces ties
(items that share the same distance). If left uncontrolled,
different tie-breaking strategies could give drastically different values of the evaluation metric, e.g. AP. We address
this issue by using tie-aware ranking metrics that implicitly
average over all the permutations in closed form. We further
use tie-aware ranking metrics as optimization objectives in
deep hashing networks, leading to state-of-the-art results.
ture [3, 28]. Unfortunately, the learning to hash literature
largely lacks tie-awareness, and current evaluation protocols
rarely take tie-breaking into account. Thus, we advocate
using tie-aware ranking evaluation metrics, which implicitly average over all permutations of tied items, and permit
efficient closed-form evaluation.
Our natural next step is to learn hash functions by optimizing tie-aware ranking metrics. This can be seen as an instance of learning to rank with listwise loss functions, which
is advantageous compared to many other ranking-inspired
hashing formulations. To solve the associated discrete and
NP-hard optimization problems, we relax the problems into
their continuous counterparts where closed-form gradients
are available, and then perform gradient-based optimization
with deep neural networks. We specifically study the optimization of AP and NDCG, two ranking metrics that are
14023

