GANerated Hands for Real-Time 3D Hand Tracking from Monocular RGB
Franziska Mueller1,2 Florian Bernard1,2 Oleksandr Sotnychenko1,2 Dushyant Mehta1,2
Srinath Sridhar3 Dan Casas4 Christian Theobalt1,2
1

MPI Informatics

2

3

Saarland Informatics Campus

Stanford University

4

Univ. Rey Juan Carlos

Figure 1: We present an approach for real-time 3D hand tracking from monocular RGB-only input. Our method is compatible
with unconstrained video input such as community videos from YouTube (left), and robust to occlusions (center-left). We
show real-time 3D hand tracking results using an off-the-shelf RGB webcam in unconstrained setups (center-right, right).

Abstract
We address the highly challenging problem of real-time
3D hand tracking based on a monocular RGB-only sequence. Our tracking method combines a convolutional
neural network with a kinematic 3D hand model, such that it
generalizes well to unseen data, is robust to occlusions and
varying camera viewpoints, and leads to anatomically plausible as well as temporally smooth hand motions. For training our CNN we propose a novel approach for the synthetic
generation of training data that is based on a geometrically
consistent image-to-image translation network. To be more
specific, we use a neural network that translates synthetic
images to “real” images, such that the so-generated images follow the same statistical distribution as real-world
hand images. For training this translation network we combine an adversarial loss and a cycle-consistency loss with
a geometric consistency loss in order to preserve geometric properties (such as hand pose) during translation. We
demonstrate that our hand tracking system outperforms the
current state-of-the-art on challenging RGB-only footage.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D pose of the hand is a long-standing
goal in computer vision with many applications such as in
virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR) [17, 26] and human–
computer interaction [38, 18]. While there is a large body
of existing works that consider marker-free image-based
hand tracking or pose estimation, many of them require
depth cameras [34, 47, 39, 44, 27, 7, 54] or multi-view

setups [41, 1, 56]. However, in many applications these
requirements are unfavorable since such hardware is less
ubiquitous, more expensive, and does not work in all scenes.
In contrast, we address these issues and propose a new
algorithm for real-time skeletal 3D hand tracking with a
single color camera that is robust under object occlusion
and clutter. Recent developments that consider RGB-only
markerless hand tracking [36, 63, 8] come with clear limitations. For example, the approach by Simon et al. [36]
achieves the estimation of 3D joint locations within a multiview setup; however in the monocular setting only 2D joint
locations are estimated. Similarly, the method by GomezDonoso et al. [8] is also limited to 2D. Recently, Zimmermann and Brox [63] presented a 3D hand pose estimation
method from monocular RGB which, however, only obtains
relative 3D positions and struggles with occlusions.
Inspired by recent work on hand and body tracking
[49, 20, 19], we combine CNN-based 2D and 3D hand
joint predictions with a kinematic fitting step to track hands
in global 3D from monocular RGB. The major issue of
such (supervised) learning-based approaches is the requirement of suitable annotated training data. While it has been
shown to be feasible to manually annotate 2D joint locations in single-view RGB images [14], it is impossible to
accurately annotate in 3D due to the inherent depth ambiguities. One way to overcome this issue is to leverage existing multi-camera methods for tracking hand motion in
3D [41, 1, 56, 8]. However, the resulting annotations would
lack precision due to inevitable tracking errors. Some works
render synthetic hands for which the perfect ground truth
is known [20, 63]. However, CNNs trained on synthetic

49

