Super-FAN: Integrated facial landmark localization and super-resolution of
real-world low resolution faces in arbitrary poses with GANs
Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos
Computer Vision Laboratory, The University of Nottingham, United Kingdom

Ours

SRGAN

Input

{adrian.bulat, yorgos.tzimiropoulos}@nottingham.ac.uk

Figure 1: A few examples of visual results produced by our system on real-world low resolution faces from WiderFace.

Abstract

This paper addresses 2 challenging tasks: improving the
quality of low resolution facial images and accurately locating the facial landmarks on such poor resolution images. To
this end, we make the following 5 contributions: (a) we propose Super-FAN: the very first end-to-end system that addresses both tasks simultaneously, i.e. both improves face
resolution and detects the facial landmarks. The novelty
or Super-FAN lies in incorporating structural information
in a GAN-based super-resolution algorithm via integrating
a sub-network for face alignment through heatmap regression and optimizing a novel heatmap loss. (b) We illustrate
the benefit of training the two networks jointly by reporting good results not only on frontal images (as in prior
work) but on the whole spectrum of facial poses, and not
only on synthetic low resolution images (as in prior work)
but also on real-world images. (c) We improve upon the
state-of-the-art in face super-resolution by proposing a new
residual-based architecture. (d) Quantitatively, we show
large improvement over the state-of-the-art for both face
super-resolution and alignment. (e) Qualitatively, we show
for the first time good results on real-world low resolution
images like the ones of Fig. 1.

1. Introduction
The aim of this paper is to improve upon the quality and
understanding of very low resolution facial images. This
is important in many applications, like face editing surveillance/security. In terms of quality, our aim is to increase
the resolution and recover the details of real-world low resolution facial images like the ones shown in the first row
of Fig. 1; this task is also known as face super-resolution
(when the input resolution is too small this task is sometimes called face hallucination). In terms of understanding,
we wish to extract mid- and high-level facial information by
localizing a set a predefined facial landmarks with semantic
meaning like the tip of the nose, the corners of the eyes etc.;
this task is also known as face alignment.
Attempting to address both tasks simultaneously is really
a chicken-and-egg problem: On one hand, being able to detect the facial landmarks has already been shown beneficial
for face super-resolution [33, 29]; however how to accomplish this for low resolution faces in arbitrary poses is still
an open problem [4]. On the other hand, if one could effectively super-resolve low quality and low resolution faces
across the whole spectrum of facial poses, then facial landmarks can be localized with high accuracy.
Because it is difficult to detect landmarks in very low
resolution faces (as noticed in [32, 33] and validated in this
work), prior super-resolution methods based on this idea

109

