CLIP-Q: Deep Network Compression Learning by In-Parallel
Pruning-Quantization
Frederick Tung
Greg Mori
Simon Fraser University
ftung@sfu.ca, mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
Deep neural networks enable state-of-the-art accuracy
on visual recognition tasks such as image classification and
object detection. However, modern deep networks contain millions of learned weights; a more efficient utilization of computation resources would assist in a variety of
deployment scenarios, from embedded platforms with resource constraints to computing clusters running ensembles of networks. In this paper, we combine network pruning and weight quantization in a single learning framework that performs pruning and quantization jointly, and
in parallel with fine-tuning. This allows us to take advantage of the complementary nature of pruning and quantization and to recover from premature pruning errors, which
is not possible with current two-stage approaches. Our
proposed CLIP-Q method (Compression Learning by InParallel Pruning-Quantization) compresses AlexNet by 51fold, GoogLeNet by 10-fold, and ResNet-50 by 15-fold,
while preserving the uncompressed network accuracies on
ImageNet.

In-parallel pruning-quantization
1.

Clipping
0

2.

Partitioning

3.

Quantizing

0

0

[while not max iterations]

Forward
pass

Backward
pass

Minibatch

Figure 1. An overview of our deep network compression approach.
CLIP-Q combines weight pruning and quantization in a single
learning framework, and performs pruning and quantization in parallel with fine-tuning. The joint pruning-quantization adapts over
time with the changing network.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have become indispensable tools
for a wide range of visual recognition tasks, such as image classification [19, 27, 48], object detection [6, 32, 42],
semantic segmentation [2, 33, 39, 58], and visual question
answering [21, 35, 36, 56]. The capacity of deep neural
networks to act as powerful non-linear function approximators is made possible by their millions of learnable connection weights. In general, there has been a trend towards
deeper architectures with increasing numbers of learnable
connections [19, 23, 45]. However, many practical applications of computer vision require efficient solutions with
low memory and energy footprint. For example, a mobile robot may need to map its surroundings while detecting objects and people, or a smartphone app may need to
perform fine-grained classification of animals in the wild.

More generally, a more efficient utilization of computation
resources would assist in a variety of deployment scenarios, from resource-constrained platforms to computing clusters running ensembles of deep networks. An important research question is therefore: how can we make state-of-theart deep neural networks, with millions of parameters, more
compact and efficient?
Our focus in this paper is on deep network compression,
which has the goal of making deep networks more compact
[13, 16, 49]. Complementary lines of work focus on accelerating deep network inference at test time [9, 10, 11, 30],
or reducing deep network training times [1, 24]. The conventional understanding is that large numbers of connections (weights) are necessary for training deep networks
with high predictive accuracy; however, once the network
17873

