SBNet: Sparse Blocks Network for Fast Inference
Mengye Ren∗ 1,2 , Andrei Pokrovsky∗ 1 , Bin Yang∗ 1,2 , Raquel Urtasun 1,2
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group
2
University of Toronto
{mren3,andrei,byang10,urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
Conventional deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) apply convolution operators uniformly in space
across all feature maps for hundreds of layers - this incurs
a high computational cost for real-time applications. For
many problems such as object detection and semantic
segmentation, we are able to obtain a low-cost computation
mask, either from a priori problem knowledge, or from a
low-resolution segmentation network. We show that such
computation masks can be used to reduce computation
in the high-resolution main network. Variants of sparse
activation CNNs have previously been explored on smallscale tasks and showed no degradation in terms of object
classification accuracy, but often measured gains in terms
of theoretical FLOPs without realizing a practical speedup when compared to highly optimized dense convolution
implementations. In this work, we leverage the sparsity
structure of computation masks and propose a novel
tiling-based sparse convolution algorithm. We verified the
effectiveness of our sparse CNN on LiDAR-based 3D object
detection, and we report significant wall-clock speed-ups
compared to dense convolution without noticeable loss of
accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have led
to major breakthroughs in many computer vision tasks
[21]. While model accuracy consistently improves with the
number of layers [11], as current standard networks use over
a hundred convolution layers, the amount of computation
involved in deep CNNs can be prohibitively expensive for
real-time applications such as autonomous driving.
Spending equal amount of computation at all spatial locations is a tremendous waste, since spatial sparsity is ubiquitous in many applications: in autonomous driving, only
∗ Equal contribution.

Code available at https://github.com/uber/sbnet

Gather

Scatter

*
Convolution

*

Figure 1: Our proposed tiled sparse convolution module
the areas on the road matter for object detection; in video
segmentation, only occluded and fast-moving pixels require
recomputation; in 3D object classification [34], sparsity
is directly encoded in the inputs as voxel occupancy. In
these examples, spatial sparsity can be represented as binary
computation masks where ones indicate active locations
that need more computation and zeros inactive. In cases
where such masks are not directly available from the inputs,
we can predict them in the form of visual saliency [16]
or objectness prior [20] by using another relatively cheap
network or even a part of the main network itself [4, 25].
These binary computation masks can be efficiently incorporated into the computation of deep CNNs: instead of
convolving the input features at every location, we propose
to use the masks to guide the convolutional filters. Computation masks can also be considered as a form of attention
mechanism where the attention weights are binary. While
most current uses of attention in computer vision have been
predominantly targeted at better model interpretability and
higher prediction accuracy, our work highlights the benefit
of attentional inference speed-up.
In this work, we leverage structured sparsity patterns of
computation masks and propose Sparse Blocks Networks
(SBNet), which computes convolution on a blockwise decomposition of the mask. We implemented our proposed
sparse convolution kernels (fragments of parallel code) on
graphics processing unit (GPU) and we report wall-clock
time speed-up compared against state-of-the-art GPU dense

8711

