Referring Image Segmentation via Recurrent Refinement Networks
Ruiyu Li† ,
Kaican Li† ,
Yi-Chun Kuo† ,
Michelle Shu‡ ,
Xiaojuan Qi† ,
Xiaoyong Shen§ ,
Jiaya Jia†,§
†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong,

‡

Johns Hopkins University,

§

YouTu Lab, Tencent

{ryli,kcli5,yckuo5,xjqi,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, mshu1@jhu.edu, goodshenxy@gmail.com

Abstract
We address the problem of image segmentation from natural language descriptions. Existing deep learning-based
methods encode image representations based on the output
of the last convolutional layer. One general issue is that the
resulting image representation lacks multi-scale semantics,
which are key components in advanced segmentation systems. In this paper, we utilize the feature pyramids inherently existing in convolutional neural networks to capture
the semantics at different scales. To produce suitable information flow through the path of feature hierarchy, we propose Recurrent Refinement Network (RRN) that takes pyramidal features as input to refine the segmentation mask progressively. Experimental results on four available datasets
show that our approach outperforms multiple baselines and
state-of-the-art1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation is a challenging task that
has gained much attention over past years. Although existing segmentation methods [24, 2, 36, 35, 20] become increasingly accurate by incorporating Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) [18, 27, 8, 12] and multi-scale image representations [6, 21], they are constrained to predict a fixed set of
pre-defined categories. The limited output space for these
methods is insufficient for many real world, language-based
applications where targets are represented by natural language expressions.
Recently, there is a surge of interest in combining natural language processing with visual understanding, including image-text retrieval [16, 28, 30], image captioning [13, 29, 32], and visual question answering [1]. Hu et
al. [9] generalized semantic segmentation to the task of referring image segmentation, which contains a broader set
of categories represented by natural language expressions.
1 Code is publicly available at https://github.com/liruiyu/
referseg_rrn.

(a) input image

(b) segmentation mask for
people [2]

(c) LSTM-CNN [9]

(d) our result

Figure 1. Given an input image (a) and a query “far right
man”, the mask generated by segmentation model (b) is much
more precise than the one generated by LSTM-CNN model (c). (d)
shows the result of our model, which focuses on the entire entity of
interest and has a clear boundary. It is noted that the LSTM-CNN
model, which generates the result in (c), uses the same segmentation network as [2].

Referring image segmentation, however, is more challenging than traditional semantic segmentation as it demands a
deeper understanding of the image. For example, to answer the language query “the left two apples on
the table”, an algorithm needs not only to distinguish
among different instances on the table, but also to localize
the two apples on the left.

1.1. Exiting Solutions
Existing methods tackle this problem by first modeling
image and language jointly, then conducting segmentation
based on the combination of both descriptors [9, 10, 23].
Specifically, Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks
15745

