Actor and Observer: Joint Modeling of First and Third-Person Videos
Gunnar A. Sigurdsson 1∗ Abhinav Gupta 1 Cordelia Schmid 2 Ali Farhadi 3 Karteek Alahari 2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Inria† 3 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
github.com/gsig/actor-observer

?

First
Person

Transfer

"Person is typing on a laptop.
Then they put down the laptop
and pick up a pillow."

Learned Joint
Representation

Third
Person
"Cleaning Dishes"
Figure 1: We explore how to reason jointly about first and third-person for understanding human actions. We collect paired
data of first and third-person actions sharing the same script. Our model learns a representation from the relationship between
these two modalities. We demonstrate multiple applications of this research direction, for example, transferring knowledge
from the observer’s to the actor’s perspective.

Abstract
Several theories in cognitive neuroscience suggest that
when people interact with the world, or simulate interactions, they do so from a first-person egocentric perspective,
and seamlessly transfer knowledge between third-person
(observer) and first-person (actor). Despite this, learning
such models for human action recognition has not been
achievable due to the lack of data. This paper takes a step
in this direction, with the introduction of Charades-Ego, a
large-scale dataset of paired first-person and third-person
videos, involving 112 people, with 4000 paired videos. This
enables learning the link between the two, actor and observer perspectives. Thereby, we address one of the biggest
bottlenecks facing egocentric vision research, providing a
link from first-person to the abundant third-person data on
the web. We use this data to learn a joint representation of
first and third-person videos, with only weak supervision,
and show its effectiveness for transferring knowledge from
the third-person to the first-person domain.
∗ Work was done while Gunnar was at Inria.
† Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
Grenoble, France.

1. Introduction
What is an action? How do we represent and recognize actions? Most of the current research has focused
on a data-driven approach using abundantly available thirdperson (observer’s perspective) videos. But can we really learn how to represent an action without understanding goals and intentions? Can we learn goals and intentions
without simulating actions in our own mind? A popular
theory in cognitive psychology, the Theory of Mind [30],
suggests that humans have the ability to put themselves in
each others’ shoes, and this is a fundamental attribute of human intelligence. In cognitive neuroscience, the presence
of activations in mirror neurons and motor regions even for
passive observations suggests the same [33].
When people interact with the world (or simulate these
interactions), they do so from a first-person egocentric perspective [16]. Therefore, making strides towards humanlike activity understanding might require creating a link between the two worlds of data: first-person and third-person.
In recent years, the field of egocentric action understanding [14, 20, 22, 27, 32, 34] has bloomed due to a variety
of practical applications, such as augmented/virtual reality.
While first-person and third-person data represent the two

7396

