Egocentric Activity Recognition on a Budget
Rafael Possas ∗

Sheila Pinto Caceres ∗
Fabio Ramos
School of Information Technologies
University of Sydney
{rafael.possas, fabio.ramos}@sydney.edu.au, spin3586@uni.sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Recent advances in embedded technology have enabled
more pervasive machine learning. One of the common applications in this field is Egocentric Activity Recognition
(EAR), where users wearing a device such as a smartphone
or smartglasses are able to receive feedback from the embedded device. Recent research on activity recognition has
mainly focused on improving accuracy by using resource intensive techniques such as multi-stream deep networks. Although this approach has provided state-of-the-art results,
in most cases it neglects the natural resource constraints
(e.g. battery) of wearable devices. We develop a Reinforcement Learning model-free method to learn energy-aware
policies that maximize the use of low-energy cost predictors while keeping competitive accuracy levels. Our results
show that a policy trained on an egocentric dataset is able
use the synergy between motion and vision sensors to effectively tradeoff energy expenditure and accuracy on smartglasses operating in realistic, real-world conditions.

1. Introduction
The use of wearable technologies has increased the demand for applications that can efficiently process large
amounts of raw data from motion sensors and videos. Recognizing an activity is possibly the first step in understanding the context in which a person is embedded. Therefore,
creating robust methods to recognize activities under the
constraints of smart devices becomes one of the main challenges in the awakening of this technological trend.
Extensive research has been done in EAR. Traditional
vision methods commonly encode prior knowledge of
the egocentric paradigm by using handcrafted features
to build mid-level representations based on the detection/segmentation of objects [6, 15, 17, 19, 26], hands [15,
16, 17, 19, 23, 37], gaze [15, 16], among others. However,
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

the use of these specific representations prevent the generalization to a more realistic set of activities. For example,
hand detection has been widely used in kitchen-related activities but would be ineffective in the recognition of the
walking activity. Ideally, learning algorithms should be less
dependent on prior knowledge and instead be able to learn
adequate features from data automatically [3]. Deep learning methods have shown that they can achieve this task
quite well in several domains. Recent research on Activity Recognition has used very deep neural networks from
external [1, 4, 9, 24, 30] and egocentric [32] perspectives
achieving encouraging results. These models, however, demand high computing resources and energy which are commonly not available in wearable devices hindering their use
in most of real-life applications.
The egocentric domain also entails new challenges.
Cameras often produce shaken and blurred shots due to the
natural movements of the wearer. Unintelligible images can
be produced by real life situations such as dark and rainy environments. Therefore, alternative sources of information
such as motion sensors can be used to increase the prediction performance at a low power consumption cost. In fact,
the use of sensors such as accelerometers [2, 6] have played
an important role in EAR. Traditionally, these devices were
attached to several parts of the body [2, 12, 43], to external objects [14, 40] and to the ambient [12, 43] which often
limited their use to controlled environments which can be
quite different to a real-life setting.
Few approaches [13, 41, 44] have tackled activity recognition while considering the energy constraints on devices
such as smartphones. However, they consider a small group
of simple activities. State-of-the-art performance on more
complex activities comes from recent work [32, 33] that
uses data from both camera and motion sensors to perform activity recognition from an egocentric perspective.
Their methods, nevertheless, are extremely energy inefficient as they rely on both resource intensive multi-stream
Deep Neural Networks and on expensive feature extraction
techniques such as the one from stabilized optical flow.
15967

