PointGrid: A Deep Network for 3D Shape Understanding
Truc Le and Ye Duan
University of Missouri – Columbia
tdlxqb@mail.missouri.edu, duanye@missouri.edu

Abstract
Volumetric grid is widely used for 3D deep learning due
to its regularity. However the use of relatively lower order local approximation functions such as piece-wise constant function (occupancy grid) or piece-wise linear function (distance field) to approximate 3D shape means that it
needs a very high-resolution grid to represent finer geometry details, which could be memory and computationally
inefficient. In this work, we propose the PointGrid, a 3D
convolutional network that incorporates a constant number
of points within each grid cell thus allowing the network to
learn higher order local approximation functions that could
better represent the local geometry shape details. With experiments on popular shape recognition benchmarks, PointGrid demonstrates state-of-the-art performance over existing deep learning methods on both classification and segmentation.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has become a universal tool for many visual recognition tasks ranging from classification to segmentation, especially ConvNets for 2D images [28, 48, 50,
16, 10, 34, 37, 45, 18] thanks to its weight sharing and other
kernel optimizations of 2D convolutions. It is therefore natural that a lot of researchers currently aim at the adaptation
of deep ConvNets to 3D models. Such adaptation is, however, non-trivial due to the nature of 3D data representations. Currently the 3D geometry shape representation consists of point, mesh and volumetric grid. Mesh is extremely
irregular and hence it is very hard to design a framework to
directly learn from it. Point is flexible but it is unorganized.
Volumetric grid is regular, which enables many researchers
to utilize either occupancy grid or distance field as a mean
of data representation and learn 3D convolutional networks
from it.
Belonging to the volumetric grid, VoxNet and its variants
[57, 35, 54, 6, 39, 32] is the most straightforward approach
which transforms a 3D model into an occupancy grid. However, naive implementation of VoxNet does not scale well

for dense 3D data because computational and memory requirements grow cubicly with the 3D grid resolution. A
typical VoxNet takes as input a grid of size 64 × 64 × 64
which is incapable of exploiting the rich and detailed geometry of the original 3D data. To resolve these issues, Kd-Net
[27], O-CNN [55] and Oct-Net [42] in many respects mimic
ConvNets but use the kd-tree or oct-tree structure to form
the computational graph and apply 3D convolutions level
by level, to share the learnable parameters, and to compute
a sequence of hierarchical representations in a feedforward
bottom-up fashion. These approaches exploit the sparsity
of 3D data and can adaptively allocate computational and
memory resources with respect to the data density. However, due to the use of more complicated data structures, it
is generally not a simple task to implement these networks
efficiently.
Recently Qi et al. [38] proposed PointNet that can consume unorganized point sets in 3D. In this network, all 3D
points share the same set of multi-layer perceptrons which
independently transform individual points. However, a single max-pooling layer is the only global operation in PointNet, which limits its ability to examine contextual neighborhood structure of the points.
In this work, we propose the PointGrid, a 3D convolutional network that is an integration of point and grid, a
hybrid model that can better represent the local geometry
shape details (Fig. 1). The proposed method scales better
than volumetric grid and avoid information loss at the same
time. PointGrid has an embedding volumetric grid that has
the regular structure which allows 3D convolutions to extract global information hierarchically. In each grid cell, we
sample a constant number of points (e.g. K) to overcome the
grid size limitation. We expect the sampling points within
the grid cell can better represent the local geometry shape
details while the grid scales well with respect to data size
as it only scales linearly in K, not cubicly as in pure volumetric grid. Later, we also show that PointGrid does not
require a high resolution grid to perform well and a grid of
16 × 16 × 16 is experimentally sufficient, which is substantially smaller than a typical 64 × 64 × 64 grid of VoxNet.
As a result, PointGrid (see Fig. 2) is simpler and faster in
19204

