Between-class Learning for Image Classification
Yuji Tokozume1
Yoshitaka Ushiku1
1
The University of Tokyo

Tatsuya Harada1,2
2
RIKEN

{tokozume,ushiku,harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel learning method for image classification called Between-Class learning (BC learning)1 . We generate between-class images by mixing two images belonging to different classes with a random ratio. We
then input the mixed image to the model and train the model
to output the mixing ratio. BC learning has the ability to
impose constraints on the shape of the feature distributions,
and thus the generalization ability is improved. BC learning is originally a method developed for sounds, which can
be digitally mixed. Mixing two image data does not appear to make sense; however, we argue that because convolutional neural networks have an aspect of treating input
data as waveforms, what works on sounds must also work
on images. First, we propose a simple mixing method using internal divisions, which surprisingly proves to significantly improve performance. Second, we propose a mixing
method that treats the images as waveforms, which leads
to a further improvement in performance. As a result, we
achieved 19.4% and 2.26% top-1 errors on ImageNet-1K
and CIFAR-10, respectively.2

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [18] have
achieved high performance in various tasks, such as image
recognition [17, 11], speech recognition [1, 21], and sound
recognition [19, 26]. One of the biggest themes of research
on image recognition has been network engineering. Many
types of image recognition networks have been proposed
mainly in ILSVRC competition [17, 23, 25, 11, 28, 29, 12].
Furthermore, training deep neural networks is difficult, and
many techniques have been proposed to achieve a high performance: data augmentation techniques [17], new network
layers such as dropout [24] and batch normalization [14],
optimizers such as Adam [15], and so on. Thanks to these
1 Our preliminary experimental results on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet-1K
were already presented in ILSVRC2017 on July 26, 2017.
2 The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/mil-tokyo/bc_learning_image/.

Dog 1.0

Cat 1.0

Dog 0.5
Cat 0.5

Figure 1. We argue that CNNs have an aspect of treating the input
data as waveforms. In that case, a mixture of two images is a mixture of two waveforms. This make sense for machines, although it
does not visually make sense for humans.

research studies, training deep neural networks has become
relatively easy, with a stable performance, at least for image
classification. At present, a novel approach is needed for
further improvement.
In [3], a simple and powerful learning method named
Between-Class learning (BC learning) was proposed for
deep sound recognition. BC learning aims to learn a classification problem by solving the problem of predicting the
mixing ratio between two different classes. They generated
between-class examples by mixing two sounds belonging to
different classes with a random ratio. They then input the
mixed sound to the model and trained the model to output
the mixing ratio of each class. The advantages of BC learning are not limited only to the increase in variation of the
training data. They argued that BC learning has the ability to impose constraints on the feature distributions, which
cannot be achieved with standard learning, and thus the generalization ability is improved. They carefully designed the
method of mixing two sounds, considering the difference in
the sound energies, to achieve a satisfactory performance.
As a result, BC learning improved the performance on various sound recognition networks, datasets, and data augmentation schemes, and they achieved a performance surpasses
the human level in sound classification tasks.
The question here is whether BC learning also performs
well on images. The core idea of BC learning itself, i.e.,

5486

