Multi-Oriented Scene Text Detection via
Corner Localization and Region Segmentation
Pengyuan Lyu1,2 , Cong Yao2 , Wenhao Wu2 , Shuicheng Yan3 , Xiang Bai1 ∗
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Megvii (Face++) Technology Inc. 3 National University of Singapore
{lvpyuan, yaocong2010}@gmail.com, wwh@megvii.com, eleyans@nus.edu.sg, xbai@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous deep learning based state-of-the-art scene text
detection methods can be roughly classified into two categories. The first category treats scene text as a type of general objects and follows general object detection paradigm
to localize scene text by regressing the text box locations,
but troubled by the arbitrary-orientation and large aspect
ratios of scene text. The second one segments text regions
directly, but mostly needs complex post processing. In this
paper, we present a method that combines the ideas of the
two types of methods while avoiding their shortcomings.
We propose to detect scene text by localizing corner points
of text bounding boxes and segmenting text regions in relative positions. In inference stage, candidate boxes are
generated by sampling and grouping corner points, which
are further scored by segmentation maps and suppressed
by NMS. Compared with previous methods, our method
can handle long oriented text naturally and doesn’t need
complex post processing. The experiments on ICDAR2013,
ICDAR2015, MSRA-TD500, MLT and COCO-Text demonstrate that the proposed algorithm achieves better or comparable results in both accuracy and efficiency. Based on
VGG16, it achieves an F-measure of 84.3% on ICDAR2015
and 81.5% on MSRA-TD500.

1. Introduction
Recently, extracting textual information from natural
scene images has become increasingly popular, due to the
growing demands of real-world applications (e.g., product
search [4], image retrieval [20], and autonomous driving).
Scene text detection, which aims at locating text in natural images, plays an important role in various text reading
systems [35, 11, 50, 6, 21, 52, 5, 42, 41, 14, 8, 26].
Scene text detection is challenging due to both external
and internal factors. The external factors come from the en∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. The images in top row and bottom row are the predicted
corner points and position-sensitive maps in top-left, top-right,
bottom-right, bottom-left order, respectively.

vironment, such as noise, blur and occlusion, which are also
major problems disturbing general object detection. The
internal factors are caused by properties and variations of
scene text. Compared with general object detection, scene
text detection is more complicated because: 1) Scene text
may exist in natural images with arbitrary orientation, so
the bounding boxes can also be rotated rectangles or quadrangles; 2) The aspect ratios of bounding boxes of scene text
vary significantly; 3) Since scene text can be in the form of
characters, words, or text lines, algorithms might be confused when locating the boundaries.
In the past few years, scene text detection has been
widely studied [58, 11, 6, 53, 21, 46, 56, 40, 45] and has
achieved obvious progresses recently, with the rapid development of general object detection and semantic segmentation. Based on general object detection and semantic segmentation models, several well-designed modifications are
made to detect text more accurately. Those scene text detectors can be split into two branches. The first branch is based
on general object detectors (SSD [31], YOLO [38] and
DenseBox [19]), such as TextBoxes [28], FCRN [15] and
EAST [57] etc., which predict candidate bounding boxes
directly. The second branch is based on semantic segmentation, such as [56] and [54], which generate segmentation
maps and produce the final text boxes by post-processing.
Different from previous methods, in this paper we combine the ideas of object detection and semantic segmentation and apply them in an alternative way. Our motivations
mainly come from two observations: 1) a rectangle can be
determined by corner points, regardless of the size, aspect
ratio or orientation of the rectangle; 2) region segmenta-

7553

