Single Image Dehazing via Conditional Generative Adversarial Network
Runde Li∗
Jinshan Pan∗
Zechao Li
Jinhui Tang†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
In this paper, we present an algorithm to directly restore
a clear image from a hazy image. This problem is highly illposed and most existing algorithms often use hand-crafted
features, e.g., dark channel, color disparity, maximum contrast, to estimate transmission maps and then atmospheric
lights. In contrast, we solve this problem based on a conditional generative adversarial network (cGAN), where the
clear image is estimated by an end-to-end trainable neural network. Different from the generative network in basic cGAN, we propose an encoder and decoder architecture
so that it can generate better results. To generate realistic
clear images, we further modify the basic cGAN formulation by introducing the VGG features and an L1 -regularized
gradient prior. We also synthesize a hazy dataset including indoor and outdoor scenes to train and evaluate the
proposed algorithm. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method performs favorably against
the state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic dataset and
real world hazy images.

1. Introduction
Image dehazing aims to restore a clear image from a hazy
image which is corrupted by haze, fog or smoke. This process can be formulated by [11, 33]
I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x))

(1)

where I(x) and J(x) represent the hazy image and the scene
radiance, respectively. A is the global atmospheric light,
and t(x) is the medium transmission map. If the haze is
homogeneous, the transmission map can be expressed as
t(x) = e−ρd(x) , where ρ is the medium extinction coefficient and d(x) is the scene depth. x indexes pixels in an
image. As only the observed image I(x) is known, recovering the scene radiance J(x) is highly ill-posed.
In recent years, we have witnessed significant advances
in image dehazing mainly due to using hand-crafted features to estimate transmission maps and atmospheric lights [1, 3, 4, 10, 11, 19, 20, 22, 40]. The commonly used hand† Corresponding author: jinhuitang@njust.edu.cn. * equal contribution.

(a) Input image

(b) Ren [24]

(c) Cai [3]

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Image dehazing example. Existing methods usually estimate transmission maps and atmospheric lights separately, which cannot effectively solve the problem. Our
proposed end-to-end trainable method avoids this problem
and generates much better images.
crafted features are mainly based on chromatic, textural and
contrast properties. However, methods based on these features do not work well for some cases since the assumptions
on the features do not always hold. For example, He et al.
[11] assume that the values of dark channel in clear images
are close to zero and then use it to estimate the transmission map. However, it does not work well for the scene objects which are similar to the atmospheric light. Recently,
some deep learning-based methods have been proposed to
solve image dehazing. These methods first use convolution
neural networks to estimate the transmission map and then
follow the conventional method to estimate the atmospheric
light to recover clear images. However, if the transmission
map is not well estimated, they will accordingly interfere
the estimation of atmospheric light. Therefore the final recovered image usually contains color distortions or artifacts. As most existing algorithms estimate the transmission
map and atmospheric light separately, it is of great interest

8202

