Light field intrinsics with a deep encoder-decoder network
Anna Alperovich, Ole Johannsen, Michael Strecke and Bastian Goldluecke
University of Konstanz
Konstanz, Germany
anna.alperovich@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract
We present a fully convolutional autoencoder for light
fields, which jointly encodes stacks of horizontal and vertical epipolar plane images through a deep network of residual layers. The complex structure of the light field is thus reduced to a comparatively low-dimensional representation,
which can be decoded in a variety of ways. The different pathways of upconvolution we currently support are for
disparity estimation and separation of the lightfield into diffuse and specular intrinsic components. The key idea is that
we can jointly perform unsupervised training for the autoencoder path of the network, and supervised training for
the other decoders. This way, we find features which are
both tailored to the respective tasks and generalize well to
datasets for which only example light fields are available.
We provide an extensive evaluation on synthetic light field
data, and show that the network yields good results on previously unseen real world data captured by a Lytro Illum
camera and various gantries.

1. Introduction
Light fields have a complex, heavily redundant structure.
In their two-plane parametrization [24], they are given as a
dense, regularly sampled 2D grid of so-called subaperture
views of a scene. When fixing a single vertical or horizontal line in the image plane and moving through the space
of view points in the same direction, one obtains 2D slices
in this four-dimensional space, which are called epipolar
plane images (EPIs), see Figure 5. For scenes with purely
diffuse reflection, these exhibit patterns of oriented lines of
constant color. Each of these lines corresponds to the projection of a single 3D point in space, and its slope, called the
disparity, is inversely proportional to the point’s distance to
the observer. Discontinuities in the pattern are caused by
occlusions, as they cause transitions between multiple orientations at the occlusion edge [40], see Figure 2.
The situation also becomes less straightforward when reflection or glossy, non-Lambertian surfaces come into play,

center view

disparity

diffuse

specular

Figure 1. Our network jointly separates an input light field into
diffuse and specular components, and computes a disparity map
for the center view. This figure shows output on a previously unseen light field rendered with Blender.

as the EPIs then show superimposed patterns [19]. The orientation of the patterns corresponding to specular reflection
does not correspond to disparity, but the specular flow direction, which depends on the intrinsic surface geometry.
To distinguish between those two cases, one must know
if a point exhibits diffuse or specular reflection. On the
other hand, with known geometry, the specular flow can be
directly estimated and reflection components can be separated [34]. In case that both shape and reflectance are unknown, it is hardly possible to tell which phenomena gave
rise to a particular EPI.
Nevertheless, EPIs from natural light fields exhibit an
overall regular structure, and it seems likely that they form

9145

