Visual Question Reasoning on General Dependency Tree

Qingxing Cao

Xiaodan Liang

Bailin Li

Guanbin Li

Liang Lin∗

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
caoqx@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com, liblin3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
The collaborative reasoning for understanding each
image-question pair is very critical but under-explored for
an interpretable Visual Question Answering (VQA) system.
Although very recent works also tried the explicit compositional processes to assemble multiple sub-tasks embedded
in the questions, their models heavily rely on the annotations or hand-crafted rules to obtain valid reasoning layout,
leading to either heavy labor or poor performance on composition reasoning. In this paper, to enable global context
reasoning for better aligning image and language domains
in diverse and unrestricted cases, we propose a novel reasoning network called Adversarial Composition Modular
Network (ACMN). This network comprises of two collaborative modules: i) an adversarial attention module to exploit the local visual evidence for each word parsed from the
question; ii) a residual composition module to compose the
previous mined evidence. Given a dependency parse tree
for each question, the adversarial attention module progressively discovers salient regions of one word by densely combining regions of child word nodes in an adversarial manner. Then residual composition module merges the hidden
representations of an arbitrary number of children through
sum pooling and residual connection. Our ACMN is thus
capable of building an interpretable VQA system that gradually dives the image cues following a question-driven reasoning route and makes global reasoning by incorporating
the learned knowledge of all attention modules in a principled manner. Experiments on relational datasets demonstrate the superiority of our ACMN and visualization results
show the explainable capability of our reasoning system.

∗ Corresponding author is Liang Lin. This work was supported by the
State Key Development Program under Grant 2016YFB1001004, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61622214 and
Grant 61702565, Guangdong Natural Science Foundation Project for Research Teams under Grant 2017A030312006, and was also sponsored by
CCF-Tencent Open Research Fund.

Figure 1: Illustration of our Adversarial Composition Module Network (ACMN) that sequentially performs reasoning
over a dependency tree parsed from the question. Conditioning on preceding word nodes, our ACMN alternatively
mines visual evidence for nodes with modifier relations via
an adversarial attention module and integrates features of
child nodes of nodes with clausal predicate relation via a
residual composition module.

1. Introduction
The task of Visual Question Answering (VQA) is to
predict the correct answer given an image and a textual
question. The key to this task is the capability of coreasoning over both image and language domains. However, most of the previous methods [21, 20, 16] work more
like a black-box manner, i.e., simply mapping the visual
content to the textual words by crafting neural networks.
The main drawback of these methods is the lack of interpreting ability to the results, i.e., why these answers are
produced? Moreover, it has been shown that their accu-

7249

