Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation by Iteratively Mining
Common Object Features
Xiang Wang1
Shaodi You2,3
Xi Li1
Huimin Ma1∗
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
3
DATA61-CSIRO
Australian National University

1

{wangxiang14@mails., lixi16@mails., mhmpub@}tsinghua.edu.cn, shaodi.you@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation under image
tags supervision is a challenging task as it directly associates high-level semantic to low-level appearance. To
bridge this gap, in this paper, we propose an iterative
bottom-up and top-down framework which alternatively expands object regions and optimizes segmentation network.
We start from initial localization produced by classification
networks. While classification networks are only responsive
to small and coarse discriminative object regions, we argue
that, these regions contain significant common features
about objects. So in the bottom-up step, we mine common
object features from the initial localization and expand
object regions with the mined features. To supplement nondiscriminative regions, saliency maps are then considered
under Bayesian framework to refine the object regions.
Then in the top-down step, the refined object regions are
used as supervision to train the segmentation network
and to predict object masks. These object masks provide
more accurate localization and contain more regions of
object. Further, we take these object masks as initial
localization and mine common object features from them.
These processes are conducted iteratively to progressively produce fine object masks and optimize segmentation
networks. Experimental results on Pascal VOC 2012
dataset demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms
previous state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation under image
tags supervision is to perform a pixel-wise segmentation of
an image, providing only the labels of existing semantic objects in the image. Because it relies on very slight human
labeling, it benefits a number of computer vision tasks, such
as object detection [8] and autonomous driving [3].
∗ corresponding author

MCOF

MCOF

MCOF-iter1

MCOF-iter2

…

MCOF

(a)

Object seeds

Mined object regions

Person
Car

(b)

Dog
Cat

Person
Dog

Images & class labels Object seeds

Mined object regions

Ground truth

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the proposed MCOF framework. Our
framework iteratively mines common object features and expands
object regions. (b) Examples of initial object seeds and our mined
object regions. Our method can tolerate inaccurate initial localization and produce quite satisfactory results.

Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation is, however,
very challenging as it directly associates high-level semantic to low-level appearance. Since only image tags are available, most previous works rely on classification networks to
localize objects. However, while no pixel-wise annotation
is available, classification networks can only produce inaccurate and coarse discriminative object regions, which can
not meet the requirement of pixel-wise semantic segmentation, and thus harms the performance.
To address this issue, in this paper, we propose an iterative bottom-up and top-down framework, which tolerates
inaccurate initial localization by Mining Common Object
Features (MCOF) from initial localization to progressively
expand object regions. Our motivation is, though the initial
localization produced by classification network is coarse, it

1354

