The Perception-Distortion Tradeoff
Yochai Blau and Tomer Michaeli
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
{yochai@campus,tomer.m@ee}.technion.ac.il

Perception

Abstract

1. Introduction
The last decades have seen continuous progress in image
restoration algorithms (e.g. for denoising, deblurring, superresolution) both in visual quality and in distortion measures
like peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity index (SSIM) [45]. However, in recent years, it seems
that the improvement in reconstruction accuracy is not always accompanied by an improvement in visual quality. In
fact, and perhaps counter-intuitively, algorithms that are superior in terms of perceptual quality, are often inferior in
terms of e.g. PSNR and SSIM [22, 16, 6, 38, 51, 49]. This
phenomenon is commonly interpreted as a shortcoming of
the existing distortion measures [44], which fuels a constant
search for alternative “more perceptual” criteria.
In this paper, we offer a complementary explanation
for the apparent tradeoff between perceptual quality and

Alg. Ϯ

Better quality

Image restoration algorithms are typically evaluated by
some distortion measure (e.g. PSNR, SSIM, IFC, VIF) or
by human opinion scores that quantify perceived perceptual
quality. In this paper, we prove mathematically that distortion and perceptual quality are at odds with each other.
Specifically, we study the optimal probability for correctly
discriminating the outputs of an image restoration algorithm from real images. We show that as the mean distortion decreases, this probability must increase (indicating
worse perceptual quality). As opposed to the common belief, this result holds true for any distortion measure, and is
not only a problem of the PSNR or SSIM criteria. However,
as we show experimentally, for some measures it is less severe (e.g. distance between VGG features). We also show
that generative-adversarial-nets (GANs) provide a principled way to approach the perception-distortion bound. This
constitutes theoretical support to their observed success in
low-level vision tasks. Based on our analysis, we propose
a new methodology for evaluating image restoration methods, and use it to perform an extensive comparison between
recent super-resolution algorithms.

Alg. ϭ

Possible
Alg. ϯ

Impossible

Less distortion

Distortion

Figure 1. The perception-distortion tradeoff. Image restoration
algorithms can be characterized by their average distortion and by
the perceptual quality of the images they produce. We show that
there exists a region in the perception-distortion plane which cannot be attained, regardless of the algorithmic scheme. When in
proximity of this unattainable region, an algorithm can be potentially improved only in terms of its distortion or in terms of its
perceptual quality, one at the expense of the other.

distortion measures. Specifically, we prove that there exists a region in the perception-distortion plane, which cannot be attained regardless of the algorithmic scheme (see
Fig. 1). Furthermore, the boundary of this region is monotone. Therefore, in its proximity, it is only possible to improve either perceptual quality or distortion, one at the expense of the other. The perception-distortion tradeoff exists for all distortion measures, and is not only a problem
of the mean-square error (MSE) or SSIM criteria. However, for some measures, the tradeoff is weaker than others.
For example, we find empirically that the recently proposed
distance between deep-net features [16, 22] has a weaker
tradeoff with perceptual quality than MSE. This aligns with
the observation that this measure is “more perceptual” than
MSE.
Let us clarify the difference between distortion and perceptual quality. The goal in image restoration is to estimate
an image x from its degraded version y (e.g. noisy, blurry,
etc.). Distortion refers to the dissimilarity between the reconstructed image x̂ and the original image x. Perceptual

6228

