One-shot Action Localization by Learning Sequence Matching Network
Hongtao Yang
The Australian National University

Xuming He
ShanghaiTech University

u5226028@anu.edu.au

hexm@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Fatih Porikli
The Australian National University
fatih.porikli@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Learning based temporal action localization methods require vast amounts of training data. However, such largescale video datasets, which are expected to capture the dynamics of every action category, are not only very expensive to acquire but are also not practical simply because
there exists an uncountable number of action classes. This
poses a critical restriction to the current methods when the
training samples are few and rare (e.g. when the target action classes are not present in the current publicly available datasets). To address this challenge, we conceptualize
a new example-based action detection problem where only
a few examples are provided, and the goal is to find the
occurrences of these examples in an untrimmed video sequence. Towards this objective, we introduce a novel oneshot action localization method that alleviates the need for
large amounts of training samples. Our solution adopts the
one-shot learning technique of Matching Network and utilizes correlations to mine and localize actions of previously
unseen classes. We evaluate our one-shot action localization method on the THUMOS14 and ActivityNet datasets,
of which we modified the configuration to fit our one-shot
problem setup.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization, which jointly classifies action instances and localizes them in an untrimmed video,
is a key task in video understanding. Due to a wide range
of applications such as video surveillance and video analytics [31, 16], it has been an active research topic in recent
years [25, 30, 38, 49, 35, 48, 15, 50, 51, 34, 23, 14, 28,
47, 8]. While early attempts relied on handcrafted video
features [31, 19, 44, 25], deep neural network based approaches have made significant progress [9, 20, 35, 48,
49, 34] and reported the state-of-the-art performance due
to data-driven spatiotemporal feature representations, effec-

Figure 1. Example-based action localization problem setup. Inputs are a few example videos and a untrimmed test video, after
encoding and computing correlation, frame labeling are obtained
by comparing correlations. Finally, frame labeling are combined
into action instances.

tive end-to-end learning strategies, and the availability of
large-scale action/activity datasets [40, 18, 10].
Most existing deep network based action localization
methods, however, adopt a strongly supervised learning
strategy that relies on a large amount of annotated video
data, which are costly to collect [20, 21]. While transfer
learning or model pretraining may mitigate this problem to
some extent [34, 6, 48], it remains challenging to handle
novel action classes and adapt learned network models to
a new scenario with high data efficiency. By contrast, human beings are capable of learning new action classes and
localizing their instances from only a few examples of each
class [13, 7]. Therefore, it is much desirable to incorporate
such an efficient learning strategy into action localization
for more flexibility and better generalization when annotations are scarce.
To this end, in this paper, we consider a one(few)shot learning scenario of action localization; given one
(or a few) example of new action classes, typically one
per class, our goal is to detect all occurrences of each
class in an untrimmed video. While one-shot learning has
been extensively studied in the context of visual recognition [1, 24, 32, 33, 43, 12, 29], few studies address the challenge of learning from a few instances to detect spatiotem4321
1450

