Illuminant Spectra-based Source Separation Using Flash Photography
Zhuo Hui,† Kalyan Sunkavalli,‡ Sunil Hadap,‡ and Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan†
†
‡
Carnegie Mellon University
Adobe Research

Abstract
Real-world lighting often consists of multiple illuminants
with different spectra. Separating and manipulating these
illuminants in post-process is a challenging problem that
requires either signiﬁcant manual input or calibrated scene
geometry and lighting. In this work, we leverage a flash/noflash image pair to analyze and edit scene illuminants based
on their spectral differences. We derive a novel physicsbased relationship between color variations in the observed
flash/no-flash intensities and the spectra and surface shading corresponding to individual scene illuminants. Our
technique uses this constraint to automatically separate an
image into constituent images lit by each illuminant. This
separation can be used to support applications like white
balancing, lighting editing, and RGB photometric stereo,
where we demonstrate results that outperform state-of-theart techniques on a wide range of images.

1. Introduction
Real-world lighting often consists of multiple illuminants with different spectra. For example, outdoor illumination – both sunlight and skylight – differ in color temperature from indoor illuminants like incandescent, ﬂuorescent,
and LED lights. These variations in illuminant spectra manifest as color variations in captured images that are often a
nuisance for vision-based analysis and photography.
In this work, we address the problem of explicitly separating an image into multiple images, each of which is lit by
only one of the illuminants in the scene (see Figure 1(b)).
Source separation of this form can enable a number of image editing and scene analysis applications. For example,
we can change the illumination in the image by editing each
illuminant image, or use the multiple images for scene analysis tasks like photometric stereo.
However, source separation is a highly ill-posed inverse
problem and is especially hard from a single photograph;
each pixel observation in the image combines the effect
of the unknown mixture of illuminants and the unknown
scene reﬂectance. Previous attempts at addressing these
challenges either use calibrated acquisition systems [15, 14]

or rely on extensive user input [8, 7, 9], making it difﬁcult
to apply them at large-scale.
In this paper, we take a step towards source separation by
making use of ﬂash photography, i.e., two photographs acquired with and without the use of the camera ﬂash. The key
insight behind our technique is that ﬂash photography provides an image under a single illuminant, thereby enabling
us to infer the reﬂectance spectra up to a per-pixel scale.
Based on this, we derive a novel reﬂectance-invariant —
the Hull Constraint — that relates light source spectra and
their relative per-pixel shading to the observed intensities in
the no-ﬂash photograph. We use the Hull Constraint to separate the no-ﬂash photograph into multiple images – each
corresponding to the lighting of a unique spectra. This, in
turn, enables a wide-range of capabilities including whitebalancing under complex mixed illumination, the editing of
the color and brightness of the separated illuminants, camera spectrum response editing and photometric stereo. The
Hull constraint is independent of scene and lighting geometry; it applies equally to point and area sources as well as
near and distant lighting. Figure 1 showcases our technique
for a real-world sample.
Contributions. We propose a ﬂash photography-based
technique to analyze spatially-varying, mixed illumination.
In particular, we make the following contributions:
1. We introduce a novel reﬂectance-invariant property of
Lambertian scenes that relates illuminant spectra to observed pixel intensities.
2. We propose an algorithm to separate an image into its
single-illuminant components, and present an analysis of
its robustness and limitations.
3. We leverage these separated images to enable a wide
variety of applications including white balancing, light
editing, camera response editing and photometric stereo.

2. Related Work
In this section, we review previous works on illumination
analysis as well as prior applications of ﬂash photography.
16209

