Single Image Reflection Separation with Perceptual Losses
Xuaner Zhang
UC Berkeley

Ren Ng
UC Berkeley

Abstract
We present an approach to separating reflection from a
single image. The approach uses a fully convolutional network trained end-to-end with losses that exploit low-level
and high-level image information. Our loss function includes two perceptual losses: a feature loss from a visual
perception network, and an adversarial loss that encodes
characteristics of images in the transmission layers. We
also propose a novel exclusion loss that enforces pixel-level
layer separation. We create a dataset of real-world images
with reflection and corresponding ground-truth transmission layers for quantitative evaluation and model training.
We validate our method through comprehensive quantitative experiments and show that our approach outperforms
state-of-the-art reflection removal methods in PSNR, SSIM,
and perceptual user study. We also extend our method to
two other image enhancement tasks to demonstrate the generality of our approach.

1. Introduction
Reflection from windows and glasses is ubiquitous in
the real world, but it is usually undesirable in photographs.
Users often want to extract the hidden clean transmission
image by removing reflection from an image. For example, we may have been tempted to take photos through an
aquarium glass or skyscraper windows, but reflection can
often damage the image quality. Removing reflection from
a single image allows us to recover visual content with better perceptibility. Thus, separating the reflection layer and
transmission layer from an image — the reflection separation problem — is an active research area in computer vision.
Let I ∈ Rm×n×3 be the input image with reflection. I
can be approximately modeled as the sum of the transmission layer T and the reflection layer R: I = T +R. Our goal
is to recover the transmission layer T given I, which is an
ill-posed problem without additional constraints or priors.
As the reflection separation problem is ill-posed, prior
works often require additional input images and hardcrafted priors. A line of previous research uses multiple im-

Qifeng Chen
Intel Labs

ages as input or requires explicit user guidance [9, 27, 32].
Multiple images, however, are not always available in practice, and user guidance is inconvenient and error-prone. Recent researchers proposed methods for reflection removal
from a single image [25, 21], but these approaches rely on
hand-crafted priors such as ghost cues and relative smoothness which may not generalize to all images with reflection. More recently, CEILNet [5] uses a deep neural network to train a model with low-level losses on color and
edges, but this approach does not directly enable the model
to learn high-level semantics which can be highly useful for
reflection removal. Low-level information is insufficient
for reflection separation when there is color ambiguity or
the model needs to ”recognize” objects in the image. For
example, in Figure 1, our model trained with perceptual
losses may have learned the representations of lamps and
faces, and thus correctly removes them from the input image, while CEILNet fails to do so.
In this paper, we present a fully convolutional network
with perceptual losses that encode both low-level and highlevel image information. Our network takes a single image
as input and directly synthesizes two images: the reflection layer and the transmission layer. We further propose a
novel exclusion loss that effectively enforces the separation
of transmission and reflection at pixel level. To thoroughly
evaluate and train different approaches, we build a dataset
that contains real-world images and the ground-truth transmission images. Our dataset covers diverse natural environments including indoor and outdoor scenes. We also use this
real-world dataset to compare our approach quantitatively
to previous methods. In summary, our main contributions
are:
• We propose to use a deep neural network with perceptual losses for single image reflection separation. We
impose perceptual supervision through two losses with
different levels of image information: a feature loss
from a visual perception network, and an adversarial
loss to refine the output transmission layer.
• We propose a carefully designed exclusion loss that
emphasizes independence of the layers to be separated
in the gradient domain.
14786

