AMNet: Memorability Estimation with Attention
Jiri Fajtl1 , Vasileios Argyriou1 , Dorothy Monekosso2 , Paolo Remagnino1
1
Kingston University, London, UK
2
Leeds Beckett University, Leeds, UK

Abstract

Attention

In this paper we present the design and evaluation of an
end-to-end trainable, deep neural network with a visual attention mechanism for memorability estimation in still images. We analyze the suitability of transfer learning of deep
models from image classification to the memorability task.
Further on we study the impact of the attention mechanism
on the memorability estimation and evaluate our network
on the SUN Memorability and the LaMem datasets. Our
network outperforms the existing state of the art models on
both datasets in terms of the Spearman’s rank correlation
as well as the mean squared error, closely matching human
consistency.

hinit

[14x14x1024]
h0

The ability of man cognition to recall as well as forget
visual content after viewing it is very important to the way
we acquire new information and interact with our environment. This is becoming increasingly significant as creating
and consuming visual content dominates other forms of information exchange. Moreover, low cost, automated image
and video capture systems are rapidly surfacing as the norm
in the Internet of the Things (IoT) domain, also contributing
to the visual information flow.
To which degree an image is later remembered or forgotten is expressed as image memorability. It is an important
cognitive measure to be taken into account while processing
visual content, whether for human to human or machine to
human communication or for storage.
Memorability estimation has a large variety of practical
applications, such as selecting or designing highly memorable advertising material, organizing and tagging of photos in albums, introducing a real-time, image memorability measure built into consumer digital cameras, helping to
make highly memorable presentations and data visualizations, improving memorability of specific parts of a graphical user interface (GUI) or helping to illustrate education
material. An application of a great interest is to measure
a decline in memory capacity of patients affected by de-

1

LSTM

ResNet 50

Attention

h1

LSTM

∑

Attention

h2

LSTM

1. Introduction

Memorability
score

0

Figure 1: AMNet iteratively generates attention maps
linked to the image regions correlated with the memorability. After three iterations the memorability scores are added
and presented on the output.

mentia (such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases) and
forms of mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
Prior research [13] has shown that image memorability
has a stable property, that is, individuals tend to remember the same images with the same probability regardless
of delays, and that it can be quantified and measured. This
research has led to first attempts to learn and predict memorability with machine learning freameworks, initially with
low-level, global image features [12], reaching moderate
success. To improve such a solution would, however, require the design of new features, which demands a strong
domain knowledge not well understood in the specific case
of memorability.
In [37], [2] and recently [14] has been shown that this
problem can be mitigated by applying deep learning techniques to the memorability domain. Deep learning, however, requires large training dataset which was not available
until A. Khosla et al. [18] introduced a large memorability
dataset LaMem with 60K images and subsequently used it
16363

