Distributable Consistent Multi-Object Matching
Nan Hu
Stanford University

Qixing Huang
UT Austin

Abstract
In this paper we propose an optimization-based framework to multiple object matching. The framework takes
maps computed between pairs of objects as input, and outputs maps that are consistent among all pairs of objects.
The central idea of our approach is to divide the input object collection into overlapping sub-collections and enforce
map consistency among each sub-collection. This leads to
a distributed formulation, which is scalable to large-scale
datasets. We also present an equivalence condition between
this decoupled scheme and the original scheme. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets show that
our framework is competitive against state-of-the-art multiobject matching techniques.

1. Introduction
Object matching techniques have been widely used in
many fields of computer vision, including 2D and 3D image
analysis, object recognition, biomedical identification, and
object tracking. There is a rich literature on finding meaningful approximate isomorphisms between pair of objects
that are represented as graphs [24, 6, 9, 10, 26, 8, 13, 14].
Many tasks, however, require to solve the so-called multiobject matching problem, i.e., finding consistent maps
among all pairs of objects within a collection. Examples
include non-rigid structure from motion [1, 7] and shared
object discovery [3]. In this context, a central task is
how to utilize the data collection as a regularizer to improve the maps computed between pairs of objects in isolation [15, 4, 32].
A generic constraint that one can utilize to improve maps
among a collection is the so-called cycle consistency constraint, namely composition of maps along any two paths
sharing the same starting and end objects are identical. A
technical challenge of utilizing this constraint is that it is
impossible to check all cycles for consistency, due to the
fact that the number of paths increase exponentially with
the total number of objects. Recent works on joint matching have shown that the cycle consistency constraint can
be translated into a much more manageable constraint, i.e.,

Boris Thibert
UG Alpes

Leonidas Guibas
Stanford University

the data matrix that stores pair-wise maps in blocks is positive semidefinite and low-rank [15, 22]. Based on this connection, people have formulated multi-object matching as
solving semidefinite programs (or SDP), which are convex relaxations of the corresponding matrix recovery problem. These algorithms achieved near-optimal exact recovery conditions [15, 4]. On the other hand, solving semidefinite programs are computationally expensive. In a recent
work, Zhou et al [32] attempt to address the computational
issue using alternating minimization for efficient low-rank
matrix recovery.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework that utilizes the cycle-consistency constraint in a hierarchical manner for scalable multiple object matching. We show how
to apply this framework to extend the methods described
in [15, 4, 32]. In particular, instead of jointly imposing the global consistency constraint among all pair-wise
maps [15, 4, 32], we split the input object collection into
overlapping subsets, and impose consistency within each
subset. We then impose consistency between maps across
the subsets. Interestingly, we show that by combing these
two consistency constraints together, we can guarantee
global consistency under mild conditions (See Section 2).
Yet computationally, such a decoupled approach yields significant performance gains, when compared with existing
approaches.

1.1. Related Work
Early works on multi-object matching (e.g., [31, 16]) extend pairwise matching schemes to the multi-object setting
without explicitly considering the map consistency constraint. [30, 20] proposed to detect inconsistent cycles, and
formulate multi-object matching as solving combinatorial
optimizations, i.e., removing bad maps to break all inconsistent cycles. Recently, people have proposed to formulate non-convex optimization problems by using the cycle
consistency constraint as an explicit constraint for either
pixel-wise flow computation [32], sparse feature matching
[27], sparse shape modeling [5], or structure from motion
[21]. These problems are, as a consequence, hard to solve
and do not admit exact recovery conditions. Recent works
[15, 22] showed that consistent maps could be extracted
12463

