DS*: Tighter Lifting-Free Convex Relaxations for Quadratic Matching Problems
Florian Bernard1,2
1

MPI Informatics

2

Christian Theobalt1,2

Michael Moeller3
3

Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract

University of Siegen

DS* (our)

1. Introduction
Matching problems that seek for correspondences between images, shapes, meshes or graphs are a long-standing
challenge in computer vision and computer graphics. Computationally, they can be phrased as optimisation problems
over binary variables that encode the matching. Whilst
the formulation as a discrete optimisation problem appears
most natural, in many scenarios a continuous formulation
may be advantageous (e.g. for improving computational efficiency, or for representing uncertainties [45]).
In this work, we focus on convex relaxations of quadratic
programming problems over permutation matrices, where
we are particularly interested in finding both scalable as
well as tight convex relaxations. To be more precise, we
consider problems of the general form
min

X∈Pn ∩C

f (x) := xT W x + cT x ,

(1)

2

where x:= vec(X) ∈ Rn is the vector containing the
columns of matrix X ∈ Rn×n , C is a (closed) convex
set, and Pn is the set of n×n permutation matrices. Since
Acknowledgements: We thank A. Tewari for providing MoFA facial
expression parameters [48]. This work was funded by the ERC Starting
Grant CapReal (335545).

spectral

6

8

10

12

n

runtime
log time [s]

log objective

In this work we study convex relaxations of quadratic
optimisation problems over permutation matrices. While
existing semidefinite programming approaches can achieve
remarkably tight relaxations, they have the strong disadvantage that they lift the original n×n-dimensional variable to
an n2 ×n2 -dimensional variable, which limits their practical applicability. In contrast, here we present a lifting-free
convex relaxation that is provably at least as tight as existing (lifting-free) convex relaxations. We demonstrate experimentally that our approach is superior to existing convex
and non-convex methods for various problems, including
image arrangement and multi-graph matching.

SDP

upper bounds

log objective

lower bounds

6

8

10

n

12

10 2
10 0
10 -2
6

8

10

12

n

Figure 1. Normalised bounds (log-scale) and runtime in seconds
(log-scale) for random instances of Problem (1). The (lifted) SDP
has the best lower bounds but is not scalable. The spectral relaxation is efficient but has the weakest bounds. Our DS* method has
reasonably good bounds and scales much better than the SDP.

in general problems of this form are known to be NPhard [37], for moderately-sized problems one cannot expect to find a globally optimal solution. Thus, a lot of
effort has been put into finding good solutions that may
be suboptimal. Among them are semidefinite programming (SDP) relaxations of matching problems [58, 43, 26],
which are known to produce good solutions for various binary problems [44, 52] by lifting the n2 -dimensional variable x to an n4 -dimensional variable. Whilst SDP relaxations allow finding a solution in polynomial time (e.g. with
roughly O(n6 ) per-iteration complexity in SDCut [51]), the
quadratic increase of the number of variables prohibits scalability (Fig. 1). The lifting-free methods include spectral
[30] and convex relaxations [19, 1, 18, 16]. While they are
better scalable, they achieve weaker bounds and thus usually do not result in high quality solutions. Our aim is to improve upon the tightness of lifting-free convex relaxations.

1.1. Related work
In this section we summarise existing works that are
most relevant to our approach.
Assignment problems: The linear assignment problem (LAP) seeks to find a permutation matrix X ∈ Pn
that minimises the (linear) objective fLAP (X) = tr(C T X),
where Cij indicates the cost of assigning object i to object
j [34, 9]. The LAP is among the combinatorial methods
that permit finding a global optimum in polynomial time,

4310

