Multi-view Consistency as Supervisory Signal
for Learning Shape and Pose Prediction
Shubham Tulsiani, Alexei A. Efros, Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley
{shubhtuls, efros, malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present a framework for learning single-view shape
and pose prediction without using direct supervision for
either. Our approach allows leveraging multi-view observations from unknown poses as supervisory signal during training. Our proposed training setup enforces geometric consistency between the independently predicted shape and pose
from two views of the same instance. We consequently learn
to predict shape in an emergent canonical (view-agnostic)
frame along with a corresponding pose predictor. We show
empirical and qualitative results using the ShapeNet dataset
and observe encouragingly competitive performance to previous techniques which rely on stronger forms of supervision.
We also demonstrate the applicability of our framework in a
realistic setting which is beyond the scope of existing techniques: using a training dataset comprised of online product
images where the underlying shape and pose are unknown.

1. Introduction
Consider the flat, two-dimensional image of a chair in
Figure 1(a). A human observer cannot help but perceive
its 3D structure. Even though we may have never seen this
particular chair before, we can readily infer, from this single
image, its likely 3D shape and orientation. To make this
inference, we must rely on our knowledge about the 3D
structure of other, previously seen chairs. But how did we
acquire this knowledge? And can we build computational
systems that learn about 3D in a similar manner?
Humans are moving organisms: our ecological supervision [15] comprises of observing the world and the objects
in it from different perspectives, and these multiple views
inform us of the underlying geometry. This insight has been
successfully leveraged by a long line of geometry-based
reconstruction techniques. However these structure from
motion or multi-view stereo methods work for specific instances and do not, unlike humans, generalize to predict the
3D shape of a novel instance given a single view. Some
Project website with code: https://shubhtuls.github.io/
mvcSnP/

Figure 1: We learn to predict the shape and pose of an object from
a single input view. Our framework can leverage training data of
the form of multi-view observations of objects, and learn shape and
pose prediction despite the lack of any direct supervision.

recent learning-based methods [8, 16] have attempted to address single-view 3D inference task, but this ability has come
at a cost. These approaches rely on full 3D supervision and
require known 3D shape for each training image. Not only is
this form of supervision ecologically implausible, it is also
practically tedious to acquire and difficult to scale. Instead,
as depicted in Figure 1(b), our goal is to learn 3D prediction
using the more naturally plausible multi-view supervision.
The broader goal of learning from data without explicit
supervision is the focus of of considerable attention in the
deep learning literature. Mechanisms that have been proposed include the use of information bottlenecks or proxy
tasks such as prediction that encourage learning about the
temporal or spatial structure. Similarly, in this paper, we rely
on enforcing a geometric bottleneck for the task of explaining novel views and leverage the principle of multi-view
consistency: a common geometry, observed from different
perspectives can consistently explain multiple views of an
instance. While some recent approaches [25, 30, 35] have
utilized these principles to learn 3D shape prediction, they
all crucially rely on object pose supervision during training.
12897

