Deep Ordinal Regression Network for Monocular Depth Estimation
Huan Fu1 Mingming Gong2,3 Chaohui Wang4 Kayhan Batmanghelich2 Dacheng Tao1
1
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
4
Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR 8049), CNRS, ENPC, ESIEE Paris, UPEM, Marne-la-Vallée, France
{hufu6371@sydney, dacheng.tao@}sydney.edu.au

{mig73, kayhan@}pitt.edu

chaohui.wang@u-pem.fr

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation, which plays a crucial role
in understanding 3D scene geometry, is an ill-posed problem. Recent methods have gained significant improvement
by exploring image-level information and hierarchical features from deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs).
These methods model depth estimation as a regression problem and train the regression networks by minimizing mean
squared error, which suffers from slow convergence and unsatisfactory local solutions. Besides, existing depth estimation networks employ repeated spatial pooling operations,
resulting in undesirable low-resolution feature maps. To obtain high-resolution depth maps, skip-connections or multilayer deconvolution networks are required, which complicates network training and consumes much more computations. To eliminate or at least largely reduce these
problems, we introduce a spacing-increasing discretization
(SID) strategy to discretize depth and recast depth network
learning as an ordinal regression problem. By training
the network using an ordinary regression loss, our method
achieves much higher accuracy and faster convergence in
synch. Furthermore, we adopt a multi-scale network structure which avoids unnecessary spatial pooling and captures
multi-scale information in parallel. The proposed deep ordinal regression network (DORN) achieves state-of-the-art
results on three challenging benchmarks, i.e., KITTI [16],
Make3D [49], and NYU Depth v2 [41], and outperforms
existing methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Estimating depth from 2D images is a crucial step of
scene reconstruction and understanding tasks, such as 3D
object recognition, segmentation, and detection. In this paper, we examine the problem of Monocular Depth Estimation from a single image (abbr. as MDE hereafter).

Image

Ground Truth

MSE

DORN

Figure 1: Estimated Depth by DORN. MSE: Training our network via MSE in log space, where ground truths are continuous
depth values. DORN: The proposed deep ordinal regression network. Depth values in the black part are not provided by KITTI.

Compared to depth estimation from stereo images or
video sequences, in which significant progresses have been
made [19, 29, 26, 44], the progress of MDE is slow. MDE is
an ill-posed problem: a single 2D image may be produced
from an infinite number of distinct 3D scenes. To overcome
this inherent ambiguity, typical methods resort to exploiting
statistically meaningful monocular cues or features, such as
perspective and texture information, object sizes, object locations, and occlusions [49, 24, 32, 48, 26].
Recently, some works have significantly improved
the MDE performance with the use of DCNN-based models
[38, 55, 46, 9, 28, 31, 33, 3], demonstrating that deep features are superior to handcrafted features. These methods
address the MDE problem by learning a DCNN to estimate
the continuous depth map. Since this problem is a standard
regression problem, mean squared error (MSE) in log-space
or its variants are usually adopted as the loss function. Although optimizing a regression network can achieve a reasonable solution, we find that the convergence is rather slow
12002

