Boundary Flow: A Siamese Network that Predicts Boundary Motion without
Training on Motion
Peng Lei, Fuxin Li and Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA
{leip, lif, sinisa}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Using deep learning, this paper addresses the problem
of joint object boundary detection and boundary motion
estimation in videos, which we named boundary flow estimation. Boundary flow is an important mid-level visual cue
as boundaries characterize objects’ spatial extents, and the
flow indicates objects’ motions and interactions. Yet, most
prior work on motion estimation has focused on dense object motion or feature points that may not necessarily reside
on boundaries. For boundary flow estimation, we specify a
new fully convolutional Siamese network (FCSN) that jointly
estimates object-level boundaries in two consecutive frames.
Boundary correspondences in the two frames are predicted
by the same FCSN with a new, unconventional deconvolution
approach. Finally, the boundary flow estimate is improved
with an edgelet-based ﬁltering. Evaluation is conducted on
three tasks: boundary detection in videos, boundary flow
estimation, and optical flow estimation. On boundary detection, we achieve the state-of-the-art performance on the
benchmark VSB100 dataset. On boundary flow estimation,
we present the ﬁrst results on the Sintel training dataset. For
optical flow estimation, we run the recent approach CPMFlow but on the augmented input with our boundary-flow
matches, and achieve signiﬁcant performance improvement
on the Sintel benchmark.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the problem of estimating motions
of object boundaries in two consecutive video frames, or
simply two images. We call this problem boundary ﬂow
(BF) estimation. Intuitively, BF is deﬁned as the motion of
every pixel along object boundaries in two images, as illustrated in Fig. 1. A more rigorous deﬁnition will be presented
in Sec. 3. BF estimation is an important problem. Its solution can be used as an informative mid-level visual cue for
a wide range of higher-level vision tasks, including object

Figure 1: Boundary ﬂow estimation. Given two images
(a), our approach jointly: predicts object boundaries in both
images (b), and estimates motion of the boundaries in the
two images (c). For clarity, only a part of boundary matches
are shown in (c).
detection (e.g.,[11]), object proposals (e.g.,[38]), video segmentation (e.g.,[21]), and depth prediction (e.g., [1]). This is
because, in a BF, the boundaries identify objects’ locations,
shapes, motions, local interactions, and ﬁgure-ground relationships. In many object-level tasks, BF can be computed
in lieu of the regular optical ﬂow, hence avoiding estimating
motion on many irrelevant background pixels that may not
be essential to the performance of the task.
Yet, this problem has received scant attention in the literature. Related work has mostly focused on single-frame
edge detection and dense optical ﬂow estimation. These
approaches, however, cannot be readily applied to BF estimation, due to new challenges. In particular, low-level
spatiotemporal boundary matching — which is agnostic
13282

