Audio to Body Dynamics
Eli Shlizerman1,3 , Lucio Dery1,2 , Hayden Schoen1 , and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman1,3
1

Facebook Inc.
Stanford University
3
University of Washington
2

Figure 1. Given as input a music of violin (audio signal), our method (1) predicts body skeleton and (2) uses the skeleton to animate an
avatar. See videos at: https://arviolin.github.io/AudioBodyDynamics/.

Abstract

1. Introduction
All the same it is being said everywhere that I played
too softly, or rather, too delicately for people used to
the piano-pounding of the artists here.
Frederic Chopin

We present a method that gets as input an audio of violin
or piano playing, and outputs a video of skeleton predictions which are further used to animate an avatar. The key
idea is to create an animation of an avatar that moves their
hands similarly to how a pianist or violinist would do, just
from audio. Notably, it’s not clear if body movement can
be predicted from music at all and our aim in this work is
to explore this possibility. In this paper, we present the first
result that shows that natural body dynamics can be predicted. We built an LSTM network that is trained on violin
and piano recital videos uploaded to the Internet. The predicted points are applied onto a rigged avatar to create the
animation.

When pianists play a musical piece, their body reacts to
the music. Their fingers strike piano keys to create music.
They move their arms to play on different octaves. Violin
players draw the bow with one hand across the strings and
touch lightly or pluck the strings with the other hand’s fingers. Faster bowing produces faster music pace.
An interesting question is: can body movement be predicted computationally from a music signal? This is a
highly challenging computational problem. We need to
have a good training set of videos, we need to be able to
accurately predict body poses in those videos, and build an
algorithm that is able to find correlation between music and
body, to further predict movement.
Human body dynamics is complex, particularly given the
17574

