Missing Slice Recovery for Tensors Using a Low-rank Model in Embedded Space
Tatsuya Yokota1

Burak Erem2 Seyhmus Guler2 Simon K. Warfield2 Hidekata Hontani1
1
Nagoya Institute of Technology, Gokiso, Showa, Nagoya, Japan
2
Boston Children’s Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA, United States

{t.yokota, hontani}@nitech.ac.jp, {burak.erem, seyhmus.guler, simon.warfield}@childrens.harvard.edu

Abstract
Let us consider a case where all of the elements in some
continuous slices are missing in tensor data. In this case,
the nuclear-norm and total variation regularization methods usually fail to recover the missing elements. The key
problem is capturing some delay/shift-invariant structure.
In this study, we consider a low-rank model in an embedded
space of a tensor. For this purpose, we extend a delay embedding for a time series to a “multi-way delay-embedding
transform” for a tensor, which takes a given incomplete
tensor as the input and outputs a higher-order incomplete
Hankel tensor. The higher-order tensor is then recovered
by Tucker-based low-rank tensor factorization. Finally, an
estimated tensor can be obtained by using the inverse multiway delay embedding transform of the recovered higherorder tensor. Our experiments showed that the proposed
method successfully recovered missing slices for some color
images and functional magnetic resonance images.

1. Introduction
Matrix/tensor completion is a technique for recovering
the missing elements in incomplete data and it has become
a very important method in recent years [2, 3, 1, 9, 16,
21, 4, 31, 30]. In general, completion is an ill-posed problem without any assumptions. However, if we have useful
prior knowledge or assumptions regarding the data structure, completion can be treated as a well-posed optimization
problem, such as convex optimization. The assumption of
the structure is also referred to as a “model.”
The methods for modeling matrices/tensors can be categorized into two classes. In the first class, the methods directly represent data with the matrices/tensors themselves
and some structures of the matrices/tensors are assumed,
such as low-rank [2, 3, 1, 9, 16] and smooth properties
[32, 11].
This work was supported in part by JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas (Multidisciplinary Computational
Anatomy): JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 26108003 and 15K16067.

By contrast, the methods in the second class “embed”
the data into a high-dimensional feature space and it is assumed that the data can be represented by low-rank or a
smooth manifold in the embedded space [17, 25, 6, 18] (see
Figure 1). Typically, a time series is represented by a “Hankel matrix” (see Section 2.1.1) and its low-rank property has
been employed widely for modeling a linear time-invariant
system of signals [25, 18]. For example, Li et al. [15] proposed a method for modeling damped sinusoidal signals
based on a low-rank Hankel approximation. Ding et al. [6]
proposed the use of rank minimization of a Hankel matrix
for the video inpainting problem by assuming an autoregressive moving average model. Figure 2 shows an example
of occlusion recovery for a noisy time series, which indicates that total variation (TV) and quadratic variation (QV)
regularization methods reconstruct a flat estimator, whereas
minimization of the Hankel matrix (our proposed method)
successfully reconstructs the signal.
In the proposed method, the incomplete input data are
not represented as a Hankel matrix, but instead they are
represented as a “higher order Hankel tensor” via multiway embedding with delay/shift along the time/space axes,
and we solve the low-rank tensor completion problem in
the embedded space. The minimization of the rank of a
matrix/tensor is NP-hard [10] and the problem is often relaxed to nuclear-norm minimization [20]. A disadvantage
of the relaxation to nuclear norm minimization is that it decreases the rank of the resultant matrix/tensor as well as the
total component values in the matrix/tensor. In particular,
nuclear norm minimization often obtains “dark” signals in
denoising tasks. Thus, we employ Tucker decomposition
for low-rank modeling of the higher order Hankel tensor
completion.
The Tucker-based tensor completion is a non-convex optimization problem, and the existing methods usually have
difficulty for selecting the step-size parameter. In this study,
we propose to use an auxiliary function-based approach,
where it improves the convergence characteristics of the optimization process. Moreover, we propose a rank increment
scheme for determining the appropriate multi-linear tensor
18251

