Manifold Learning in Quotient Spaces
Éloi Mehr1 , André Lieutier , Fernando Sanchez Bermudez , Vincent Guitteny , Nicolas Thome1 , and
Matthieu Cord1
1

LIP6, UPMC Sorbonne Universités

Abstract
When learning 3D shapes we are usually interested in
their intrinsic geometry rather than in their orientation. To
deal with the orientation variations the usual trick consists
in augmenting the data to exhibit all possible variability,
and thus let the model learn both the geometry as well as
the rotations. In this paper we introduce a new autoencoder model for encoding and synthesis of 3D shapes. To
get rid of undesirable input variability our model learns a
manifold in a quotient space of the input space. Typically,
we propose to quotient the space of 3D models by the action of rotations. Thus, our quotient autoencoder allows to
directly learn in the space of interest, ignoring side information. This is reflected in better performances on reconstruction and interpolation tasks, as our experiments show
that our model outperforms a vanilla autoencoder on the
well-known Shapenet dataset. Moreover, our model learns
a rotation-invariant representation, leading to interesting
results in shapes co-alignment. Finally, we extend our quotient autoencoder to quotient by non-rigid transformations.

1. Introduction
Manifold learning and generative models are major research topics to learn from a dataset a latent space representing the input space [4, 21]. They are useful tools, not
only to grasp the hidden structure of the data, but also to
generate new plausible data, either by sampling or by nonlinear interpolation, or to complete missing information by
inferring unobserved variables.
In this work we focus on manifold learning of 3D shapes.
Such data is often represented in a high-dimensional real
vector space X. Manifold learning aims at representing
the data by learning an embedding in a low-dimensional
space. However, explicit representations of 3D shapes

Manifold Learning

Quotient
Manifold Learning

Raw Data

Manifold Illustration

Figure 1: Misaligned dataset is learned in the space of 3D shapes
quotiented by rotations, thus the quotient autoencoder focuses on
the intrinsic geometry only. As a result it reconstructs better than
a vanilla autoencoder, and is also able to co-align the shapes.

(point clouds, voxels, meshes, CAD1 models) are given
through coordinates and therefore in a given pose. These
natural representations carry two pieces of information: the
“intrinsic geometry” of the shape, i.e. its geometry up to
rigid transformations, together with the pose information
itself. While mathematically clear, intrinsic geometries
are the quotient of X by the action of the group of rigid
transformations, following Kendall’s shape spaces [18], the
quest for simple and parsimonious explicit representations
of them remains elusive. To “disentangle” both pieces of
information, and learn an explicit representation of intrinsic geometry, one possibility consists in seeing the shape
as a metric space, either through heat kernel (or Laplacian)
based signatures [23, 29] or, in the case of a point cloud,
by giving Euclidean distances between each pair of points.
While interesting for some applications, these representations are not parsimonious. One could also suggest rotationinvariant spherical harmonics [17], but getting rid of pose
information in them makes us lose most geometric information.
In this paper we propose a strategy to bridge the gap between pre-processing of 3D datasets using co-analysis tech1 Computer assisted design.

19165

