Seeing Temporal Modulation of Lights from Standard Cameras
Naoki Sakakibara
Fumihiko Sakaue
Nagoya Institute of Technology

Jun Sato

sakakibara@cv.nitech.ac.jp, sakaue@nitech.ac.jp, junsato@nitech.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel method for measuring the temporal modulation of lights by using off-the-shelf
cameras. In particular, we show that the invisible flicker
patterns of various lights such as fluorescent lights can be
measured by a simple combination of an off-the-shelf camera and any moving object with specular reflection. Unlike
the existing methods, we do not need high speed cameras
nor specially designed coded exposure cameras. Based on
the extracted flicker patterns of environment lights, we also
propose an efficient method for deblurring motion blurs in
images. The proposed method enables us to deblur images
with better frequency characteristics, which are induced by
the flicker patterns of environment lights. The real image
experiments show the efficiency of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Our life environments are brimming over with lights, and
these lights seem to illuminate us continuously. However,
most artificial lights are blinking at very high speed. For
example, fluorescent lights are turning on and off in accordance with the alternating current (AC) of the electric
power [20]. Also, many LED lights are controlled to turn on
and off for adjusting the intensity and reducing their electric power consumptions. These flicker patterns are very
fast, and human vision cannot perceive them.
Usually, these flicker patterns are controlled so that they
are invisible to human vision, since visible flicker is a nuisance. However, if we use these flicker patterns efficiently,
we may be able to achieve brand new visual measurement
methods.
Quite recently, Sheinin et al. [17] have proposed an efficient method for measuring the flicker patterns of various
lights and identifying the type of lights from their flicker
patterns. They developed a new coded imaging system that
observes scene intensity by synchronizing with the AC electric power cycle. By measuring the flicker patterns of light,
they showed a new possibility of using them. Unfortunately,
their method requires a very special coded imaging system,

Figure 1. Motion blur of specular reflection is observed as dashed
line since light on road was flickering at very high speed.

which controls the input light by using a digital micromirror
device (DMD) synchronized with the AC electric power cycle. Since such a very special imaging system is not available for general users, it is not easy to obtain the flicker
patterns of lights. Also, their method can only measure
periodic light signals, and the change in intensity of nonperiodic light signals cannot be captured.
Thus, in this paper, we propose a novel method for measuring the flicker patterns of various lights easily without
using special sensors. Our method uses an off-the-shelf
camera and a moving object with specular reflection on its
surface. Such moving objects can be vehicles on a road,
rolling metal balls on desks, etc. The fundamental idea of
our method is to decode the temporal flicker pattern of light
into a spatial intensity pattern in a single image.
For example, Fig. 1 is an image of a moving vehicle
taken by a standard camera with an exposure time of 40
msec. As we can see in this figure, the specular reflections
are observed as dashed lines in the image, and these dashed
lines are the motion blur of the specular reflections. The
motion blur was recorded as dashed lines since the light on
the road was flickering at very high speed. In other words,
the dashed lines in the image roughly show the temporal
flicker patterns of the light. Thus, by eliminating the distor-

6402

