Controllable Video Generation with Sparse Trajectories
Zekun Hao
Xun Huang
Serge Belongie
Department of Computer Science & Cornell Tech, Cornell University
{hz472,xh258,sjb344}@cornell.edu

Abstract
Video generation and manipulation is an important yet
challenging task in computer vision. Existing methods usually lack ways to explicitly control the synthesized motion.
In this work, we present a conditional video generation
model that allows detailed control over the motion of the
generated video. Given the first frame and sparse motion
trajectories specified by users, our model can synthesize
a video with corresponding appearance and motion. We
propose to combine the advantage of copying pixels from
the given frame and hallucinating the lightness difference
from scratch which help generate sharp video while keeping the model robust to occlusion and lightness change. We
also propose a training paradigm that calculate trajectories
from video clips, which eliminated the need of annotated
training data. Experiments on several standard benchmarks
demonstrate that our approach can generate realistic videos
comparable to state-of-the-art video generation and video
prediction methods while the motion of the generated videos
can correspond well with user input.

1. Introduction
The ability to synthesize realistic videos is a hallmark
of motion understanding and has a wide range of applications (e.g., video editing, augmented reality, movie and
game production). State-of-the-art computer graphics engines are able to synthesize photo-realistic videos, yet they
require heavy manual labor of experts and are usually constrained to specific domains. There has been a significant body of recent work that explores alternative solutions
based on deep generative neural networks [30, 8, 22, 26,
38, 25, 14, 2, 31, 28], but the quality of the results is still far
from satisfactory.
Here, we emphasize that video generation models should
support high-level control over the motion to be synthesized
in order for it to be useful. In many scenarios, it is important for users to be able to control how objects should move
in the generated video. Most existing methods either deterministically generate a single predicted future from some

Trajectories provided
by users

Video
generation

Figure 1. Video generation conditioned on sparse trajectories.
Given an input image (top row) and three different trajectories
provided by human users (middle row). Our model can generate
different pixel-level video predictions that exhibit motion corresponding to the input trajectories (bottom row).

given frames [25, 14, 2, 31, 28], or randomly sample from
a distribution of futures without any high-level control over
which future to be generated [32, 38, 1].
In this paper, we aim at improving both the controllability and quality of video generation. Our model synthesizes a video clip conditioned on a single initial frame that
provides object and scene appearance, and some sparse trajectories that encode the desired high-level motion. For example, given the initial image in the top row of Figure 1,
users can control which direction the car should move in
the video by drawing trajectories (middle row). Our model
can then generate videos that exhibit motion corresponding
to the input trajectories. Different trajectories lead to different generated videos. The sparse trajectories not only
provide a convenient way for human users to guide the synthesized motion, but also improve the generation quality by
providing the model with more information, as shown in
our following experiments. The trajectory-based manipulation is also general enough to be applied to any types of
videos (e.g. human actions, robotic arm movements).
17854

